BLUE ISLAND, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2026 S-3 Supplement contains:
Local legislation passed through December 16, 2025
State legislation current through Illinois Legislative Service, 2024 Pamphlet
No. 3
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
DIRECTORY OF CITY OFFICIALS
of the
CITY OF BLUE ISLAND, ILLINOIS
MAYOR’S OFFICE
 
Fred Bilotto    Mayor
Jairo Frausto   City Treasurer
Thomas Wogan    City Administrator
Mark W. Patoska Deputy City Administrator
 
CITY COUNCIL ALDERMEN
 
Dexter Johnson  First Ward
Luiz Montoya    Second Ward
Nancy Rita      Third Ward
Bill Fahrenwald Fourth Ward
Gabriel McGee   Fifth Ward
Candace Carr    Sixth Ward
Joshua Roll     Seventh Ward
 
CITY CLERK’S OFFICE
 
Raeann Cantelo-Zylman City Clerk
 
FIRE DEPARTMENT
 
David Haywood  Fire Chief
Valerie Altman Administrative Assistant
 
POLICE DEPARTMENT
 
Geoffery Farr Police Chief
Lori Salgado  Administrative Assistant
 
PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
 
David Johnson     Chair
Annette Alexander Board Member
Jason Berry       Board Member
David Brown       Board Member
Samuel Jones      Board Member
Michael Sinde     Board Member
Arthur J. Weir    Board Member
 
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
 
Tom Mantel      Chair
Earl Summers    Commissioner
Alex Gomez      Secretary
Colleen Walsh   Commissioner
Steve Carr      Commissioner
Pat Disabato    Commissioner
Brad St. Ledger Vice Chair
 
PLANNING AND ZONING DEPARTMENT
 
Arthur J. Weir Director
 
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
 
Michael Schroeder Superintendent
Hortencia Rangel  Administrative Assistant
 
WATER AND SEWER DEPARTMENT
 
Michael Schroeder Public Works Director
 
FINANCE DEPARTMENT
 
Mark W. Patoska  Deputy City Administrator
Julianne Donohue Finance and Benefits Coordinator
 
BUILDING SAFETY DEPARTMENT
 
Robert “Bob” Vasilenko      Building Official
Jim O'Boyle                     Building Inspector
Josephine Castellanos           Administrative Assistant (Building Clerk)
Tracy Garcia                    Administrative Assistant (Building Clerk)
Katelynn Schneider              Administrative Assistant (Building Clerk)
Marty Tarvid                    Property Maintenance Inspector, Lead
Susan M. Wagner, LEHP, RS, REHS Health Inspector
 
CODE ENFORCEMENT DEPARTMENT
 
Marty Tarvid        Property Maintenance Inspector, Lead
Michael Fitzpatrick Building Inspector
Sean Kennedy        Property Maintenance Inspector
 
HEALTH DEPARTMENT
 
Susan M. Wagner, LEHP, RS, REHS Health Inspector
 
MEADOWS GOLF CLUB
 
Michael Powers Golf Course Director of Operations
 
JOHN D. RITA RECREATION CENTER
 
Bob Jackson Facility Director
 
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
      
11.   ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF CODE VIOLATIONS
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.18   Section histories; statutory references
 
   
10.99   Penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the City of Blue Island,
Illinois, shall be designated as the “Code of Blue Island, Illinois”, and may
be so cited.
(Prior Code, § 10.01)
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
(Prior Code, § 10.02)
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
(Prior Code, § 10.03)
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code, other than the title, chapter and
section numbers, are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
(Prior Code, § 10.04)
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   General purpose. For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CITY or MUNICIPALITY. The City of Blue Island, Illinois.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This code as modified by
amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or sections.
      COUNTY. Cook County, Illinois.
      ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL CODE. The Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5, as now
or hereafter amended.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath and, in such cases, the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of the city unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as applied to
any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members thereof and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Illinois.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed; equivalent to the
words YEAR OF OUR LORD.
(Prior Code, § 10.05)
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of the city shall be by the following
rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the
legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.
   (A)   “And” or “or”. Either conjunction shall include the other as if
written “and/or” if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, such
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. 
      (1)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders.
      (2)   Words in the singular shall include the plural and words in the
plural shall include the singular.
      (3)   The use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
(Prior Code, § 10.06)
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
(Prior Code, § 10.07)
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever, in one section, reference is made to another section hereof, such
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
(Prior Code, § 10.08)
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
(Prior Code, § 10.09)
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words were clearly
intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word
or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
such error.
(Prior Code, § 10.10)
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal law, shall
be the official time within the city for the transaction of all municipal
business.
(Prior Code, § 10.11)
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice, unless otherwise
indicated.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
(Prior Code, § 10.12) (Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
(Prior Code, § 10.13)
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
(Prior Code, § 10.14)
§ 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from
their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
(Prior Code, § 10.15)
§ 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in anywise be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
(Prior Code, § 10.16)
§ 10.17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of such chapter or section. In addition to such
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 10.17)
§ 10.18 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 8-13-1960;
Ord. 18, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (65 ILCS 5/1-2-1) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-
1983) or (65 ILCS 5/102) (Ord. 25, passed 2-14-2010)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
         § 30.01 MEETINGS OF CITY COUNCIL.
            The regular meeting of the City Council shall be held on the second
and fourth Tuesdays of each calendar month, except that during December, the
City Council shall meet on the second and third Tuesdays.
         (Prior Code, § 30.01) (Ord. 2252, passed 11-25-1974)
         Statutory reference:
            Meetings, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-25
(Prior Code, § 10.18)
§ 10.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this code for
which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine not exceeding $750, or not exceeding the maximum fine
allowable by state law at the time of the violation. A separate offense shall
be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 10.99) (Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015)
CHAPTER 11: ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF
CODE VIOLATIONS
Section
   
11.01   Adoption
   
11.02   Definitions
   
11.03   Code Hearing Department
   
11.04   Hearing procedures not exclusive
   
11.05   Instituting code hearing proceedings
   
11.06   Subpoenas; defaults
   
11.07   Continuances; representation at code hearings
   
11.08   Hearing; evidence
   
11.09   Hearing Officers; qualifications
   
11.10   Findings, decisions and orders; judgements; enforcement
   
11.11   Review under Administrative Review Law
   
11.12   Impact on existing administrative adjudication systems
   
11.13   Effective date
§ 11.01 ADOPTION.
   The city hereby adopts Div. 2.2 of ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5 (65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-1 et
seq.) in its current form and as it may be amended from time to time for
adjudication of municipal code violations to the extent permitted by the State
Constitution.
(Prior Code, § 11.01) (Ord. 06-019, passed 3-28-2006)
§ 11.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CODE. Any offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code or a similar offense that
is a traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles and except for any
reportable offense under § 6-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/6-
204), but including, however, the administrative adjudication of violations of
traffic regulations concerning the standing, parking or conditions of vehicles
as set forth in § 11-208.3 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-208.3).
   HEARING OFFICER. An independent contractor retained by the city, whose duty
it is to:
      (1)   Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether or
not a code violation exists;
      (2)   Hear testimony and accept evidence from all interested parties
relevant to the existence of a code violation;
      (3)   Preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the hearing
and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing; and
      (4)   Issue and sign a written finding, decision and order stating
whether a code violation exists.
(Prior Code, § 11.02) (Ord. 06-019, passed 3-28-2006; Ord. 2016-002, passed 2-
9-2016)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.
§ 11.03 CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Creation. There is hereby established a Code Hearing Department in the
city’s government. The function is to expedite the prosecution and correction
of code violations in the manner set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   Adjudication. The Code Hearing Department may adjudicate any violation
of a municipal ordinance including Building Code violations adjudicated
pursuant to Div. 31.1 of 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1 et seq. in its current form and as
amended from time to time; but not any offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code
or similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of
vehicles and except for any reportable offense under § 6-204 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/6-204), but including, however, the administrative
adjudication of violations of traffic regulations concerning the standing,
parking or conditions of vehicles as set forth in § 11-208.3 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-208.3).
   (C)   Ordinance Enforcement Administrator. The Ordinance Enforcement
Administrator is authorized and directed to:
      (1)   Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of
city ordinance violations as may be permitted by law and directed by ordinance;
      (2)   Adopt, distribute and process all notices as may be required under
this chapter or as may be reasonably required to carry out the purpose of this
chapter;
      (3)   Collect monies paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a
final determination of liability;
      (4)   Certify copies of final determinations of
an ordinance violation adjudicated pursuant to this chapter, and any factual
reports verifying the final determination of any violation liability which was
issued in accordance with this chapter, the laws of the state, including 625
ILCS 5/11-208.3, as from time to time amended;
      (5)   Certify reports to the Secretary of State in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and state law;
      (6)   Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate and
maintain the administrative adjudication system hereby created; and
      (7)   Collect unpaid fines and penalties through private collection
agencies and pursuit of all post-judgment remedies available by current law.
   (D)   System coordinator/computer operator. The system coordinator/computer
operator is hereby authorized and directed to operate and maintain the computer
programs for the administrative adjudication system of the city’s Ordinance
Enforcement Department hereby created, on a day to day basis, including, but
not limited to:
      (1)   Input of violation notice information;
      (2)   Establishing court dates and notice dates.
      (3)   Record fine and penally assessment and payments;
      (4)   Issue payment receipts;
      (5)   Issue succeeding notice of hearing dates and/or final determination
of liability; issue notice of immobilization; issue notice of impending
impoundment; issue notice of impending driver’s license suspension, as directed
by the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator in accordance with the provisions
hereinafter set forth; and
      (6)   Keep accurate records of appearances and nonappearances at
administrative hearings, pleas entered, judgments entered, sanctions imposed,
if any, fines and penalties assessed and paid.
(Prior Code, § 11.03) (Ord. 06-019, passed 3-28-2006; Ord. 2016-002, passed 2-
9-2016)
§ 11.04 HEARING PROCEDURES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   This chapter does not preclude the city from using other methods to enforce
the provisions of its code.
(Prior Code, § 11.04) (Ord. 06-019, passed 3-28-2006)
§ 11.05 INSTITUTING CODE HEARING PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   When a police officer or other individual authorized to issue a code
violation finds a code violation to exist, he or she shall note the violation
on a multiple copy violation notice and report form that indicates the name and
address of the defendant, the type and nature of the violation, the date and
time the violation was observed and the names of the witnesses of the
violation.
   (B)   The violation report form shall be forwarded to the Code Hearing
Department where the fine and any penalty which may be assessed are documented
on the citation, a docket number stamped on all copies of the report and a
hearing date noted in the blank spaces provided for that purpose on the form.
The hearing date shall not be less than 30, nor more than 40, days after the
violation is reported.
   (C)   One copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in the files
of the Code Hearing Department. The copy maintained in the Code Hearing
Department files can be accessed for the assigned hearing date or prior to the
hearing date for individuals who present to the City Code Hearing Department
requesting to admit to liability and pay the fine assessed for the citation
prior to hearing. One copy of the report form shall be returned to the
individual representing the city in the case so that he or she may prepare
evidence of the code violation for presentation at the hearing on the date
indicated. One copy of the report form shall be served by first class mail to
the defendant along with a summons commanding the defendant to appear at the
hearing.
   (D)   Service of any violation notice shall be made by the person issuing
such notice:
      (1)   In the case of violation of the city motor vehicle code, service
shall be made by:
         (a)   Affixing the original or a facsimile of the notice to an
unlawfully standing or parked vehicle, unstickered vehicle or vehicle violating
any compliance regulation;
         (b)   Handing the notice to the registered owner, operator or lessee
of the vehicle, if present; or
         (c)   Mailing the notice by first class mail to the person responsible
for the ordinance violation, along with a summons commanding the individual to
appear at the hearing.
      (2)   In the case of any ordinance violation other than the city motor
vehicle code, service shall be made by:
         (a)   A personal service upon a party, the party’s employee or agent;
         (b)   First class mail along with a summons commanding the owner to
appear at the hearing; or
         (c)   If the name of the owner of the structure cannot be ascertained
or if service on the owner cannot be made by mail, service may be made on the
owner by posting or nailing a copy of the notice on the front door of the
structure where the violation is found.
      (3)   The correctness of facts contained in any violation notice shall be
verified by the person issuing said notice by:
         (a)   Signing his or her name to the notice at the time of issuance;
or
         (b)   In the case of a notice produced by a computer device, by
signing a single certificate, to be kept by the Ordinance Enforcement
Administrator, attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by the
device while under his or her control.
      (4)   The original or a facsimile of the violation notice shall be
retained by the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator and kept as a record in the
ordinary course of business.
      (5)   Any violation notice issued, signed and served in accordance
herewith, or a copy of the notice, shall be prima facie correct and shall be
prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the notice.
(Prior Code, § 11.05) (Ord. 06-019, passed 3-28-2006; Ord. 2016-002, passed 2-
9-2016; Ord. 2021-032, passed 8-24-2021)
§ 11.06 SUBPOENAS; DEFAULTS.
   At any time prior to the hearing date, the Hearing Officer assigned to hear
the case may, at the request of either party, direct witnesses to appear and
give testimony at the hearing. If, on the date set for the hearing, the
defendant or his or her attorney fails to appear, the Hearing Officer may find
the defendant in default and shall proceed with the hearing and accept evidence
relevant to the existence of a code violation.
(Prior Code, § 11.06) (Ord. 06-019, passed 3-28-2006)
§ 11.07 CONTINUANCES; REPRESENTATION AT CODE HEARINGS.
   (A) Continuances. No continuances shall be authorized by the Hearing Officer
in proceedings under this chapter, except in cases where a continuance is
absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the defendant. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance authorized
by a Hearing Officer under this chapter shall not exceed 25 days.
   (B)   Representation at hearing. The case for the city may be presented by
an attorney designated by the city or by any other municipal employee; except
that, the case for the city shall not be presented by any employee of the Code
Hearing Department. The case for the defendant may be presented by the
defendant, his or her attorney or any other agent or representative of the
defendant.
   (C)   Failure to appear.
      (1)   If on the dates set for the hearing the alleged violator or his or
her attorney or designee fails to appear, the Hearing Officer may find the
alleged violator in default and shall proceed with the hearing and accept
evidence relevant to the existence of a code violation.
      (2)   Upon finding the alleged violation in default, the Ordinance
Enforcement and Code Hearing Administrator shall send or cause to be sent
notices by first class mail, postage prepaid to the violator who received the
notice of an ordinance violation. Service of notices sent in accordance
herewith shall be complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail.
      (3)   Upon failure of the person receiving a notice of a violation to
appear at the time and date designated for a hearing in the case of a violation
of the city motor vehicle code and failure of the registered, owner, operator
or lessee of the “cited vehicle” to pay the fine in full as stated on said
notice, the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator shall send or cause to be sent
notices by first class mail postage prepaid to the person who received the
notice; or the violation of the city motor vehicle code, the registered owner
or operator of the “cited vehicle” at the address as is recorded with the
Secretary of State, and shall be sent to the lessee of the “cited vehicle” at
the address last known to the lessor of the “cited vehicle” at the time of the
lease. Service of notices sent in accordance herewith shall be complete as of
the date of deposit in the United States mail.
      (4)   A Hearing Officer may set aside any judgment entered by default and
set a new hearing date, upon a petition filed within 21 days after the issuance
of the order of default, if the Hearing Officer determines that the
petitioner’s failure to appear at the hearing was for good cause or at any time
if the petitioner establishes that the municipality did not provide proper
service of process. If any judgment is set aside pursuant to this division (D)
(4), the Hearing Officer shall have authority to enter an order extinguishing
any lien which has been recorded for any debt due and owing the municipality as
a result of the vacated default judgment.
(Prior Code, § 11.07) (Ord. 06-019, passed 3-28-2006; Ord. 2016-002, passed 2-
9-2016)
§ 11.08 HEARING; EVIDENCE.
   (A)   An administrative hearing shall be held for the following:
      (1)   To adjudicate any alleged ordinance violation on its merits; and
      (2)   To contest the validity of a notice of impending immobilization or
impending impoundment or the validity of a notice of impending driver’s license
suspension. The hearing shall be granted to the registered owner or operator of
the “cited vehicle”, pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3 or the lessee of the
“cited vehicle”, 625 ILCS 5/11-1306, incorporated herein by reference, and at
the date, time and place as is set forth by the Ordinance Enforcement
Administrator and served upon the registered owner, operator or lessee for
hearings contesting the validity of notices of impending immobilization or
impending impoundment or driver’s license suspension.
   (B)   All administrative hearings shall be recorded and shall culminate in a
determination of liability or non-liability, made by the Hearing Officer, who
shall consider facts and/or testimony without the application of the formal or
technical rules of evidence. Evidence including hearsay, may be admitted only
if it is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the
conduct of their affairs.
(Prior Code, § 11.08) (Ord. 06-019, passed 3-28-2006; Ord. 2016-002, passed 2-
9-2016)
§ 11.09 HEARING OFFICERS; QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Prior to conducting proceedings under this chapter, Hearing Officers
shall successfully complete a formal training program that includes the
following:
      (1)   Instruction on the rules of procedure of the hearing that they will
conduct;
      (2)   Orientation to each subject area of the code violations that they
will administer;
      (3)   Observation of administrative hearings; and
      (4)   Participation in hypothetical cases, including rules on evidence
and issuing final orders.
   (B)   In addition, every Hearing Officer must be an attorney licensed to
practice law in the state for at least three years.
(Prior Code, § 11.09) (Ord. 06-019, passed 3-28-2006)
§ 11.10 FINDINGS, DECISIONS AND ORDERS; JUDGEMENTS ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Written determination. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing
Officer shall issue a written determination on the basis of the evidence
presented at the hearing as to whether or not a code violation exists and such
determination shall be designated as the findings, decision and order and shall
include:
      (1)   The Hearing Officer’s findings of fact;
      (2)   A decision of whether or not a code violation exists based upon the
findings of fact;
      (3)   An order that states the sanction and costs imposed, which costs
are debts due and, owing the city; or dismisses the case if a violation is not
proved. A monetary sanction for a violation under this chapter shall not exceed
the amount provided for in 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1 in its current form and as amended
from time to time;
      (4)   A warning that failure to pay may result in prosecution of the case
by the City Attorney, referral to a collection agency, filing of a lien upon
property and/or personal estate, and/or suspension of drivers licenses for ten
or more unpaid citations pursuant to the applicable state statute;
      (5)   A warning that the vehicle owned by the person and located within
the city may be immobilized and impounded for the failure to pay fines or
penalties for ten or more vehicular standing or parking regulations violations;
and
      (6)   Any other warning of possible impoundment as permitted by law or
ordinance.
   (B)   Service of order. A copy of the findings, decision and order shall be
served on the defendant within five days after it is issued. Service shall be
in the same manner that the report form and summons are served under §
11.05 of this chapter.
   (C)   Payment. Payment of any penalty or fine and the disposition of fine
money shall be in the same manner as set forth in the code, unless the
corporate authorities adopting this chapter provide otherwise.
   (D)   Failure to pay fine, sanction or costs. A fine, other sanction or
costs imposed or part of any fine, other sanction or costs imposed, remaining
unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, judicial review
procedures under the Administrative Review Law, 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq. shall
be a debt due and owing the city and, as such, may be collected in accordance
with applicable law.
   (E)   Enforcement of judgment. After expiration of the period within which
judicial review under the Administrative Review Law (735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.)
may be sought for a final determination of the code violation, unless stayed by
a court of competent jurisdiction, the findings, decision and order of the
Hearing Officer may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
   (F)   Petition for entry of judgment in Circuit Court. Nothing herein shall
restrict the city from commencing a proceeding in the Circuit Court of the
county in which the city is located for the purpose of obtaining a judgment on
the findings, decision and order.
      (1)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from consolidating
multiple findings, decisions and orders against a person in such a proceeding.
Upon commencement of the action, the city shall file a certified copy of the
findings, decision and order, which shall be accompanied by a certification
that recites facts sufficient to show that the findings, decision and order was
issued in accordance with this chapter and the applicable municipal ordinances.
      (2)   Service of the summons and a copy of the petition may be by any
method; provided that, the total amount of fines, other sanctions and costs
imposed by the findings, decision and order does not exceed $2,500.
      (3)   If the court is satisfied that the findings, decision and order was
entered in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and the applicable
city ordinance and that the defendant had an opportunity for a hearing under
this chapter and for judicial review as provided in this chapter:
         (a)   The Court shall render judgment in favor of the city and against
the defendant for the amount indicated in the findings, decision and order,
plus costs. The judgment shall have the same effect and may be enforced in the
same manner as other judgments for the recovery of money; and
         (b)   The Court may also issue any other orders and injunctions that
are requested by the city to enforce the order of the Hearing Officer to
correct a code violation.
   (G)   Expenses of enforcement.
      (1)   In any case in which a defendant has failed to comply with a
judgment ordering a defendant to correct a code violation or imposing any fine
or other sanction as a result of a code violation, any expenses incurred by a
municipality to enforce the judgment, including, but not limited to, attorney
fees, court costs, and costs related to property demolition or foreclosure,
after they are fixed by a court of competent jurisdiction or a Hearing Officer,
shall be a debt due and owing the municipality and may be collected in
accordance with applicable law.
      (2)   Prior to any expenses being fixed by a Hearing Officer pursuant to
this division (G), the municipality shall provide notice to the defendant that
states that the defendant shall appear at a hearing before the administrative
Hearing Officer to determine whether the defendant has failed to comply with
the judgment. The notice shall set the date for such a hearing, which shall not
be less than seven days from the date that notice is served. If notice is
served by mail, the seven-day period shall begin to run on the date that the
notice was deposited in the mail.
   (H)   Liens. Upon being recorded in the manner required by Article XII of
the Code of Civil Procedure or by the Uniform Commercial Code, a lien shall be
imposed on the real estate or personal estate, or both, of the defendant in the
amount of any debt due and owing the municipality under this section. The lien
may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of
a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (I)   Order and sanction attach to property. In the case of a building code
violation only, the order to correct a building code violation and the
sanctions imposed by the city as the result of a finding of a building code
violation under this section shall attach to the property as well as to the
property owner so that a finding of a building code violation against one owner
cannot be avoided by conveying or transferring the property to another owner.
Any subsequent transferee or owner of property takes subject to the findings,
decision and order of a Hearing Officer under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 11.10) (Ord. 06-019, passed 3-28-2006; Ord. 2016-002, passed 2-
9-2016; Ord. 2021-032, passed 8-24-2021)
§ 11.11 REVIEW UNDER ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW LAW.
   The findings, decision and order of the Hearing Officer shall be subject to
review in the Circuit Court of the county in which the city is located. The
provisions of the Administrative Review Law, 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq. and the
rules adopted pursuant thereto, shall apply to and govern every action for the
judicial review of the findings, decisions and order of a Hearing Officer under
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 11.11) (Ord. 06-019, passed 3-28-2006)
§ 11.12 IMPACT ON EXISTING ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION SYSTEMS.
   This chapter shall not affect the validity of systems of administrative
adjudication that were authorized by state law, including the city ordinances
and in existence prior to the effective date of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 11.12) (Ord. 06-019, passed 3-28-2006)
§ 11.13 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval and publication in pamphlet form as provided by law. A full, true and
complete copy of this chapter shall be published in pamphlet form, by authority
of the City Council as corporate authorities.
(Prior Code, § 11.13) (Ord. 06-019, passed 3-28-2006)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   CITY COUNCIL
      
31.   CITY OFFICIALS
      
32.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS
      
33.   FIRE AND POLICE DEPARTMENTS; EMERGENCY SERVICES
      
34.   PERSONNEL POLICIES
      
35.   GENERAL POLICIES
      
36.   ELECTIONS
      
37.   TAXATION AND FINANCE
      
38.   INVESTMENT POLICY
      
39.   FEE AND FINE SCHEDULE
CHAPTER 30: CITY COUNCIL
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Meetings of City Council
   
30.02   Membership of City Council
   
30.03   Special meetings of Council
   
30.04   Presiding officer at meetings
   
30.05   City administration and personnel and appointment of city officers
   
30.06   Legislative counsel
   
30.07   Rules for public comment at meetings
   
30.08   Rules for recording public meetings
Standing Committees
   
30.20   Committee liaisons
   
30.21   Membership in committees
   
30.22   Written reports of committees
   
30.23   Effective date
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 MEETINGS OF CITY COUNCIL.
   (A)   The regular meeting of the City Council shall be held at 7:00 p.m. CST
on the second and fourth Tuesdays of each calendar month, except that during
December, the City Council shall meet on the second Tuesdays.
   (B)   The regular meeting of the Committee of the Whole of the City Council
shall be held at 6:00 p.m. CST during the week immediately following the first
regular City Council meeting of each calendar month on a Thursday.
   (C)   The Mayor can make reasonable changes to the scheduling of meetings of
the City Council without amending the city code to reflect the same.
(Prior Code, § 30.01) (Ord. 2252, passed 11-25-1974; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-
10-2015; Ord. 2021-013A, passed 6-8-2021; Ord. 2021-055, passed 11-23-2021;
Ord. 2022-002, passed 1-11-2022; Ord. 2024-022, passed 4-23-2024)
Statutory reference:
   Meetings, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-25
   State Open Meetings Act, see 5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
§ 30.02 MEMBERSHIP OF CITY COUNCIL.
   For provisions concerning membership of City Council, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-20-
10.
(Prior Code, § 30.02)
§ 30.03 SPECIAL MEETINGS OF COUNCIL.
   For provisions concerning special meetings of City Council, see 65 ILCS 5/
3.1-40-25.
(Prior Code, § 30.03)
§ 30.04 PRESIDING OFFICER AT MEETINGS.
   For provisions concerning the presiding officer at meetings of City Council,
see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-30.
(Prior Code, § 30.04)
§ 30.05 CITY ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL AND APPOINTMENT OF CITY OFFICERS.
   (A)   City departments.
      (1)   Department creation. The city shall be made up of the following
departments: Finance and Administration; Marketing and Blue Island Television
(BITV); Planning and Zoning; Buildings; Water and Sewer; Public Works; Golf
Course; Police; Fire; and Clerk’s Office.
      (2)   Department employees.
         (a)   The departments shall consist of such positions deemed necessary
to carry out the purpose of the department and shall be subject to the
administrative control of the Mayor. All employees, in the absence of any
statutory provisions to the contrary, shall be selected by the Mayor or Mayor’s
designee pursuant to the Mayor’s power of administrative control of all
departments and divisions.
         (b)   Unless otherwise provided by state statute, the Mayor shall have
the power to employ employees upon recommendation of the head of the department
to where the employee is to be assigned. Unless otherwise provided, the head of
each department shall have the power to discipline or remove any employee
employed in that department, subject to the rules and regulations contained in
the city handbook of policies and procedures.
   (B)   Appointive offices.
      (1)   Appointed offices. All officers, other than elective officers,
shall be appointed by the Mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the City
Council, as provided by state statute. In addition to those offices
specifically enumerated in the Illinois Municipal Code, the following municipal
offices are hereby established: City Administrator and Deputy City
Administrator, whose duties shall be as determined by the Mayor.
      (2)   Discontinue certain appointed offices. The following appointed
offices shall be discontinued and the duties of said offices shall be re-
assigned as determined by the Mayor:
         (a)   Supervisor of 911;
         (b)   Director of Blue Island Emergency Medical Assistance;
         (c)   Superintendent of Public Works;
         (d)   Superintendent of Water Building Commissioner;
         (e)   Supervisor of Planning;
         (f)   Supervisor of Buildings;
         (g)   Supervisor of Special Projects;
         (h)   Supervisor of Inspections and Facility Management;
         (i)   Electrical Inspector;
         (j)   Health/License Inspector;
         (k)   Golf Course Pro;
         (l)   Director of Golf;
         (m)   Supervisor of Budget and Finance;
         (n)   Director of Marketing;
         (o)   Director of Finance and Administration;
         (p)   Director of Municipal Services; and
         (q)   Director of Public Health and Safety.
(Prior Code, § 30.05) (Ord. 2014-018, passed 4-22-2014; Ord. 2021-013B, passed
6-8-2021)
§ 30.06 LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL.
   (A)   It is in the best interests of the city for the Aldermen to retain
legislative counsel to independently advise Aldermen on matters relating to
their legislative duties which may include, but not be limited to, the drafting
of ordinances, opinions on the powers of the legislative branch, analyses of
the validity of actions taken by the city, review of litigation issues,
representation of the corporate authorities regarding legislative matters in
litigation, and providing other advice on matters within the purview of the
legislative branch of municipal government.
   (B)   Aldermen shall each be authorized to seek legal counsel regarding any
matters within the range of items specified in division (A) of this section.
   (C)   The legislative counsel shall be retained as an independent contractor
at a rate authorized by the City Council for a term in excess of one year but
not exceeding the term of the then-current Mayor. No department or office of
legislative counsel is hereby created. The legislative counsel shall not
replace or usurp the powers of the City Attorney.
(Ord. 2019-016, passed 5-28-2019)
§ 30.07 RULES FOR PUBLIC COMMENT AT MEETINGS.
   (A)   Public comment.
      (1)   Regarding committee meetings, any member of the general public
(“speaker”) may orally or in writing address items that are on the agenda of
any open meeting of a standing committee of the City Council (“Council”) or any
subcommittees thereof, subject to the rules provided in this section.
      (2)   Regarding Council meetings, speakers may orally or in writing
address any item, including those not on the meeting agenda, at any open
meeting of the Council, subject to the rules provided in this section.
   (B)   Public comment rules. Oral public comment at meetings shall be subject
to the rules set forth below.
      (1)   Speakers must be physically present at the meeting. An individual
who is unable to be physically present at the meeting may give written comments
to another individual to be read by that individual at the meeting. Written
comments must adhere to all other rules for public comment in this section. An
individual reading written comments may read such comments from only one other
individual at a given meeting.
      (2)   During the period for public comment at Council meetings, speakers
must come forward to the podium at Council meetings if they are physically able
to do so. During the period for public comment at committee or subcommittee
meetings, the location from which speakers must address the committee or
subcommittee, if physically able to do so, shall be determined by the presiding
officer.
      (3)   Speakers must give their full names prior to speaking during public
comment. Speakers shall not be required to provide their home addresses during
public comment.
      (4)   After being recognized by the Mayor or presiding officer, speakers
must address the Council, committee or subcommittee directly and not members of
the public.
      (5)   Each speaker is allotted a maximum of four minutes to speak. The
four-minute time period shall be monitored by the City Clerk. Speakers who are
reading written comments submitted by other individuals must adhere to this
time frame.
      (6)   Speakers shall refrain from using obscene, profane, abusive or
inciting language or gestures.
   (C)   Posting of public comment rules. Public comment rules will be posted
on the city’s website, at the East Annex and with the sign-in sheet at each
public meeting.
(Ord. 2019-029, passed 7-16-2019; Ord. 2019-043, passed 8-27-2019)
§ 30.08 RULES FOR RECORDING PUBLIC MEETINGS.
   (A)   Policy. It is the city’s policy to cooperate with representatives of
the media and with other members of the public who wish to record public
meetings by tape, film or other means.
   (B)   Procedural rules.
      (1)   Any person may record the proceedings of a public meeting by tape,
film or other means, subject to the rules of this section.
      (2)   Meetings closed to the public may not be recorded except as
required and authorized by the Open Meetings Act, 5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
      (3)   The Mayor or presiding officer may designate a location for
recording equipment or restrict the movements of individuals who are using the
recording equipment for the purpose of reasonably preserving meeting decorum
and facilitating the conduct of business.
      (4)   If a witness at any open meeting refuses to testify on the grounds
that he or she may not be compelled to testify if any portion of his or her
testimony is to be broadcast or televised or if motion pictures are to be taken
of him or her while he or she is testifying, then the Mayor or other presiding
officer holding the meeting shall prohibit such recording during the testimony
of the witness, in accordance with 5 ILCS 120/2.05. Nothing in this section
shall be construed to extend the right to refuse to testify at any meeting not
subject to the provisions of § 8-701 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
(Ord. 2019-029, passed 7-16-2019; Ord. 2019-043, passed 8-27-2019)
STANDING COMMITTEES
§ 30.20 COMMITTEE LIAISONS.
   Operating as committee liaisons within the Committee of Whole and the City
Council, each Alderman shall be assigned a committee liaison assignment with
responsibility over a respective operational area of the city in an effort to
foster policy direction and leadership regarding specific community needs. The
seven operational areas of the city to be assigned a committee liaison shall be
as determined by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 30.15) (Ord. 11-128, passed 4-12-2011; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-
10-2015; Ord. 2021-013A, passed 6-8-2021)
§ 30.21 MEMBERSHIP IN COMMITTEES.
   (A) The City Council shall appoint an Alderman as the committee liaison for
each respective operational area of the city assigned a committee liaison.
   (B)   Each committee member shall be notified in writing of the committee
liaison assignment for which he or she is to serve and shall continue to serve
as such liaison until notified in writing to the contrary.
(Prior Code, § 30.16) (Ord. 11-128, passed 4-12-2011; Ord. 2019-015, passed 5-
28-2019; Ord. 2021-013A, passed 6-8-2021)
§ 30.22 WRITTEN REPORTS OF COMMITTEES.
   The committee liaison or, in his or her absence, his or her designee, in
reporting upon a subject of the liaison assignment, shall report in writing to
the Committee of the Whole or the City Council unless such written report is
excused by the Mayor. All written reports of any committee liaison and all
papers, petitions and other documents relative to a liaison’s report shall be
placed on file in the City Clerk’s office and shall become a part of the
official city records.
(Prior Code, § 30.17) (Ord. 11-128, passed 4-12-2011; Ord. 2021-013A, passed 6-
8-2021)
§ 30.23 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage
and approval as required by law.
(Prior Code, § 30.18) (Ord. 11-128, passed 4-12-2011)
CHAPTER 31: CITY OFFICIALS
Section
   
31.01   Mayor
   
31.02   City Attorney
   
31.03   City Collector
   
31.04   City Clerk
   
31.05   City Treasurer
   
31.06   City Administrator
   
31.07   Deputy City Administrator
§ 31.01 MAYOR.
   (A)   Election; term of office. For provisions concerning the election of
the Mayor and the Mayor’s term of office, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-10.
   (B)   Duties and powers. For provisions concerning the duties and powers of
the Mayor, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-5.
(Prior Code, § 31.01)
§ 31.02 CITY ATTORNEY.
   (A)   Except as provided otherwise in Chapter 30, the City Attorney shall
conduct all the law business of the city and shall keep in proper books a
register of all actions in court prosecuted or defended by the Attorney; such
books shall at all times be open to the inspection of the Mayor or any member
of the City Council.
   (B)   The City Attorney may draft ordinances as may be required of the
Attorney by the City Council or by any committee thereof.
   (C)   The City Attorney shall draw any deeds, leases, contracts or other
papers required by the business of the city when requested so to do by the
Mayor, the City Council or by any Council committee.
   (D)   The City Attorney shall, when required to do so, furnish written
opinions upon subjects submitted to him or her by the Mayor, the City Council
or by any Council committee.
   (E)   Upon request of the City Council or Mayor, the City Attorney shall, on
or before May 1 in each year, report in writing to the City Council the
transactions of the Attorney’s office during the preceding year together with
such other information as the Attorney may deem necessary and proper.
   (F)   The City Attorney shall be ex officio city prosecutor and shall be
charged with the prosecution of all actions for violation of the ordinances of
the city. He or she shall also institute an action in every case when there has
been a violation of any city ordinance, when instructed so to do by the Mayor,
the City Council, or upon complaint of any other person, when in the Attorney’s
judgment the public interest requires that the same shall be prosecuted. The
City Attorney is empowered to file a civil action to recover any penalty or
fine for the violation of any city ordinance. Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/1-2-9.1, in
all actions for violation of the municipal code of the city where in the fine
for the violation would not be in excess of $750 and no jail term could be
imposed, service of summons may be by certified mail, return receipt requested,
whether service is to be within or without the state. Any violations of the
municipal code of the city where in the fine for the violation would be in
excess of $750 is excluded.
   (G)   The City Attorney may discontinue any action brought for the violation
of any city ordinance upon such terms as to the Attorney may deem equitable,
and he or she shall, as to such actions, have like powers as State’s Attorneys
in state cases. Such actions shall be discontinued with the advice and consent
of the Mayor or City Council.
   (H)   The City Attorney shall have the power to incur all necessary expenses
in fulfilling the duties of the office as authorized by prior appropriation.
(Prior Code, § 31.02) (Ord. 90-220, passed 5-22-1990; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-
10-2015; Ord. 2019-016, passed 5-28-2019)
§ 31.03 CITY COLLECTOR.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall hold the office of City Collector.
   (B)   65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-120 delineates the duties of the Collector and these
duties shall be assumed by the City Clerk.
   (C)   The salary for the duly elected City Clerk shall be a gross amount of
$65,000 per year; payable in equal bi-weekly installments. Salary for the City
Clerk shall not increase nor decrease during the term of office.
(Prior Code, § 31.03) (Ord. 12-207, passed 9-25-2012)
§ 31.04 CITY CLERK.
   (A)   Duties of City Clerk. For provisions concerning the duties of the City
Clerk, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-90.
   (B)   Deputy Clerk.
      (1)   There is hereby created the office of Deputy Clerk.
      (2)   The City Clerk is authorized to appoint a Deputy Clerk who shall
have the power and duty to execute all documents required by any law or
ordinance to be executed by the Clerk, and affix the seal of the city thereto
whenever required.
      (3)   When signing any documents, the Deputy Clerk shall sign the name of
the City Clerk followed by the word “by” and the Deputy Clerk’s own name and
the words “Deputy Clerk”.
   (B)   The powers and duties herein described shall be exercised by such
Deputy Clerk only in absence of the City Clerk from the Clerk’s office in the
city hall, and only when either written direction has been given by the City
Clerk to exercise such power, or the City Council has determined by resolution
that the City Clerk is temporarily or permanently incapacitated to perform such
function. Such Deputy Clerk shall have the power and authority as may be
provided by statute.
(Prior Code, § 31.04) (Ord. 2090, passed 1-6-1969)
§ 31.05 CITY TREASURER.
   For provisions concerning the duties of the City Treasurer, see 65 ILCS 5/
3.1-35-40 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 31.05)
§ 31.06 CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   There is hereby created the office of the City Administrator. The City
Administrator shall be appointed as provided in §
30.05(B)(1) herein. The City Administrator shall hold office during the term of
the Mayor unless otherwise indicated at the time of appointment or in the
applicable contract. The City Administrator shall be paid a salary in an amount
of $90,000 or by contract approved by the City Council. No appointment or
contract, however, shall exceed the term of the Mayor in office at the time of
appointment.
   (B)   The City Administrator shall be responsible to the Mayor for the
proper administration of the city. In discharging this responsibility, the City
Administrator as administrative head of all departments shall:
      (1)   Direct, supervise and coordinate the administration of all
departments, offices and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by
law;
      (2)   Attend, or cause a designee to attend, all City Council meetings.
The City Administrator shall have the right to take part in all discussions,
but shall not vote;
      (3)   Oversee the preparation of the annual appropriation and budget, and
prepare and submit to the City Council by the date set by the City Council, a
recommended annual appropriation and budget for city operations and a
recommended capital program. When the annual appropriation and budget or
capital program has been approved by the City Council, the City Administrator
shall be responsible for the administration of the appropriation, budget and
capital program;
      (4)   Direct, supervise and oversee the city’s application for, and
administration of all federal, state, county and other monetary grants;
      (5)   Be responsible for all contract negotiations for the city;
      (6)   Submit to the City Council and make available to the public a
complete report on the administrative activities of the city within 90 days of
the end of each fiscal year;
      (7)   Make such other reports as the City Council may require concerning
the operations of city departments, offices and agencies;
      (8)   Keep the City Council fully advised as to the present financial
condition and future needs of the city;
      (9)   Be responsible for procurement of commodities and services for all
city departments, offices and agencies, and promulgate purchasing rules which
shall be followed by employees in the procurement of goods and services;
      (10)   Propose to the City Council such personnel rules and regulations,
as the administrator deems necessary to manage the personnel policies of the
city;
      (11)   Advise the City Council on pending decisions of public policy and
recommend to the City Council the adoption of such measures as the
Administrator may deem necessary or expedient for the health, safety or welfare
of the community or for the improvement of administrative services;
      (12)   Be responsible for the conduct of all collective bargaining
processes of the city, in conjunction with the respective department heads and
any other officers appointed by the Mayor and/or City Council, and recommend to
the City Council collective bargaining agreements for approval by the City
Council, and shall be responsible for administering all contracts reached
throughout the collective bargaining process;
      (13)   Provide staff support services for the Mayor and members of the
City Council;
      (14)   Serve as the public information officer for the city;
      (15)   Be responsible for, and oversee information technology including,
but not limited to, computer systems, cable television and telecommunications;
and
      (16)   Perform such other duties as may be specified by law or assigned
by the Mayor.
(Ord. 2021-013B, passed 6-8-2021)
§ 31.07 DEPUTY CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   There is hereby created the office of the Deputy City Administrator.
The Deputy City Administrator shall be appointed as provided in §
30.05(B)(1) herein. The Deputy City Administrator shall be paid a salary in an
amount of $85,000 or by contract approved by the City Council. The Deputy City
Administrator shall hold office during the term of the Mayor unless otherwise
indicated at the time of appointment or in the applicable contract. No
appointment or contract, however, shall exceed the term of the Mayor in office
at the time of appointment.
   (B)   The Deputy City Administrator shall be responsible to the City
Administrator and Mayor as the chief assistant for the administration of the
City. In discharging this responsibility, the Deputy City Administrator shall,
under the supervision of the City Administrator, be responsible for overseeing
operation of the daily affairs of the city, personnel matters, payroll,
maintenance of financial records for the City Administrator, and such other
duties as the City Administrator or the Mayor may establish. The Deputy City
Administrator shall be responsible for working with the City Treasurer to
account for all funds expended from and received into the city treasury.
(Ord. 2021-013B, passed 6-8-2021)
CHAPTER 32: CITY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
   
32.01   Community Health Coalition
   
32.02   Arts and Culture Committee
   
32.03   Fire Tax Board
   
32.04   Building Code Hearing Department
   
32.05   Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals
   
32.06   Special Events Committee
§ 32.01 COMMUNITY HEALTH COALITION.
   (A)   Short title. This section shall be known and may be cited as “The Blue
Island Community Health Coalition Ordinance”.
   (B)   Creation. A Community Health Coalition is hereby created for the city.
   (C)   Membership, appointment, tenure and compensation.
      (1)   Officers of the Coalition shall consist of four to six members to
be appointed by the Mayor subject to the confirmation of the City Council. They
are: Chair, Co-Chair, Secretary and Treasurer.
      (2)   Officers of the Coalition shall be appointed for two-year terms and
limited to serving three consecutive two-year terms.
      (3)   Appointments to fill a vacancy shall be for the remainder of the
unexpired terms only.
      (4)   All officers and members of the Coalition shall serve without
compensation for their services.
      (5)   Membership to the Coalition is voluntary and open to the public.
   (D)   Organization, bylaws and meetings.
      (1)   The Coalition shall organize by the appointment of a Chair and such
other officers as it deems necessary. Such officers shall hold office for a
term of two years and may succeed themselves not to exceed three consecutive
terms.
      (2)   The Coalition shall adopt such bylaws governing its procedures and
regulating its business as it, from time to time, deems proper and necessary,
consistent with city ordinances or state laws heretofore or hereafter in force
and effect. The adoption and amendment of the bylaws shall be by a majority
vote of the members of the Governance Committee of the Coalition. Every member
of the Governance Committee of the Coalition shall be furnished with a copy of
proposed bylaws or amendments thereto at least ten days prior to any action
taken thereon by the Coalition. The Coalition shall keep written records of its
proceedings which shall be open to public inspection.
   (E)   Powers and duties. The Coalition shall work in coordination with the
city administration to strengthen community health in the city. The Coalition
will formulate and carry out specific strategies to achieve this objective.
Should at any time the Coalition become a 501(c)(3) organization on file with
the Illinois Secretary of State, the Coalition will cease to be a city
committee and will be independently governed.
   (F)   Annual report. The Coalition shall submit an annual written report to
the City Council not later than March 1 of each year beginning in 2013.
(Prior Code, § 32.01) (Ord. 12-164, passed 2-28-2012)
§ 32.02 ARTS AND CULTURE COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Short title. This section shall be known and may be cited as “The Blue
Island Arts and Culture Committee Ordinance”.
   (B)   Creation. An Arts and Culture Committee is hereby created for the
city.
   (C)   Membership, appointment, tenure and compensation.
      (1)   The Committee shall consist of seven to nine members to be
appointed by the Mayor subject to the confirmation of the City Council.
      (2)   The members of the Committee shall be appointed for three-year
terms.
      (3)   Appointments to fill a vacancy shall be for the remainder of the
unexpired terms only.
      (4)   All members of the Committee shall serve without compensation for
their services as members of the Committee.
      (5)   The Secretary of the Committee may be a non-member thereof and if
so, shall have no vote.
   (D)   Organization, bylaws and meetings.
      (1)   The Committee shall organize by the election of a Chairperson and
such other officers as it deems necessary. Such officers shall hold office for
a term of three years and may succeed themselves.
      (2)   The Committee shall adopt such bylaws governing its procedures and
regulating its business as it, from time to time, deems proper and necessary,
consistent with city ordinances or state laws heretofore or hereafter in force
and effect. The adoption and amendment of the bylaws shall be by a majority
vote of the members of the Committee. Every member of the Committee shall be
furnished with a copy of proposed bylaws or amendments thereto at least ten
days prior to any action taken thereon by the Committee. The Committee shall
keep written records of its proceedings which shall be open to public
inspection.
   (E)   Powers and duties. The Committee shall work in coordination with the
city administration to strengthen the arts and culture the city. The Committee
will formulate and carry out specific strategies to achieve this objective.
   (F)   Annual report. The Committee shall submit an annual written report to
the City Council not later than June 1 of each year.
(Prior Code, § 32.02) (Ord. 10-099, passed 4-27-2010; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-
10-2015)
§ 32.03 FIRE TAX BOARD.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   In accordance with the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS, 5/11-10-2,
there shall be established a board known as the Foreign Fire Insurance Board.
      (2)   The Board shall consist of seven Trustees: the Fire Chief, who
shall hold office by virtue of rank, and six members, who shall be elected at
large by the sworn members of the Department. If there is an insufficient
number of candidates to fill all these positions, the number of Board members
may be reduced, but not fewer than three Trustees. All members of the
Department shall be eligible to be elected as officers of the Department
Foreign Fire Insurance Board. The members of the Board shall annually elect
officers. These officers shall be a Chairperson and a Treasurer. The Trustees
of the Department Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall make all needful rules and
regulations with respect to the Department Foreign Fire Insurance Board and the
management of the money to be appropriated to the board. The officers of the
Department Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall develop and maintain a listing of
those items that the Board feels are appropriate expenditures under this Act.
The Treasurer of the Department Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall give a
sufficient bond to the municipality in which the Fire Department is organized.
This bond shall be approved by the Mayor or President, as the case may be,
conditioned upon the faithful performance by the Treasurer of his or her duties
under the ordinance and the rules and regulation provided for in the section.
The Treasurer of the Department Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall receive the
appropriated money and shall pay out the money upon the order of the Department
Foreign Fire Insurance Board for the maintenance, use and benefit of the
Department. As part of the annual municipal audit, these funds shall be audited
to verify that the funds have been expended by the Board only for the
maintenance, use and benefit of the Department.
      (3)   The Municipal Treasurer shall pay upon receipt the sums received
pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-10-1 and 11-10-2, to the Treasurer of the Foreign Fire
Insurance Board.
      (4)   The Board shall be empowered to adopt needful rules and regulations
for the efficient and effective management of the money received by the
Treasurer.
      (5)   The Treasurer of the Fund shall give a sufficient bond to the city.
The bond shall be approved by the Mayor of the city.
      (6)   The Treasurer of the Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall pay out the
money upon the order of the membership of the Fire Department for the
maintenance, use and benefit of the Department.
   (B)   Rules and regulations. The rules and regulations set forth in this
division (B) shall govern the Foreign Fire Tax Fund.
      (1)   Name.
         (a)   The Foreign Fire Tax Fund shall be the name of this
organization.
         (b)   References in this Constitution and bylaws to “Fund” or “Tax
Fund” shall refer to the fund as set forth in division (B)(1)(a) above.
         (c)   This Tax Fund, its officers, representatives and members shall
recognize, observe and be bound by the provisions of this Constitution and
bylaws.
      (2)   Jurisdiction. The jurisdiction of the Foreign Fire Insurance Tax
Fund shall be as follows: all persons engaged in firefighting or fire
prevention who are permanent, paid-on-call or volunteer employees of the City
Fire Department.
      (3)   Membership. Any person engaged in service within the jurisdiction
of the Department as given in division (B)(2) above, will be eligible for
active membership.
      (4)   Meetings.
         (a)   Regular meetings. Regular meetings of this Tax Fund shall be
held as needed. The Secretary will notify all members at least seven days prior
to scheduled meetings.
         (b)   Special meetings. Special meetings may be called by vote of a
majority of the Executive Board. All members shall be notified of such meeting
at least four days prior to same. The notice shall state the business to be
considered at such meeting, and no other business than that stated shall be in
order at such meeting.
         (c)   Quorum. The quorum for any meeting of this Tax Fund, either
regular or special, shall be ten members present.
         (d)   Rights of members. Every member shall have the right to attend
any meeting and to participate in such meeting in accordance with the
recognized rules as set forth in the manual of parliamentary procedure adopted
by this Tax Fund.
         (e)   Rules for meetings. The rules contained in Atwood’s Rules for
Meetings shall govern the meetings of this Tax Fund in all cases not in
conflict with the Constitution and bylaws.
         (f)   Open meetings. All meetings of the Tax Fund will be conducted in
accordance with the State Open Meetings Act, being 5 ILCS 120.
      (5)   Officers and elections.
         (a)   Generally. The officers of this Tax Fund shall consist of a
President, Vice President, Secretary and Treasurer who shall hold office for
two years, and until the election and installation of their successors unless
removed from office as provided in this Constitution and bylaws.
         (b)   Eligibility for office. Any member shall be eligible to be a
candidate for office in this Tax Fund.
         (c)   Rights of candidates. Every candidate for office shall have the
right to request distribution of campaign literature, by mail or otherwise, to
all members at the candidate’s own expense. There shall be no discrimination in
favor of, or against any candidate with regard to the membership lists.
         (d)   Method of nomination and election. Nominations shall take place
at a meeting, to be scheduled by the executive board at least one month prior
to the election date. Nominations shall be made by active members and approved
by a majority of the members present. Beginning 1994, elections shall be held
bi-annually on the third Tuesday in November. Elections shall be held at Fire
Station #1, between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Notice of the election shall be
posted at both stations at least five working days prior to the election date
selected by the Board. Two election judges shall be picked by the Executive
Board at the nomination meeting.
         (e)   Ballots preserved. The ballots and all other records of an
election shall be preserved by the Secretary for five years following an
election.
         (f)   Vacancies in office. When an office becomes vacant by reason of
the death, resignation or removal of the incumbent, the vacancy shall be filled
by election of the members of the Department. The vacancy shall be filled for
the balance of the unexpired term. The election to fill the vacancy shall be
held within 60 days of the date the vacancy becomes final. The election shall
be by secret ballot following the rules of the Australian ballot.
      (6)   Duties of officers.
         (a)   President. It shall be the duty of the President to preside at
all meetings of the Tax Fund. He or she shall be the executive head of the
Fund. He or she shall be a member ex officio of all committees. He or she shall
appoint such committees as may be provided for in this Constitution and bylaws
and such special committees as may be authorized to the Tax Fund. He or she
shall have general supervision of the activities of the other officers and
chairpersons of committees. The President shall discharge on behalf of the Tax
Fund such duties as may be imposed on him or her by applicable laws including
the execution and filing of any reports to federal and state authorities, and
shall cause to be maintained by the Tax Fund such reports as the law requires
to be kept in support of reports filed by it.
         (b)   Vice President. The Vice President shall assist the President in
such a manner as the President may determine. In the absence of the President,
he or she shall preside at meetings of the Tax Fund. If the office of President
becomes vacant, the Vice President shall be acting President until the office
of President is filled by election by the Executive Board.
         (c)   Secretary. The Secretary shall have custody of all documents,
records, books and papers belonging to the Tax Fund, except as otherwise
provided by this Constitution and bylaws. He or she shall attest all official
documents with his or her signature. He or she shall conduct the correspondence
of the Tax Fund promptly. He or she shall maintain the official list of
members, which shall be kept accurately and on a current basis. The Secretary
shall discharge on behalf of the Tax Fund such duties as may be imposed upon
him or her by applicable law including the execution and filing of any reports,
and he or she shall cause to be maintained by the Tax Fund such records as the
law requires to be kept in support of reports filed by it.
         (d)   Treasurer. The Treasurer shall receive all money due the Tax
Fund, from whatsoever the source, and shall disburse the same only by voucher
signed by the President in conformity with a majority vote of the membership of
the Tax Fund. Such disbursement shall be by check, which shall also be signed
by the President. He or she shall maintain and keep a current record of all
financial transactions promptly and accurately. He or she shall be prepared to
exhibit receipts and vouchers upon the audit of his or her books. He or she
shall forward the annual audit of the Tax Fund to the city.
         (e)   Executive Board. The Executive Board shall consist of the
President, Vice-President, Secretary and Treasurer. It shall be the duty of the
Executive Board to exercise general supervision and control of the funds and
property of the Tax Fund. It shall have the authority to act in the name of the
Tax Fund during intervals between meetings, such acts being subject to
confirmation by the membership at the next regular meeting of the Tax Fund. It
shall provide for an annual audit of the Treasurer’s books. It shall conduct
regular meetings as needed. (Board meetings should be held just prior to
regular meetings). Special meetings may be held on call, signed by a majority
of its members. Ten members present shall constitute a quorum. The Treasurer of
the Tax Fund shall be bonded in such amounts as may be required by the city in
compliance with applicable law. The expense of such bonds shall be borne by the
Tax Fund.
      (7)   Audit. The books and accounts of this Tax Fund shall be audited
annually. The cost of the audit shall be paid from the Tax Fund.
      (8)   Amendments.
         (a)   This Constitution and bylaws made under its provisions may be
amended by a two-thirds vote of the membership, provided each member is
notified in writing of the proposed amendment at least 15 days in advance of
the meeting at which the vote will be taken.
         (b)   A secret ballot vote shall be held concerning the amendment. The
Secretary shall provide the ballot forms. Two members appointed by the
Executive Board shall tabulate the votes. The records of the vote shall be held
by the Secretary for two years.
      (9)   Expenditures. Any expenditures exceeding $500 discussed at a
meeting must be approved by majority vote of the membership. A secret ballot
vote shall be held at Fire Station #1 at least five days after the meeting. The
Secretary shall provide the ballot forms. Two members appointed by the
Executive Board shall tabulate the votes. The records of the vote shall be held
by the Secretary for two years.
      (10)   Temporary election procedures.
         (a)   There is hereby established a Temporary Blue Island Fire
Department Election Committee. The Temporary Election Committee shall consist
of three members. The Chief of the Fire Department shall serve ex officio as
Chairperson of the Committee. The Chief shall appoint two members of the
Department to serve on the Committee, who will be on duty on the day of the
election.
         (b)   The Temporary Election Committee shall be responsible for
organizing, conducting and supervising the initial election of officers to
serve on the Board. Thereafter, the Board shall establish election procedures
consistent with this section.
(Prior Code, § 32.05) (Ord. 94-305, passed 8-23-1994; Ord. 10-096, passed 4-13-
2010)
§ 32.04 BUILDING CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BUILDING INSPECTOR. Any full- or part-time city employee whose duties
include the inspection or examination of structures in the city to determine if
code violations exist.
      BUILDING OWNER. The legal or beneficial owner of a structure.
      CODE. Any city ordinance, law, housing or building code that establishes
construction, plumbing, heating, electrical, fire prevention, sanitation or
other health and safety standards that are applicable to structures in a
municipality.
      HEARING OFFICER. An individual appointed by the Mayor and approved by the
City Council, other than a Building Inspector or law enforcement officer, whose
duty it is to:
         (a)   Preside at the administrative hearings to decide if a code
violation exists;
         (b)   Hear testimony and accept evidence from the Building Inspector,
the building owner and all interested parties relevant to the existence of a
code violation;
         (c)   Preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the
hearing and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing; and
         (d)   Issue and sign a written finding, decision and order stating
whether a code violations exists.
   (B)   Code Hearing Department.
      (1)   Code Hearing Department. Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-2, the city
establishes a Code Hearing Department. The function of the Hearing Department
is to expedite the prosecution and correction of code violations in the manner
set forth in this section.
      (2)   Hearing procedures not exclusive. The city by adoption of this
section does not preclude itself from using other methods to enforce the
provisions of its codes.
      (3)   Instituting code hearing proceedings.
         (a)   When a Building Inspector finds a code violation while
inspecting a structure, he or she shall note the violation on a multiple copy
violation notice and report form, indicating the name and address of the
structure owner, the type and nature of the violation, the date and time the
violation was observed, the names of witnesses to the violation and the address
of the structure where the violation is observed.
         (b)   The violation report form shall be forwarded by the Building
Inspector to the Code Hearing Department where a docket number shall be stamped
on all copies of the report, and a hearing date noted in the blank spaces
provided for that purpose on the form. The hearing date shall not be less than
30 days nor more than 40 days after the violation is reported by the Building
Inspector.
         (c)   One copy of the violation copy form shall be maintained in the
Code Hearing Department and shall be part of the record of hearing, one copy of
report form shall be returned to the Building Inspector so that he or she may
prepare evidence of the code violation for presentation at the hearing on the
date indicated, and one copy of the report form shall be served by first class
mail on the owner of the structure, along with a summons commanding the owner
to appear at the hearing. If the owner is registered with the city pursuant to
an existing registration ordinance, service may be made on the owner by mailing
the report and summons to the owner’s address registered with the city. If the
owner of the structure cannot be ascertained or if service on the owner cannot
be made by mail, service may be made on the owner by posting or nailing a copy
of the violation report form on the front door of the structure where the
violation is found, not less than 20 days before the hearing is scheduled.
Service may also be made by a police officer in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/1-2-
11, by the City Clerk in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/1-2-9.1 or in any other
manner provided by law including those enumerated in the Code of Civil
Procedure 735 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.
      (4)   Subpoenas and defaults. At any time prior to the hearing date the
Hearing Officer assigned to hear the case may, at the request of the Building
Inspector or the City Attorney, or the owner or his or her attorney, issue
subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing. If,
on the date set for hearing, the owner or his or her attorney fail to appear,
the Hearing Officer may find the owner in default and shall proceed with the
hearing and accept evidence relevant to the existence of a code violation.
      (5)   Continuances; representation at code hearings. No continuance shall
be authorized by the Hearing Officer in proceedings under this section except
in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of
the owner. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any
continuance authorized by the Hearing Officer under this section shall not
exceed 25 days. The case for the city may be presented by the Building
Inspector, by any other employee of the city or by an attorney designated by
the city. However, in no event shall the case for the city be presented by an
employee of the Code Hearing Department. The case for the owner may be
presented by the owner, his or her attorney, or any other agent or
representative.
      (6)   Hearing; evidence. At the hearing, a Hearing Officer shall preside
and hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the existence or non-
existence of a code violation in the structure indicated. The strict rules of
evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply to hearings
authorized by this section.
   (C)   Eviction rights of occupants. No action of eviction, abatement of
nuisance, forcible entry or detainer or other similar proceeding shall be
threatened or instituted against the occupant of a dwelling solely because such
occupant agrees to testify or testifies at a code violation hearing.
   (D)   Defenses of code violations. It shall be a defense to a code violation
charged under this section if the owner, his or her attorney or any other agent
or representative proves to the Hearing Officer’s satisfaction that:
      (1)   The code violation alleged in the notice does not in fact exist, or
at the time of the hearing that the violation has been remedied or removed;
      (2)   The code violation has been caused by the current building
occupants and that in spite of reasonable attempts by the owner to maintain the
dwelling free of such violations, the current occupants continue to cause the
violations; or
      (3)   An occupant or resident of the dwelling has refused entry to the
owner or his or her agent to all or part of a the dwelling for the purpose of
correcting the code violation.
   (E)   Findings, decisions and order. At the conclusion of the hearing, the
Hearing Officer shall make a determination on the basis of the evidence
presented at the hearing whether or not a code violation exists. The
determination shall be in writing and shall be designated as findings, decision
and order. The findings, decision and order shall include the Hearing Officer’s
findings of fact, a decision whether or not the code violation exists based on
the finding of fact, and an order, ordering the owner to correct the violation
or dismissing the case, in the event a violation is not proved. If a code
violation is proved, the order may also impose the sanctions that are provided
in the code for the violation proved. A copy of the findings, decision and
order shall be served on the owner within five days after they are issued;
service shall be in the same manner the report form and summons are served
pursuant to division (B)(3) above. Payment of any fine or penalty imposed shall
be made to the city, in care of the office of the City Clerk. When collected,
the fines and penalties shall be paid into the treasury of the city.
   (F)   Administrative review.
      (1)   Administrative review. The findings, decision and order of the
Hearing Officer shall be subject to review in the County Circuit Court and the
provisions of the Administrative Review Law, and all amendments and
modifications thereto, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto are adopted and
shall apply to and govern every action of the judicial review of the findings,
decision and order of a Hearing Officer under this section.
      (2)   Judgment on finding, decision or order.
         (a)   Any fine, other sanctions or costs imposed, or part of any fine,
other sanction or costs imposed remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or
the failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the Administrative
Review Law, 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq. shall be a debt due and owing to the city
and, as such, may be collected in accordance with applicable law.
         (b)   After expiration of the period within which judicial review
under the Administrative Review Law, 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq. may be sought for
a final determination of the code violation, the city may commence a proceeding
in the County Circuit Court for the purposes of obtaining a judgment on the
findings, decision and order. The city may consolidate multiple findings,
decisions and orders against a person in such a proceeding. Upon commencement
of the action, the city shall file a certified copy of the findings, decision
and order, which shall be accompanied by a certification that recites facts
sufficient to show that the findings, decision and order was issued in
accordance with 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-1 et seq. and this section. Service of the
summons and a copy of the petition may be made by any method provided by 735
ILCS 5/2-203 (§ 2-203 of the Code of Civil Procedure) or by certified mail,
return receipt requested, provided that the total amount of the fines, other
sanctions and costs imposed by the findings, decision and order does not exceed
$2,500. If the court is satisfied that the findings, decision and order were
entered in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-1 et seq. and this section, and
that the building owner had an opportunity for a hearing under the 65 ILCS 5/
11-31.1-1 et seq. and this section and for judicial review as provided in the
65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-1 et seq.; the court shall render judgment in favor of the
city and against the building owner for the amount indicated in the findings,
decision and order, plus costs. Such judgment shall have the same effect and
may be enforced in the same manner as other judgments for the recovery of
money; and the court may also issue such other orders and injunctions as are
requested by the city to enforce the order of the Hearing Officer to correct a
code violation.
   (G)   Sanctions applicable to owner/property. The order to correct a code
violation and the sanctions imposed by the city as a result of a finding of a
code violation under this section shall attach to the property, so that a
finding of a code violation against one owner cannot be avoided by conveying or
transferring the property to another owner. Any subsequent transferee or owner
of property takes subject to the findings, decision and order of a Hearing
Officer under this section.
   (H)   Civil liability for rentals in excess of number permitted by section.
      (1)   Generally. The owner of a building located in the city who directly
or indirectly, has collected, or caused to be collected, rentals from an
occupant of that building during a period in which the number of apartments or
family units in that building exceeded the number permitted for that building
by an ordinance of the city, is liable to any such occupant in an amount equal
to not more than three times the amount of any rentals paid by such occupant,
or in his or her behalf, after January 1,1970, together with the court costs
and reasonable attorney’s fees. If the occupant is a recipient of public aid
under Article III, IV, or VI of “The Illinois Public Aid Code”, approved April
11, 1967, as amended, being 305 ILCS 5/1-2 et seq., in whose behalf vendor
payment of the rental was made by the Illinois Department of Public Aid or a
local governmental unit, as the case may be, the liability as herein provided
is to the Illinois Department of Public Aid or the local governmental unit
making vendor payment of the rental.
      (2)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         FAMILY UNIT. A room or group of rooms used or intended to be used as a
housekeeping unit of living, sleeping, cooking and eating. The fact that any
such family unit is used or intended to be used with cooking or eating
accommodations in common with another family unit in any such building does not
affect liability hereunder.
         OWNER. The legal or beneficial owner of a building.
      (3)   Liability. No liability accrues under this section until 30 days
after the owner of record of a building has been notified in writing that such
owner is in violation of any such city ordinance. Such notice shall be
personally served upon such owner of record or sent by registered mail to the
last known address of such owner.
   (I)   Federal government contracts; maintenance of property; penalties.
      (1)   A person who contracts with the federal government or any of its
agencies, including without limitation the Department of Housing and Urban
Development, to care for vacant residential real estate shall be responsible
for maintaining the property to prevent and correct city municipal health and
safety code violations.
      (2)   A person who intentionally violates this section shall be fined or
sanctioned in accordance with the provisions of the code that the person has
violated.
(Prior Code, § 32.06) (Ord. 93-240, passed 12-14-1993)
§ 32.05 PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (A)   Short title. This section shall be known and may be cited as “The Blue
Island Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals Ordinance.”
   (B)   Commission created. A Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals (“Board”)
is created for the city. Any reference to “Plan Commission” or “Planning
Commission” or “Zoning Board of Appeals” within this code shall refer to the
Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals created herein.
   (C)   Appointment; term; compensation.
      (1)   The members of the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals shall be
the same as the members of the Zoning Board of Appeals, and will be appointed
by the Mayor with the consent and approval of the City Council. The Board shall
consist of seven members to serve for a term of five years.
      (2)   Membership on the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals shall be
under the same terms as membership on the Zoning Board of Appeals, as provided
in §
165.082 of this code.
   (D)   Organization, bylaws and meetings.
      (1)   The Board shall adopt such bylaws governing its procedures and
regulating its business as it, from time to time, deems proper and necessary,
consistent with city ordinances or state laws. The adoption and amendment of
the bylaws shall be by a majority vote of the members of the Commission. Every
member of the Commission shall be furnished with a copy of proposed bylaws or
amendments thereto at least ten days prior to any action taken thereon by the
Board. The Board shall keep written records of its proceedings with shall be
open to public inspection.
      (2)   In the event of a conflict between the bylaws of the Board and the
rules and procedures of the Zoning Board of Appeals, the Commission bylaws
shall control.
   (E)   Powers and duties.
      (1)   The Board shall prepare and recommend the following for
consideration and adoption by the Mayor and Aldermen:
         (a)   A statement of goals and objectives to help guide growth and
development in the city and its environs;
         (b)   A comprehensive plan for the present and future development and
redevelopment of the city. This plan may be adopted in whole or in separate
geographical or functional parts, each of which, when adopted by the Mayor and
Aldermen, shall be the official comprehensive plan or part thereof;
         (c)   Such amendments to the plan as may be deemed necessary;
         (d)   An official map of the city and such later revisions in the map
as may be deemed necessary by the Board or Mayor and Aldermen; and
         (e)   Plans for specific improvements pursuant to the provisions of
the official map.
      (2)   The Board shall have the jurisdiction and authority to perform, and
shall perform, all duties assigned to the Zoning Board of Appeals as detailed
in §
165.082 of this code.
      (3)   In connection with the foregoing, the Board shall:
         (a)   Review and make recommendations for the renewal, development,
redevelopment, or conservation of residential, commercial, business or
industrial areas of the city, taking into consideration urban esthetics and
civil design;
         (b)   Call upon any officials of the city for aid and advice upon any
matter properly within the scope of interest of the Board and give aid to the
official of the city and other governmental agencies charged with the direction
of projects for improvements included in the official map to further the making
of such improvements and to generally promote the objective of the official
comprehensive plan; and
         (c)   Consult with municipal, county, regional and state planning
commissions and agencies to the end that coordinated planning for the city will
be encouraged.
      (4)   The Board shall exercise other powers or duties as is now or
hereafter may be conferred by an act commonly called the Illinois Municipal
Planning Act, 65 ILCS 5/11-12-4 et seq., or any amendment thereto or as
conferred by this section or any powers or duties germane to powers hereinabove
set forth.
   (F)   Annual report. The Commission shall submit an annual written report to
the City Council no later than June 1 of each year.
(Ord. 2021-024, passed 7-13-2021)
§ 32.06 SPECIAL EVENTS COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Short title. This section shall be known and may be cited as “the Blue
Island Special Events Committee Ordinance.”
   (B)   Creation. A Special Events Committee is hereby created for the city.
   (C)   Membership, appointment, tenure and compensation.
      (1)   The Committee shall consist of five members to be appointed by the
Mayor subject to the confirmation of the City Council.
      (2)   The members of the Committee shall be appointed for three-year
terms.
      (3)   Appointments to fill a vacancy shall be for the remainder of the
unexpired terms only.
      (4)   All members of the Committee shall serve without compensation for
their services as members of the Committee.
      (5)   The Secretary of the Committee may be a non-member thereof and if
so, shall have no vote.
   (D)   Organization, bylaws and meetings.
      (1)   The Committee shall organize the election of a Chairperson and such
other officers as it deems necessary. Such officers shall hold office for a
term of three years and may succeed themselves.
      (2)   The Committee shall adopt such bylaws governing its procedures and
regulating its business as it, from time to time, deems proper and necessary,
consistent with city ordinances or state laws heretofore or hereafter in force
and effect. The adoption and amendment of the bylaws shall be by a majority
vote of the members of the Committee. The Committee shall keep written records
of its proceedings which shall be open to public inspection.
   (E)   Powers and duties. The Committee shall work in coordination with the
city administration to plan and prepare for city sponsored special events
within the city. The Committee will formulate and carry out specific strategies
to achieve this objective.
   (F)   Annual report. The Committee shall submit an annual written report to
the City Council not later than June 1 of each year.
(Ord. 2024-006, passed 1-23-2024)
CHAPTER 33: FIRE AND POLICE DEPARTMENTS;
EMERGENCY SERVICES
Section
Fire Department
   
33.001   Establishment of Department
   
33.002   Organization
   
33.003   Establishment of offices
   
33.004   Paid-on-call firefighters
   
33.005   Fire Chief
   
33.006   Appointment of other Fire Department officers
   
33.007   Fire Prevention Officer
   
33.008   Paid professional lieutenants
   
33.009   Compensation
   
33.010   Powers and duties of members
   
33.011   Destroying fire apparatus
   
33.012   Running over fire hose prohibited
   
33.013   Opening fire hydrants prohibited
   
33.014   Assembly or congregation in fire house prohibited
   
33.015   Suspension and removal
   
33.016   Required training programs
   
33.017   Mutual aid agreement authorized
   
33.018   Fire protection and emergency medical services
   
33.019   Charges for services provided in connection with the discharge or
threatened discharge of hazardous materials
   
33.020   Rules and regulations adopted
Police Department
   
33.035   Department established
   
33.036   Purpose
   
33.037   Organization
   
33.038   Establishment
   
33.039   Other personnel
   
33.040   Chief of Police and Deputy Chief; appointment and powers
   
33.041   Commanders
   
33.042   Officers and members; duties; compensation
   
33.043   Appointment of personnel
   
33.044   Detective Division created
   
33.045   Other divisions
   
33.046   Continuance in office
   
33.047   Retirement, suspension and removal
   
33.048   Fees and charges for services
Police Reserve
   
33.060   Office established
   
33.061   Organization
   
33.062   Qualification requirements
   
33.063   Training
   
33.064   Uniforms
   
33.065   Duties
   
33.066   Restrictions on members
   
33.067   Discipline
Firemen’s and Police Pension Funds
   
33.080   City shall pick up contributions to fund
   
33.081   Reduction of salary equal to contribution
   
33.082   Treatment of contributions
 
   
33.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Fire Prevention; Fireworks, see
Ch. 93
   Nuisances, see
Ch. 95
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 33.001 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEPARTMENT.
   There is created and established a Fire Department, an executive department
of the city, which shall be known as the “Blue Island Fire Department.”
(Prior Code, § 33.001) (Ord. 88-144, passed 10-25-1988)
§ 33.002 ORGANIZATION.
   The Fire Department shall be composed of a Chief of the Fire Department,
Fire Prevention Officers of the Fire Department, Lieutenants of the Fire
Department and firefighters who shall be the officers and members of the Fire
Department and such paid-on-call firefighters as determined necessary by the
Fire Chief or as otherwise provided in applicable collective bargaining
agreements, and shall consist of two fire companies to be located and have
headquarters as follows:
   (A)   Fire company No. 1 with headquarters at fire station No. 1, 2450 West
Vermont Street, Blue Island, Illinois; and
   (B)   Fire company No. 2 with headquarters at fire station No. 2, 13257
Division Street, Blue Island, Illinois.
(Prior Code, § 33.002) (Ord. 88-144, passed 10-25-1988; Ord. 2015-033, passed
11-10-2015)
§ 33.003 ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICES.
   There are created the respective offices of the Chief of the Fire
Department, one Fire Prevention Officer, three Lieutenants and such additional
offices of the Fire Department as may from time to time be provided by
ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 33.003) (Ord. 88-144, passed 10-25-1988)
§ 33.004 PAID-ON-CALL FIREFIGHTERS.
   Any person having other regular employment may serve as paid-on-call
firefighter provided that person has not attained the age of 60 years.
(Prior Code, § 33.004) (Ord. 88-144, passed 10-25-1988; Ord. 94-246, passed 1-
11-1994)
§ 33.005 FIRE CHIEF.
   (A)   Appointment. The Chief of the Fire Department shall be appointed by
the Mayor by and with the consent of the City Council to serve for such time as
is provided by law.
   (B)   Powers and duties.
      (1)   The Chief of the Fire Department shall have supervision, command
and control of the Fire Department and of all the officers and members and of
all fire apparatus and equipment belonging to the city.
      (2)   The Chief shall be responsible for the efficient performance and
operation of the Fire Department in all of its functions, and all of its
officers and members shall serve subject to the Chief’s orders.
      (3)   The Chief shall prescribe and establish from time to time such
rules and regulations concerning the organization, training and discipline of
the Fire Department, its officers, and members as the Chief may deem to be in
the best interests of the Fire Department subject to the review of the Fire
Committee of the City Council and approval by the City Council. Such rules and
regulations are not to be inconsistent to or in conflict with the rules of the
Civil Service Commission.
      (4)   In case of fire, the Chief of the Fire Department, or in the
Chief’s absence, the officer of the highest rank at the fire, shall take
command of the Fire Department and direct the management thereof Fire and
Police Departments for the suppression of the fire in the best manner possible;
and when it may be necessary for the protection of other property and to
prevent the spread of such fire or to extinguish the same, the officer in
command may cause buildings to be removed, torn down or destroyed in the best
manner possible.
      (5)   It shall be the Chief’s duty to investigate or cause to be
investigated the origin, cause and circumstances of every fire occurring within
the city, by which property has been destroyed or damaged and especially to
ascertain whether such fire was the result of carelessness or design. For this
purpose the Chief or the Chief’s designated officer shall have the power to
enter upon the premises wherein a fire shall have occurred. The Chief shall
notify the State Fire Marshal in every case of suspected arson forthwith and
shall within seven days from the occurrence of a fire make a report of the same
on forms for such purpose provided by the State Fire Marshal’s office to such
office.
      (6)   The Chief of the Fire Department shall keep in separate books
provided for that purpose:
         (a)   A true and complete inventory and record of all apparatus and
equipment belonging to the Fire Department and transactions concerning the
same;
         (b)   A roster of the officers and volunteer firefighters and a daily
duty or assignment record;
         (c)   A complete list of all fires attended to and investigated by the
Fire Department, the owner of the premises, the date and location of the fire,
the estimated loss and insurance coverage; and
         (d)   Complete reports by commanding officers concerning fires and
investigations, ambulance calls, false alarms and daily duty reports.
      (7)   The Chief shall report or cause to be reported to the City Council
at least monthly at a regular meeting thereof the number of fires, ambulance
calls, out of city calls and false alarms attended by the Fire Department for
the previous month and on such other functions the Chief deems advisable. The
Chief of the Fire Department shall as soon after the close of the fiscal year
as practicable, make a written report to the City Council showing the condition
of the Fire Department under the Chief’s management and a summary of the
information required to be kept by records and reports. The report shall be
subscribed by the Chief and filed with the City Clerk in triplicate, copies of
which shall be transmitted to the Mayor and the Chairperson of the Fire
Committee.
      (8)   The Chief of the Fire Department, or any other officer in command
of a fire, may prescribe limits within which no person except those who reside
thereon, Fire Department members, police officers or other authorized persons
may be permitted to go.
      (9)   On the expiration of the Chief’s term of office or resignation or
removal therefrom, the Chief of the Fire Department shall upon demand deliver
to the Chief’s successor in office all records, reports, books, apparatus and
equipment, and property of every description in the Chief’s control and custody
belonging to the city appertaining to such office.
      (10)   The Chief of the Fire Department shall have such other and further
duties as have been or may be granted under the statutes of the state or the
ordinances of the city, now in force or hereinafter amended.
(Prior Code, §§ 33.005) (Ord. 88-144, passed 10-25-1988)
§ 33.006 APPOINTMENT OF OTHER FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICERS.
   Except for the Chief of the Fire Department, the other officers of the Fire
Department shall be appointed and promoted in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the Civil Service Commission of the city, and the statutes of
the state providing for the administration of civil service in cities, now in
effect or hereinafter amended. Paid-on-call officers shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 33.006) (Ord. 88-144, passed 10-25-1988)
§ 33.007 FIRE PREVENTION OFFICER.
   (A)   The Fire Prevention Officer directs the day to day operation of the
Fire Prevention Bureau and supervises the enforcement of the Fire Prevention
Code.
   (B)   The Fire Prevention Officer also serves as code consultant to the
staff and performs research and other administrative functions.
(Prior Code, § 33.007) (Ord. 88-144, passed 10-25-1988)
§ 33.008 PAID PROFESSIONAL LIEUTENANTS.
   (A)   The Lieutenants of the Fire Department shall be a superior officer to
all other officers and paid-on-call firefighters excepting the Chief of the
Fire Department.
   (B)   The Lieutenants shall have such powers and perform such duties as are
promulgated by the Chief, the Civil Service Commission aforesaid, or by
ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 33.008) (Ord. 88-144, passed 10-25-1988)
§ 33.009 COMPENSATION.
   The officers and members of the Fire Department shall receive for their
services such salaries and compensation as the City Council from time to time
may lawfully allow.
(Prior Code, § 33.009) (Ord. 88-144, passed 10-25-1988)
§ 33.010 POWERS AND DUTIES OF MEMBERS.
   (A)   The members of the Fire Department shall have such powers and perform
such duties as are prescribed by law or by the rules and regulations
promulgated by the Chief, and it shall be their duty to obey the command of
their superior officer while in the performance of duty.
   (B)   It shall be the function and duty of the Fire Department and every
officer and member thereof to extinguish accidental or destructive fires from
whatever cause or source and to prevent the spread or occurrence of such fires.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of all officers and members of the Fire
Department and all police officers of the city to see that the provisions of
this chapter are enforced and to arrest on view any person who shall be found
violating any of the provisions of this chapter or who shall hinder, resist or
refuse to obey any such officer or member in the discharge of his or her duty,
and to that end all such officers and members are vested with the usual power
and authority of police officers.
   (D)   Officers and members of the Fire Department are authorized to go
outside the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of rendering aid to
other fire departments, or of extinguishing fires or rendering aid in the case
of accidents. Provided, that the Fire Department shall not render such services
outside the corporate limits excepting upon orders of the Chief of the Fire
Department or the Mayor; excepting that where the city has undertaken by
contract to render services to property outside the corporate limits in
fulfillment of such contract.
(Prior Code, § 33.010) (Ord. 88-144, passed 10-25-1988)
§ 33.011 DESTROYING FIRE APPARATUS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully destroy or damage any
engine or other apparatus or equipment of the Fire Department. Any person
violating the provisions of this section shall be fined as provided in §
33.999.
(Prior Code, § 33.011) (Ord. 88-144, passed 10-25-1988) Penalty, see §
33.999
§ 33.012 RUNNING OVER FIRE HOSE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any wheeled vehicle over any
unprotected hose of the Fire Department unless directed by an officer or member
of the Fire Department or any peace officer. Any person violating the
provisions of this section shall be fined as provided in §
33.999.
(Prior Code, § 33.012) (Ord. 88-144, passed 10-25-1988) Penalty, see §
33.999
§ 33.013 OPENING FIRE HYDRANTS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, not an officer or member of the Fire
Department, city official or city employee to use any tool or implement for the
purpose of opening any fire hydrant. Any person violating the provisions of
this section shall be fined as provided in §
33.999.
(Prior Code, § 33.013) (Ord. 88-144, passed 10-25-1988) Penalty, see §
33.999
§ 33.014 ASSEMBLY OR CONGREGATION IN FIRE HOUSE PROHIBITED.
   No persons other than an officer or member of the Fire Department, public
official, police officer or members of civil defense of the city shall assemble
or congregate around or in the fire station house without permission of the
officer in command.
(Prior Code, § 33.014) (Ord. 88-144, passed 10-25-1988) Penalty, see §
33.999
§ 33.015 SUSPENSION AND REMOVAL.
   The suspension and removal of such officers and members shall be in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the Civil Service Commission of
the city.
(Prior Code, § 33.015) (Ord. 88-144, passed 10-25-1988)
§ 33.016 REQUIRED TRAINING PROGRAMS.
   The city shall participate in the programs provided for in the Illinois Fire
Protection Training Act as set forth below.
   (A)   Prior to any trainee commencing regular full-time employment as a
firefighter, such trainee must have been certified by the Illinois State Fire
Marshal as a Firefighter II, and as having successfully completed and approved
training course as provided in said Act.
   (B)   The Firefighter II training must be completed by a trainee within the
trainee’s probationary period of 12 months, except for volunteers, part-time
and paid-on-call personnel.
   (C)   The Civil Service Commissioners of the City Fire and Police
Departments shall make the necessary amendments to the personnel rules, the
manual of rules of the City Fire Department, and the rules of the Civil Service
Commission of the city in order to require that any person appointed to the
Fire Department of the city shall not become a regular member of the Fire
Department unless and until such person shall complete, pursuant to the
Illinois Fire Protection Training Act, being 50 ILCS 740/15, the approved
training course within 12 months of the date of such person’s initial
employment.
(Prior Code, § 33.016) (Ord. 2594, passed 9-28-1982)
§ 33.017 MUTUAL AID AGREEMENT AUTHORIZED.
   The Mayor of the city is authorized to enter into a mutual aid agreement
with other participating cities, villages and fire protection districts to
assure the availability of firefighting personnel and equipment in the event of
a fire or disaster.
(Prior Code, § 33.017) (Ord. 2431, passed 12-12-1978)
§ 33.018 FIRE PROTECTION AND EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES.
   (A)   Emergency medical and ambulance services.
The following fees are hereby established as charges to any recipients of
emergency medical transportation and related services provided by the Fire
Department, unless otherwise indicated in the city’s comprehensive fee
schedule:
January 1 through December 31, 2022
 Basic Life Support     $2,500
 Transport fee per mile $30
January 1, 2023 through December 31, 2023
 Advanced Life Support  $2,625
 Basic Life Support     $2,625
 Transport fee per mile $31.50
January 1, 2024 through December 31, 2024
 Advanced Life Support  $2,756.25
 Basic Life Support     $2,756.25
 Transport fee per mile $33.08
January 1, 2025 through December 31, 2025
 Advanced Life Support  $2,894.06
 Basic Life Support     $2,894.06
 Transport fee per mile $34.73
January 1, 2026 through December 31, 2026
 Advanced Life Support  $3,038.77
 Basic Life Support     $3,038.77
 Transport fee per mile $36.47
January 1, 2027 through December 31, 2027
 Advanced Life Support  $3,190.70
 Basic Life Support     $3,190.70
 Transport fee per mile $38.29
January 1, 2028 through December 31, 2028
 Advanced Life Support  $3,350.24
 Basic Life Support     $3,350.24
 Transport fee per mile $40.20
January 1, 2029 through December 31, 2029
 Advanced Life Support  $3,517.75
 Basic Life Support     $3,517.75
 Transport fee per mile $42.21
January 1, 2030 through December 31, 2030
 Advanced Life Support  $3,693.64
 Basic Life Support     $3,693.64
 Transport fee per mile $44.32
January 1, 2031 through December 31, 2031
 Advanced Life Support  $3,878.32
 Basic Life Support     $3,878.32
 Transport fee per mile $46.54
January 1, 2032 through December 31, 2032
 Advanced Life Support  $4,072.24
 Basic Life Support     $4,072.24
 Transport fee per mile $48.87
 
   (B)   Response, rescue and recovery services.
      (1)   Motor vehicle incidents. The following hourly rates shall apply for
the provision of technical services to residents and nonresidents at the levels
indicated for responses to motor vehicle incidents:
 
Level 1                 $546 - Includes hazardous materials assessment and
                        scene stabilization.
                        $623 - Includes Level 1 services as well as clean up
Level 2                 and material used (sorbents) for hazardous fluid clean
                        up and disposal including gasoline or other automotive
                        fluids.
                        $760 - Includes scene safety, tire suppression,
                        breathing air, rescue tools, hand tools, hose, tip use,
Level 3                 foam, structure protection, and clean up gasoline or
                        other automotive fluids that are spilled as a result of
                        the accident/incident involving a car fire.
Add On Services:
                        $1,641 - Includes heavy rescue tools, ropes, air bags,
                        cribbing. This charge will be added if the fire
                        department has to free/remove anyone from the vehicle
4-Extrication           (s) using any equipment. The City will not bill at this
                        level if the patient is simply unconscious and fire
                        department is able to open the door to access the
                        patient. This level is to be billed only if equipment
                        is deployed.
                        $502 - Includes air care (multi-engine company
Creating a Landing Zone response, mutual aid, helicopter). The City will bill
                        at this level any time a helicopter landing zone is
                        created and/or is utilized to transport the patient(s).
                        The City has the option to bill each incident as an
                        independent event with custom mitigation rates, for
Itemized Response:      each incident using itemized rates deemed usual,
                        customary, and reasonable (UCR). These incidents will
                        be billed, itemized per apparatus, per personnel, plus
                        products and equipment used.
 
      (2)   Hazmat. The following hourly rates shall apply for the provision of
technical services to residents and nonresidents at the levels indicated for
responses involving hazardous materials:
 
Level 1 $881 - Basic response includes engine response, first responder
        assignment, perimeter establishment, evacuations, set-up and command.
        $3,146 - Intermediate response includes Level 1 services, hazmat
Level 2 certified team and appropriate equipment, Level A or B suit donning,
        breathing air and detection equipment, and set-up and removal of decon
        center.
        $7,426 - Advanced response includes Level 2 services, robot deployment,
        set-up and removal of decon center, detection equipment, recovery and
Level 3 identification of material, disposal and environment clean up, and
        disposal of material and contaminated equipment and material used at
        scene. Includes three hours of on scene time and each additional hour
        shall be billed at $35600 each per Hazmat team.
 
      (3)   Fire Investigation. Fire Investigation Team - $346 per hour.
Includes: scene safety, investigation, source identification, K-9/Arson Dog
Unit, Identification Equipment, Mobile Detection Unit, Fire Report. The claim
begins when the Fire Investigator responds to the incident and is billed for
logged time only.
      (4)   Fires. Assignment - $503 per hour, per engine/ $629 per hour, per
truck. Includes: scene safety, investigation, fire/hazard control. Billed at
$2,489 plus $62 per hour per rescue person, plus $126 per hour per Hazmat team
member.
      (5)   Back Country or Special Rescue. Itemized Response: Each incident
will be billed with custom mitigation rates deemed usual, customary, and
reasonable (UCR). These incidents will be billed, itemized per apparatus per
hour, per trained rescue person per hour, plus rescue products used. Minimum
billed is $503 for the first response vehicle plus $62 per rescue person.
Additional rates of $503 per hour per response vehicle and $62 per hour per
rescue person.
      (6)   False alarm. It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously
turn on or cause to be turned on a false alarm and shall constitute a violation
of this section and the offender shall be subject to the fees set forth in this
section, unless provided otherwise in the city's comprehensive fee schedule:
         (a)   First three false alarms within 12 months in a calendar year,
$0.
         (b)   Subsequent false alarms in the same 12-month calendar year,
$250.
      (7)   Water incidents or rescues.
 
        $400 plus $50 per hour per rescue person. Basic response includes
Level 1 engine response, first responder assignment, perimeter establishment,
        evacuations, first responder set-up and command, scene safety and
        investigation (including possible patient contact and hazard control)
        $800 plus $50 per hour, per rescue person. Intermediate response
Level 2 includes Level 1 services, clean up and material used (sorbents), minor
        hazardous clean up and disposal
        $2,000 plus $50 per hour, per rescue person; and $100 per hour per
        Hazmat team member. Advanced response includes Level 2 services,
Level 3 P.A.R.T. activation, donning breathing apparatus and detection
        equipment, set up and removal of decon center, detection equipment,
        recovery and identification of material, and disposal and environment
        clean up.
 
      (8)   Miscellaneous / Additional Time On Scene. Additional Time on Scene
(for all levels of service): Engine billed at $503 per hour. Truck billed at
$629 per hour. Miscellaneous Equipment billed at $378.
      (9)   Mitigation Rates. The mitigation rates above are average billing
levels for one hour of service and are typical for the incident responses
listed; however when a claim is submitted, it may be itemized and based on the
actual services provided.
   (C)   Fees and collection of fees. 
      (1)   Rates generally.
         (a)   The city shall initiate mitigation rates for the delivery of
emergency and non-emergency services by the Fire Department for personnel,
supplies and equipment to the scene of emergency and non-emergency incidents as
listed herein. The mitigation rates shall be based on actual costs of the
services and that which is usual, customary and reasonable (UCR), which may
include any services, personnel, supplies, and equipment and with baselines
established by ordinance.
         (b)   No fee shall be charged for emergency medical transportation
services to any person employed by the city when the illness or injury giving
rise to emergency medical transportation services is covered by the city’s
worker’s compensation insurance.
         (c)   The fees imposed by this section may be reduced or waived upon
recommendation by the Fire Chief and approval by the Mayor in cases where it is
deemed to be in the best interests of the city or when payment of the fee would
be an undue hardship or the person receiving emergency medical transportation
services is found to be incapable of paying the fees.
      (2)   Billing of responsible party. A claim shall be filed to the
responsible party through their insurance carrier or may be billed directly to
the responsible party. The responsible party may include the person receiving
the rendered services or the person responsible for creating the event or
condition necessitating the provision of emergency or non-emergency services by
the Fire Department.
      (3)   Rules governing rates and billing. The City Council may make rules
or regulations and from time to time may amend, revoke or add rules and
regulations as it may deem necessary or expedient in respect to billing for
services under this section and the collection of rates as established herein
or as established in the city’s comprehensive fee schedule.
      (4)   Refusal or failure to pay. Any person or entity that refuses to pay
or fails to pay charges billed will be deemed to have violated this section.
The city may pursue all remedies at law and equity to recover service charges
due and owing, including the use of the services of a collection agency.
      (5)   Fee schedule. The fees as set forth in this section shall be
charged unless provided otherwise by the city’s comprehensive fee schedule.
(Prior Code, § 33.018) (Ord. 96-382, passed 3-26-1996; Ord. 11-135, passed 7-
26-2011; Ord. 2014-002, passed 1-14-2014; Ord. 2022-039, passed 6-29-2022; Ord.
2022-054, passed 10-11-2022)
§ 33.019 CHARGES FOR SERVICES PROVIDED IN CONNECTION WITH THE DISCHARGE OR
THREATENED DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      COSTS. All expenses incurred by the city for any removal or remedial
action.
      FACILITY. Any building, structure, installation, equipment, pipe or
pipeline including, but not limited to, any pipe into a sewer or publicly-
owned treatment works, well, pond, lagoon, impoundment, ditch, landfill,
storage container, tank, motor vehicle, truck trailer, rolling stock or
aircraft. Also, any site or area where a hazardous material has been deposited,
stored, disposed of, abandoned, placed or otherwise come to be located.
      HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material, substance or mixture of materials or
substances which are toxic, flammable, corrosive, explosive, carcinogenic or
radioactive including, but not limited to, any substance or material which is
designated a hazardous material pursuant to 49 U.S.C. §§ 5101 et seq. in a
quantity and form which may pose a substantial present or potential hazard to
human health, property or the environment when improperly released, treated,
stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.
      OCCURRENCE. A discharge or threatened discharge of hazardous materials
from a facility, equipment, vehicle or other instrumentality or thing within
the boundaries of the city.
      RELEASE. Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, escaping,
emptying, discharging, injecting, leaching, dumping or disposing of a hazardous
material into or on any land, air, water, well, stream, sewer or pipe so that
such hazardous material or any constituent thereof may enter the environment.
      REMEDIAL ACTION. Any action consistent with permanent, remedy taken
instead of, or in addition to, removal actions in the event of a release or
threatened release of a hazardous material into the environment, to prevent or
minimize the release of hazardous materials so that they do not migrate to
cause a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, property or
the environment. The term includes, but is not limited to, such actions at the
location of the release as storage, confinement, perimeter protection using
dikes, trenches or ditches, clay cover, neutralization, cleanup of released
hazardous materials or contaminated materials, recycling or reuse, diversion,
destruction, segregation of reactive wastes, repair or replacement of leaking
containers, collection of leachate and runoff, onsite treatment or
incineration, provision of alternate water supplies, and any monitoring
reasonably required to assure that such actions protect the public health and
welfare and the environment.
      REMOVAL. The cleanup or removal of released hazardous materials from the
environment, such actions as may be necessary or appropriate to monitor, assess
and evaluate the release or threat of release of hazardous materials, the
disposal of removed material or the taking of such action as may be necessary
to prevent, minimize or mitigate damage to the public health or welfare of the
environment. The term includes, but is not limited to, security fencing,
provision of alternative water supplies and temporary evacuation of threatened
individuals.
      RESPONSE. Any removal or remedial action.
      RESPONSIBLE PARTY. Any person, firm, corporation, limited liability
company, partnership, sole proprietorship, trust or entity who or which owns,
leases, operates or controls any facility, equipment, vehicle or other
instrumentality or thing from which a discharge of hazardous materials has
occurred, is occurring or from which a discharge of hazardous materials is
threatened.
   (B)   Prohibited acts. No person shall cause, threaten or allow the release
of hazardous materials into the environment unless such release is in
accordance with an appropriate permit granted by the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency or other state or federal agency having primary jurisdiction
over the release and such release is in such place and manner as will not
create a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, property or
the environment.
   (C)   Response authority.
      (1)   The Fire Chief or his or her authorized representative shall have
authority to respond to any release or threatened release of hazardous
materials within the city or affecting the public water supply, wells or sewage
treatment works located within the city. This authority includes, but is not
limited to, remedial action and removal.
      (2)   The Fire Chief shall have primary authority to respond to any
release or threatened release of hazardous materials as described above. The
Fire Chief shall report any release or threatened release of hazardous
materials to all appropriate federal, state and local public health, safety and
emergency agencies within 24 hours of any substantial release of hazardous
materials. The Fire Chief shall relinquish his or her response authority at
such time, if any, as the federal, state or local public health, safety or
emergency agency having primary jurisdiction over the release or threatened
release has assumed responsibility for response to the release or threatened
release.
      (3)   The Fire Chief, during such time as response authority is vested in
him or her, shall be authorized to utilize all district personnel and equipment
and he or she may, in his or her sole discretion, take such remedial or removal
action as he or she may deem necessary or appropriate to respond to the release
or threatened release of hazardous material.
      (4)   All city personnel shall cooperate with and operate under the
direction of the Fire Chief or other person then exercising response authority
under this section until such time as the person exercising such response
authority has determined that the response is complete or responsibility for
the response is assumed by the federal, state or local public health, safety or
emergency agency having primary jurisdiction over the release or threatened
release.
      (5)   The person exercising response authority under this section shall
coordinate and/or cooperate with other federal, state or local public health,
safety or emergency agencies involved in response to the release or threatened
release of hazardous materials.
   (D)   Liability for costs.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision or rule of law, and subject
only to the defenses set forth in division (E) of this section, the following
persons shall be jointly and severally liable for all costs of removal and
remedial action incurred by the city as a result of a release or threatened
release of a hazardous material, provided such persons are not at the time of
release or threatened release taxpayers of the city:
         (a)   The owner and operator of a facility or vessel from which there
is a release or substantial threat of release of a hazardous material;
         (b)   Any person who, at the time of disposal, transport, storage or
treatment of a hazardous material, owned or operated the facility or vessel
used for such disposal, transport, treatment or storage from which there was a
release or substantial threat of a release of any such hazardous material;
         (c)   Any person who by contract, agreement, or otherwise has arranged
with another party or entity for transport, storage, disposal or treatment of
hazardous materials owned, controlled or possessed by such person at a facility
owned or operated by another party or entity from which facility there is a
release or substantial threat of a release of such hazardous materials; or
         (d)   Any person who accepts or accepted any hazardous materials for
transport to disposal, storage or treatment facilities from which there is a
release or a substantial threat of release of such hazardous substances.
      (2)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in division (D)(1) above,
taxpayers of the city shall be jointly and severally liable for all costs of
removal and remedial action incurred by the city as a result of a release or
threatened release of hazardous material only if:
         (a)   Such hazardous material was stored, produced, transported or
used in violation of any federal, state or local statute, regulation or
ordinance;
         (b)   Such persons are determined by the City Council to have
chronically released or threatened to release such hazardous material; or
         (c)   Such persons are determined by the City Council to have been
grossly negligent in the storage, production, transportation or use of such
hazardous material or the release or threatened release was due to gross
negligence by such persons or by their willful and wanton conduct.
      (3)   For the purpose of this section, taxpayers of the city shall not
include any persons, firms or corporations, who, while engaged in commerce or
business for profit, or for their own account as a part of their own for profit
business operations, by themselves, by or through their agents, employees,
officers or servants, carry and/or transport any hazardous material, as defined
herein, within the city by means of any vehicle, including, but not limited to,
a truck, train, boat, ship, barge or automobile, whether or not such entity is
otherwise considered a taxpayer of the District.
   (E)   Defenses. There shall be no liability under division (D) of this
section for a person otherwise liable who can establish by a preponderance of
the evidence that the release or substantial threat of release of a hazardous
material and the damages resulting therefrom were caused solely by:
      (1)   An act of nature over which he or she had no control;
      (2)   An act of war;
      (3)   An act or omission of a third party, other than his or her employee
or agent, or other than one whose act or omission occurs in connection with a
contractual relationship existing directly or indirectly with him or her
(except where the sole contractual arrangement arises from a published tariff
and acceptance for a carriage by a common carrier by rail), if he or she
establishes by a preponderance of the evidence that:
         (a)   He or she exercised due care with respect to the hazardous
materials concerned, taking into consideration the characteristics of such
hazardous material, in light of all relevant facts and circumstances; and
         (b)   He or she took precautions against foreseeable acts or omissions
or any such third party and the consequences that could foreseeably result from
such acts or omissions.
      (4)   Any combination of the foregoing.
   (F)   Release in accordance with law. There shall be no liability under this
section for any release permitted by state or federal law, but only to the
extent that such release is made in accordance with applicable state and
federal law, regulations and permit requirements and the ordinances of the
city.
   (G)   Public duty immunity. There shall be no liability under this section
for damages as a result of any actions taken or omitted by the response
authority, its agents and employees with respect to an incident creating a
danger to public health, welfare or the environment as a result of any release
or threatened release of a hazardous material including, but not limited to,
actions taken or omitted in the course of rendering:
      (1)   Remedial action or removal under this section;
      (2)   Care, assistance or advice in accordance with this section;
      (3)   Care, assistance or advice in accordance with the National
Contingency Plan pursuant to 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601 et seq., the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (Pub. Law No. 96-510,
being 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601 et seq., as amended);
      (4)   Care, assistance or advice in accordance with the state Emergency
Management Agency Act (20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq., as amended); or
      (5)   Care, assistance or advice at the direction of an on-site
coordinator appointed under said National Contingency Plan, the state Emergency
Management Agency Act (20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq., as amended) any City Emergency
Service and Disaster Basic Plan or by such other public health, safety or
emergency agency exercising jurisdiction over the release or threatened release
of a hazardous material.
   (H)   Contractual indemnification; subrogation.
      (1)   No conveyance, transfer, sale, indemnification, hold harmless or
similar agreement shall be effective to release the owner or operator of any
facility or vessel or any person who may be liable for a release or threat of
release under this section from the liability imposed under this section.
Nothing in this section shall bar any agreement to insure, hold harmless or
indemnify a party to such agreement for any liability under this section.
      (2)   Nothing in this section, including the provisions of division (G)
(1) above shall bar a cause of action that an owner or operator or any other
person subject to liability under this section, or a guarantor, has or would
have, by reason of subrogation or otherwise against any person.
   (I)   Costs and penalties.
      (1)   Any person who is liable for the release or threatened release of a
hazardous material who fails without sufficient cause to pay for or provide
removal or remedial action upon or in accordance with a notice and request of
the city or in accordance with any order of any court having jurisdiction on
the matter, shall be liable to the city for any costs incurred by the city as a
result of such failure to provide or take such removal or remedial action,
together with the cost of any removal or remedial action taken by the member
district in accordance with the ordinance, and all attorney fees and related
legal costs incurred in connection therewith.
      (2)   In addition, any such person shall be guilty of a violation of this
section and shall be fined not less than $100, nor more than $1,000, for each
offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day on which a
violation occurs or continues. Where such violation is found to be the result
of willful and/or wanton conduct or gross negligence, or the person committing
such violation attempts to evade responsibility hereunder by leaving the scene
of the occurrence or by other means, that person shall be subject to a fine as
provided for above or a fine in an amount equal to three times the costs,
including attorney fees and legal costs, for which it is liable under division
(I)(1) above, whichever is greater.
      (3)   Charges for removal or remedial action when rendered by the
following named entities shall be as follows:
         (a)   That unless otherwise exempt, any responsible party shall be
charged for services rendered by the Fire Department for any occurrence at the
rate set forth in the following schedule of charges:
            1.   $100 per hour (or fraction thereof) per vehicle responding;
            2.   $50 per hour (or fraction thereof) for the Fire Chief
responding;
            3.   $40 per hour (or fraction thereof) per Lieutenant responding;
            4.   $30 per hour (or fraction thereof) per Engineer responding;
            5.   $30 per hour (or fraction thereof) per emergency medical
technician or paramedic responding $30 per hour (or fraction thereof) per
firefighter responding; and
            6.   Replacement cost value for any item expended for the necessary
mitigation or resolution of the occurrence.
         (b)   In the event it is deemed by the Fire Chief or his or her
designee that it is necessary for the Fire Department to request mutual aid
assistance, the responsible party shall be charged, in addition to the rates
set forth in division (I)(3)(a) above, for all applicable charges assessed, for
the services of each mutual aid company at the rate set forth in the following
schedule of charges:
            1.   $200 per hour (or fraction thereof) per squad company;
            2.   $150 per hour (or fraction thereof) per engine company;
            3.   $200 per hour (or fraction thereof) per truck company;
            4.   $150 per hour (or fraction thereof) per tanker company;
            5.   $100 per hour (or fraction thereof) per ambulance company; and
            6.   Replacement cost value for any item expended for the necessary
mitigation or resolution of the occurrence.
         (c)   In the event it is deemed by the Fire Chief or his or her
designee that it is necessary for the Fire Department to request assistance
from the Southwest Hazardous Materials Response Team, the responsible party
shall be charged, in addition to the rates set forth in divisions (I)(3)(a) and
(I)(3)(b) above, for all applicable charges assessed, for the services for the
Southwest Hazardous Materials Response Team at the rate set forth in the
following schedule of charges:
            1.   $100 per hour (or fraction thereof) per response trailer;
            2.   $100 per hour (or fraction thereof) per decontamination
trailer;
            3.   $100 per hour (or fraction thereof) per foam trailer;
            4.   $60 per hour (or fraction thereof) for team chief;
            5.   $50 per hour (or fraction thereof) per sector officer;
            6.   $45 per hour (or fraction thereof) per team member; and
            7.   Replacement cost value for any item expended for the necessary
mitigation of the occurrence.
      (4)   In the event that court or administrative body denies reimbursement
to the SHMRT, it therefore becomes the duty of the city or the unit of local
government where the spill is located to enforce its “Spiller Pays Ordinance”
to the full extent authorized by law and to reimburse SHMRT for all costs
provided for by law and collectable under this section. In the event that the
city collects less than the full amount of the clean-up, the city and SHMRT
shall be reimbursed pursuant to the bylaws of the SHMRT Executive Committee.
      (5)   In the event that it is deemed by the Fire Chief or his or her
designee that it is necessary in the mitigation or resolution of an occurrence
for the Fire Department to call in a separate, independent, specialized service
or clean-up contractor, the responsible party shall be responsible for payment
to the separate, independent, specialized service or clean-up contractor of all
reasonable charges assessed by said contractor to complete the mitigation or
resolution of the occurrence. The responsibility for this payment shall be in
addition to any and all applicable charges assessed against the responsible
party pursuant to division (I)(3) above.
(Prior Code, § 33.019) (Ord. 92-944, passed 12-22-1992; Ord. 2000-297, passed
2-22-2000)
§ 33.020 RULES AND REGULATIONS ADOPTED.
   (A)   The rules and regulations set forth in Ord. 88-145 are hereby approved
and adopted as the rules and regulations of the Fire Department, and are hereby
adopted by reference and made a part of this code as if set out in full herein.
   (B)   The Fire Chief shall furnish or cause to be furnished to every officer
and member, both regular and paid-on-call a copy of the rules and regulations
attached hereto by reference and made a part of the ordinance.
   (C)   A copy of the rules and regulations shall be forwarded by the City
Clerk to the Civil Service Commission of the city.
(Prior Code, § 33.020) (Ord. 88-145, passed 10-25-1988; Ord. 95-323, passed 1-
24-1995)
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 33.035 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby created and established a police department, an executive
department of the City of Blue Island, Cook County, Illinois which shall be
known as the “Blue Island Police Department”.
(Prior Code, § 33.035) (Ord. 2013-253, passed 11-26-2013)
§ 33.036 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Police Department shall be to maintain law and order
within the city and each and every officer, member and other personnel
hereinafter provided shall constantly direct their best efforts, intelligently
and efficiently toward that end.
(Prior Code, § 33.036) (Ord. 2013-253, passed 11-26-2013)
§ 33.037 ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall have authority and responsibility to
organize the Police Department in order to effectively direct the patrol,
investigative, administrative and law enforcement functions. The following
grades shall constitute the members of the Police Department, in the number
provided from time to time by the City Council, or its designated committee:
      (1)   Chief of Police;
      (2)   Deputy Chief;
      (3)   Commander. The commanders of police shall be superior officers to
sergeants, corporals, patrol officer and other members of the Department and
shall serve subject to the orders of the Director of Public Safety, Chief of
Police or Deputy Chief, unless otherwise provided herein;
      (4)   Sergeant. The sergeants of police shall be superior officers to
corporals, patrol officer and other members of the Department and shall serve
subject to the orders of the Chief of Police, the Deputy Chief, and the
Commanders, unless otherwise provided herein;
      (5)   Corporal. The corporals of police shall be superior officers to
patrol officer and other members of the Department and shall serve subject to
the orders of the Chief of Police, the Deputy Chiefs of Police, the Commanders
and the Sergeants, unless otherwise provided herein; and
      (6)   Patrol officer.
   (B)   The City Council, after recommendation by the Chief of Police, and the
appropriate committees, may change the grades and numbers of any grade of the
Police Department by resolution or ordinance.
   (C)   The Police Department shall operate and function in accordance with
the provisions of the state statutes in such cases made and provided, the
provisions of this subchapter or any ordinance amendatory hereto, the rules and
regulations of the Civil Service Commission of the city, the rules and
regulations of the Police Department and general orders issued and promulgated
by the Chief of Police in accordance with his or her lawful authority.
(Prior Code, § 33.037) (Ord. 2013-253, passed 11-26-2013)
§ 33.038 ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICES.
   The Offices of Chief of Police, Deputy Chief, Commander, Sergeant and Patrol
Officer are hereby created.
(Prior Code, § 33.038) (Ord. 2013-253, passed 11-26-2013)
§ 33.039 OTHER PERSONNEL.
   Personnel for the purpose of this subchapter is hereby defined as civilian
personnel who serve in the Police Department and consists of one or more desk
clerks, record clerks, executive secretaries, part-time patrol officers,
crossing guards, community service officers and such other special patrol
officers, night watchmen or part-time personnel as may from time to time be
deemed necessary.
(Prior Code, § 33.039) (Ord. 2013-253, passed 11-26-2013)
§ 33.040 CHIEF OF POLICE AND DEPUTY CHIEF; APPOINTMENT AND POWERS.
   (A)   Appointment of Chief of Police and Deputy Chief.
      (1)   Background and term. The Chief of Police and the Deputy Chief shall
be appointed by the Mayor, by and with the consent of the City Council, to
serve for such time as may be provided in the appointment and as may otherwise
be provided by law. The Chief and the Deputy Chief need not be appointed from
the members of the Police Department, and if the persons appointed are members
of the Police Department, the appointments need not be from the rank next below
the Chief of Police, or the Deputy Chief.
      (2)   Ranks and openings. Persons appointed as Deputy Chiefs shall retain
the civil service rank which those persons last attained immediately prior to
the effective dates of their appointments. The appointments of Deputy Chiefs
shall not create any openings in the Department to be filled by another full
time member of the Department nor shall they create any openings in the civil
service ranks the respective Deputy Chiefs held immediately prior to the
effective dates of their respective appointments as Deputy Chiefs.
   (B)   Power and duties of Chief of Police.
      (1)   Generally. The Chief of Police shall be the head and Chief
Executive of the Police Department and shall have supervision, command and
control of all officers and members and other personnel thereof and of all
police equipment, apparatus, property, books and records belonging to said
Department. Unless otherwise provided by law, nothing herein shall be construed
as a limitation on the Chief of Police’s authority and discretion to assign to
the Deputy Chief, or other designee the duties and powers hereinafter
described. However, such delegation of powers or duties shall not relieve the
Chief of Police from performing in accordance with the same.
      (2)   Operation of Department. The Chief of Police shall be responsible
for the performance of the Police Department in all of its operations and
functions and all officers and members and other personnel of the Police
Department shall serve subject to his or her orders. He or she shall be
responsible for the training of the officers and members in modern methods of
crime prevention, detection and investigation and of the laws of the state
relating to criminal and motor vehicle offenses and of the ordinances of the
city.
      (3)   Authority to promulgate rules and regulations. The Chief of Police
shall promulgate and prescribe from time to time such rules, regulations and
general orders concerning the operation, organization, training and discipline
of the Police Department, its officers and members and other personnel as
hereinabove defined as he or she deems necessary to accomplish efficient
performance in the operation of the Department. The rules, regulations and
general orders shall not be inconsistent to or in conflict with the rules and
regulations of the Civil Service Commission and shall cover the conduct of the
officers and members and other personnel, the uniform and equipment to be worn
or carried, hours of service, vacations and all other departmental related
matters.
      (4)   Custodian of property. The Chief of Police shall receive and take
care of and be custodian of all property delivered to the Police Department and
shall provide receipts therefor.
      (5)   Property held as evidence. The Chief of Police shall provide for
the safekeeping of all property which is to be used as evidence in any court
proceeding and shall relocate the same only upon orders of the court, the
State’s Attorney of Cook County, District Attorney of any federal court
district or City Attorney, as the case may be and then only for presentation in
court as evidence. The order for release shall be in writing and a receipt
shall be given therefor. Unless otherwise provided for by court order, the
property shall be returned to the Chief of Police when its use as evidence is
terminated.
      (6)   Disposition of unclaimed, stolen or abandoned property.
         (a)   The Chief of Police shall dispose of abandoned, lost or stolen
or otherwise illegally possessed property coming into his or her possession, in
accordance with the provisions of the Illinois Law Enforcement Disposition of
Property Act (765 ILCS 1030) or any amendment thereto.
         (b)   A report of disposition of such property including the receipt
of net proceeds thereof shall be made to the Public Health and Safety Committee
for reporting to City Council.
      (7)   Custodian of city jail. The Chief of Police shall be the custodian
of the city jail and shall have custody of all persons incarcerated therein.
      (8)   Keeper of records. The Chief of Police shall keep, or cause to be
kept in separate books provided for that purpose:
         (a)   A true and complete inventory and record of all police
equipment, apparatus, property belonging to the Police Department and
transactions concerning the same;
         (b)   A true and complete inventory and record of all other property
belonging to other persons which has come into his or her custody, including
property which is to be used in evidence and abandoned, lost, stolen or
otherwise illegally possessed property. The record shall show the day that he
or she received it, its description and value, name and address of the owner,
if known, and place where found, or person from whom it was taken, name of
officer on the case and the general circumstances connected therewith;
         (c)   A roster of officers and members of the Police Department and
other personnel as herein defined and a daily duty or assignment record;
         (d)   Complaint, investigative and arrest reports;
         (e)   Accident, stolen motor vehicle, juvenile and coroner’s case
reports;
         (f)   Shift reports, radio log records, fingerprinting records and
court case dispositions; and
         (g)   Such other reports and records as he or she may deem advisable
in the operation of the Department.
      (9)   Monthly and yearly reports. The Chief of Police shall report or
cause to be reported to the City Council, directly or through the Public Health
and Safety Committee, at least monthly at a regular meeting thereof, all monies
received from the settlement of violations, claims, the number of traffic,
misdemeanor and felony arrests, the number of traffic, misdemeanor and felony
convictions, the amount of fines or penalties imposed by court on arrests made
by the Department, or on any other matter concerning the operation of the
Department. He or she shall as soon after the close of the fiscal year as
practicable, make a written report to the City Council showing the condition of
the Department and a summary of information required by him or her to be kept
by records and reports. The yearly report shall be subscribed to by the Chief
of Police and filed with the City Clerk, with copies of the same provided to
the Mayor and Chairperson of the Public Health and Safety Committee.
      (10)   Delivery of records, reports and equipment to successor. On
expiration of his or her term of office or resignation or removal therefrom,
the Chief of Police shall deliver to his or her successor in office all
records, reports, books, apparatus and equipment, and property of every
description in his or her control and custody belonging to the city pertaining
to said office.
      (11)   Rewards. The Chief of Police, for meritorious service rendered by
any member of the Police Department in due discharge of his or her duty, may
permit such member to retain for his or her own benefit so far as he or she may
be permitted by law, any reward or present tendered him or her therefor, and it
shall be cause for removal for any member of the Department to receive any such
reward or present without notice thereof to the Chief of Police, and without
his or her permission.
      (12)   Other powers and duties. The Chief of Police shall have such other
and further duties and powers as have been or may be granted under the state
statutes, or the ordinances of the city and the rules and regulations of the
Civil Service Commission of the city.
      (13)   Tenure in office. The Chief of Police may be removed from office
in the manner provided for removal of appointed city officers. In the event any
officer or member of the Police Department holding rank within the classified
service thereof, shall be appointed Chief, then upon the expiration of his or
her term or the termination of his or her services as Chief, he or she shall
resume his or her status and rank within the classified service.
   (C)   Deputy Chief.
      (1)   Powers and duties. The Deputy Chief shall serve at the direction of
the Chief of Police and, upon delegation of the same by the Chief of Police,
may exercise the powers and be assigned the duties as identified in division
(B) above in addition to those duties provided for by applicable law.
      (2)   Salary. The salary for the Deputy Chief shall be determined yearly
and included in the city’s appropriation ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 33.040) (Ord. 2013-253, passed 11-26-2013; Ord. 2022-023, passed
3-22-2022)
§ 33.041 COMMANDERS.
   (A)   Appointment. The Commander shall be appointed after recommendation by
the Chief of Police to the Public Health and Safety Committee of the City
Council, and after such committee has evaluated or caused to be evaluated such
person to determine eligibility to service for the Department, taking into
consideration the factors of health, experience and morals, but not excluding
other considerations regarding adaptability for the type of service called upon
to perform. If a majority of the Committee approves such person or persons, it
shall notify the Chief of Police to enroll such person or persons without
further action on the part of the City Council. A copy of the notification
shall be filed with the Mayor and City Clerk.
   (B)   Powers and duties. The Commander shall serve at the direction of the
Chief of Police or Deputy Chief and shall be responsible for internal
investigations, use of force incidents and all other assignments or matters
that may be assigned by the Deputy Chief, Chief of Police or Director of Public
Safety.
   (C)   Salary. The salary for the Commander shall be determined yearly and
included in the city’s appropriation ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 33.041) (Ord. 2013-253, passed 11-26-2013; Ord. 2022-023, passed
3-22-2022)
§ 33.042 OFFICERS AND MEMBERS; DUTIES; COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Part-time police officers shall be temporarily employed and
commissioned to do limited police work with duties as may be prescribed by the
Chief of Police. The number of hours such officers may work in any calendar
year shall be restricted to a number set by the Director of Health and Public
Safety and/or Chief of Police. Such officers shall not be assigned to supervise
or direct full-time police officers.
   (B)   Part-time police officers shall be trained in accordance with the
Illinois Police Training Act (50 ILCS 705/1 et seq.) and the rules and
requirements of the ILETSB and shall serve subject to the rules, regulations
and general orders of the Blue Island Police Department and city policies and
procedures.
   (C)   Part-time police officers shall meet the following standards:
      (1)   Be of good moral character, of temperate habits, of sound health,
and physically and mentally able to perform assigned duties;
      (2)   Be at least 21 years of age;
      (3)   Pass a medical examination;
      (4)   Possess a high school diploma or GED certificate;
      (5)   Possess a valid Illinois driver’s license;
      (6)   Possess no prior felony convictions; and
      (7)   Any individual who has served in the U.S. military must have been
honorably discharged.
   (D)   Part-time officers shall be disciplined according to city policies and
procedures. Part time police officers shall serve at the discretion of the
Chief of Police and shall not have any property rights in said employment, and
may be removed by the Chief of Police at any time.
(Prior Code, § 33.042) (Ord. 2015-003, passed 1-13-2015)
§ 33.043 APPOINTMENT OF PERSONNEL.
   Personnel shall be appointed after recommendation by the Chief of Police to
the Public Health and Safety Committee of the City Council, and after such
committee has investigated or caused to be investigated such person or persons
to determine eligibility to service for the Department, taking into
consideration the factors of health, experience and morals, but not excluding
other considerations regarding adaptability for the type of service called upon
to perform. If a majority of the Committee approves such person or persons, it
shall notify the Chief of Police to enroll such person or persons without
further action on the part of the City Council. A copy of the notification
shall be filed with the Mayor and City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 33.043) (Ord. 2013-253, passed 11-26-2013)
§ 33.044 DETECTIVE DIVISION CREATED.
   There is hereby created a division within the Police Department to be known
as the Detective Division. The Detective Division shall consist of at least one
sergeant of detectives. The Chief of Police shall assign to such division sworn
full-time police officers within the Police Department who shall be assigned at
the sole discretion of the Chief of Police or the Director of Public Safety and
those that are considered the most qualified to properly perform the duties and
functions of said Division. The detectives shall solely be responsible to the
Chief of Police or Deputy Chief in the performance of said duties.
(Prior Code, § 33.044) (Ord. 2013-253, passed 11-26-2013)
§ 33.045 OTHER DIVISIONS.
   (A)   With the approval of the Public Health and Safety Committee of the
City Council, the Chief of Police may establish other divisions within the
Police Department assigning such Police Department members to such divisions
and designating duties as he or she may deem necessary when there is no
additional fiscal impact to the city.
   (B)   Any additional divisions or assignments that could have an impact in
the city budget shall be approved by the Finance Committee.
(Prior Code, § 33.045) (Ord. 2013-253, passed 11-26-2013)
§ 33.046 CONTINUANCE IN OFFICE.
   Sergeants, corporals and patrol officers classified in such positions by the
Civil Service Commission, shall continue in office in such position and the
enactment of this subchapter will not affect tenure in such office or position.
The Chief of Police and Deputy Chief shall continue in office in such position.
The presently serving part-time patrol officers, special patrol officers and
other personnel shall continue in such positions.
(Prior Code, § 33.046) (Ord. 2013-253, passed 11-26-2013)
§ 33.047 RETIREMENT, SUSPENSION AND REMOVAL.
   All officers and members of the Police Department who are in the classified
service shall be retired, suspended, removed or demoted in accordance with the
laws of the state and with the rules and regulations of the Civil Service
Commission relating to the same.
(Prior Code, § 33.047) (Ord. 2013-253, passed 11-26-2013)
§ 33.048 FEES AND CHARGES FOR SERVICES.
   The Chief of Police or his or her designee is authorized to collect the fees
listed under the Police Department in
Chapter 39 of this code and to remit the same to the office of the City Clerk
in the ordinary course of business for deposit into the city’s Corporate
General Fund.
(Prior Code, § 33.048) (Ord. 06-015, passed 3-14-2006; Ord. 2015-033, passed
11-10-2015)
POLICE RESERVE
§ 33.060 OFFICE ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established the office of City Part-Time Police Reserve. The
Police Reserves shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the City Council. The maximum number of reserves to be appointed shall be 50.
(Prior Code, § 33.060) (Ord. 2710, passed 7-23-1985)
§ 33.061 ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   The Police Reserve shall be structured as follows: one executive
officer, who shall be in charge of the unit; one administrative officer; four
squad leaders; and 44 patrol officers.
   (B)   The supervisory personnel will function under the direction of the
Chief of Police and will be responsible for the filling of assignments by
members of the unit, the attendance of members at monthly meetings,
participation of members in training schedules and maintaining of high morale
and good deportment within the group. The reserves shall serve at the
discretion of the Chief of Police. The Reserves shall receive such hourly
compensation for their services at the hourly rate for services performed for
the city. The hourly rate for their services used by other agencies other than
the city shall be set by the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 33.061) (Ord. 2710, passed 7-23-1985)
§ 33.062 QUALIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   To be appointed as a member of the reserve unit, the applicant must be at
least 21 years of age, possess excellent physical health and stamina, and have
a good character and reputation. The applicant must be a citizen of the United
States, resident of the city or five within ten miles of the boundaries of the
city, and be free of any serious criminal violations and convictions (felony
and misdemeanor convictions, other than routine traffic/parking violations,
constitute evidence to be considered in this category). The applicant must also
have graduated from the Police Academy or the Police Training Institute
Training School. Each applicant shall be fingerprinted and checked by the
Federal Bureau of Investigation and may be directed by the Chief of Police to
submit to a polygraph examination.
(Prior Code, § 33.062) (Ord. 2710, passed 7-23-1985)
§ 33.063 TRAINING.
   The Chief of Police shall be responsible for training in police procedures
and use of weapons. Part-time reserve members shall only carry firearms while
in uniform and in the performance of their duties or unless authorized by the
Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 33.063) (Ord. 2710, passed 7-23-1985)
§ 33.064 UNIFORMS.
   Members shall provide themselves with the prescribed side arm and holster.
The Department will furnish a badge, cap piece, identification card and
shoulder patches.
(Prior Code, § 33.064) (Ord. 2710, passed 7-23-1985)
§ 33.065 DUTIES.
   The Part-Time Police Reserves, when functioning as police officers, shall
not be considered to be members of the regular Police Department and shall not
function on a full-time basis. The Part-Time Police Reserves shall be
conservators of the peace and shall have the following powers and duties when
on duty:
   (A)   To arrest or cause to be arrested, with or without process all persons
who break the peace or are found violating any city ordinance of any criminal
law of the state;
   (B)   To commit arrested persons for examination;
   (C)   To direct and assist in traffic control;
   (D)   To act as watchmen on special assignments;
   (E)   To assist in parade and crowd control in all large gatherings in and
about the city;
   (F)   To aid in civil defense matters;
   (G)   To assist in cases of civil disturbances, riots and disasters;
   (H)   To perform such other related duties as directed by the Chief of
Police; and
   (I)   To serve and execute all warrants for the violation of city ordinances
or the laws of the state within the city.
(Prior Code, § 33.065) (Ord. 2710, passed 7-23-1985)
§ 33.066 RESTRICTIONS ON MEMBERS.
   All members of the Reserve Unit shall be subject to the following
restrictions.
   (A)   No employment shall be acceptable which involves the police uniform or
police authority without specific permission of the Chief of Police. (This
refers to guard duty, handling traffic in a business area, and the like.)
   (B)   A Reserve Officer, while off duty, will consider themself a private
citizen with no more authority than a private citizen. The Reserve Office shall
not represent themself to be a Reserve Officer, either to pull over traffic
violators or to make arrests. If a Reserve Officer feels that some unusual
emergency warrants an exception to this rule, the Reserve Officer shall do so
on the Officer’s own responsibility and shall be held personally liable for the
results.
(Prior Code, § 33.066) (Ord. 2710, passed 7-23-1985)
§ 33.067 DISCIPLINE.
   All the members of the Part-Time Reserve Unit are subject to the discipline
of the Police Department while on duty and shall refrain from any conduct which
would embarrass the Department while off duty. Each reserve member will receive
a copy of the regular Department manual of rules and regulations and shall be
subject to the same standards of conduct as the regular officers.
(Prior Code, § 33.067) (Ord. 2710, passed 7-23-1985)
FIREMEN’S AND POLICE PENSION FUNDS
§ 33.080 CITY SHALL PICK UP CONTRIBUTIONS TO FUND.
   The city shall pick up those contributions to the Police and Firemen’s
Pension Funds which are required from the police officers and firefighters as
contributions pursuant to 40 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., the Illinois Pension Code.
All said contributions shall be treated as employer contributions in
determining tax treatment under the United States Internal Revenue Code. The
employees shall not be allowed to receive any portion of the contribution
picked up by the city and paid into the Police and Firemen’s Pension Funds in
cash or its equivalent in lieu of having these funds paid directly into the
respective pension fund.
(Prior Code, § 33.080) (Ord. 2696, passed 6-11-1985; Ord. 2744, passed 12-30-
1985)
§ 33.081 REDUCTION OF SALARY EQUAL TO CONTRIBUTION.
   The cash salary of each firefighter and police officer shall be reduced by
an amount equal to the amount of the employer contribution made by the city for
each such police officer or firefighter.
(Prior Code, § 33.081) (Ord. 2696, passed 6-11-1985)
§ 33.082 TREATMENT OF CONTRIBUTIONS.
   All such contributions shall be treated for all purposes the same as if
these contributions were made by the firefighter or police officer.
(Prior Code, § 33.082) (Ord. 2696, passed 6-11-1985)
§ 33.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
penalties provided for in the city’s fee and fine schedule, as exists currently
and as may be amended by City Council.
   (B)   Any person who violates the provisions of §§
33.011 through
33.014 of this chapter or any one or more of them shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall upon conviction by court be punished by a fine as set
forth in the city’s fee and fine schedule for each offense.
(Prior Code, § 33.999) (Ord. 88-144, passed 10-25-1988; Ord. 2015-033, passed
11-10-2015)
CHAPTER 34: PERSONNEL POLICIES
Section
   
34.01   Prevailing wage
   
34.02   Adoption of State Officials and Employees Ethics Act
   
34.03   Salaries, bonds and expenses
   
34.04   Deferred compensation plan
   
34.05   Retiree health care benefits
   
34.06   Paid leave policy
   
34.07   Policy prohibiting sexual harassment
§ 34.01 PREVAILING WAGE.
   (A)   To the extent and as required by the Act, the general prevailing rates
of wages in this locality for laborers, mechanics and other workers engaged in
construction of public works coming under the jurisdiction of the city is
hereby ascertained to be the same as the prevailing rates of wages for
construction work in the Cook County area, as determined by the Department of
Labor of the State of Illinois as of June of the current year (see Exhibit “A”
of Ord. 13-233).
   (B)   As required by the Act, any and all revisions of the prevailing rates
of wages in the county by the Department of Labor of the state shall supersede
the Department’s June prevailing rates for construction work undertaken by the
city. The definition of any terms appearing in the ordinance which are also
used in the Act shall be the same as in the Act.
   (C)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply said general
prevailing rate of wages as herein ascertained to any work or employment except
public works construction undertaken by the city to the extent required by the
Act.
   (D)   The City Clerk shall publicly post this determination or any revisions
of such prevailing rate of wages, and keep it available for inspection at the
city hall by any interested party. A copy of the determination or of the
currently revised determination of the prevailing rate of wages then in effect
shall be attached to all contract specifications.
   (E)   The City Clerk shall mail a copy of this determination to any
employer, and to any association of employers and to any person or association
of employees who have filed their names and addresses, and have requested
copies of any determination stating the particular rates and the particular
class of workers whose wages will be affected by such rates. The City Clerk
will also attach a copy of this determination of prevailing rate of wages then
in effect to all public works construction contracts.
   (F)   The City Clerk shall promptly file a certified copy of this section
with the Secretary of State of Illinois, Index Department 111 East Monroe
Street, Springfield, IL 62756 and with the Illinois Department of Labor,
Prevailing Wage Division, 900 S. Spring Street, Springfield, IL 62704.
   (G)   Within 30 days after the filing with the Secretary of State, the City
Clerk shall cause a notice to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation within the city.
(Prior Code, § 34.01) (Ord. 13-233, passed 6-25-2013)
§ 34.02 ADOPTION OF STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT.
   (A)   The regulations of 5 ILCS 430/5-15 and 5 ILCS 430/10-10 through 10-40
of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act, 5 ILCS 430/1-1 et seq.,
(hereinafter referred to as the “Act” in this section) are hereby adopted by
reference and made applicable to the officers and employees of the city to the
extent required by 5 ILCS 430/70-5.
   (B)   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or
accepted under the Act, by any officer or any employee of the city, is hereby
prohibited.
   (C)   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an
officer or employee of the city under the Act, is hereby prohibited.
   (D)   The participation in political activities prohibited under the Act, by
any officer or employee of the city is hereby prohibited.
   (E)   For purposes of this section, the terms “officer” and “employee” shall
be defined as set forth in 5 ILCS 430/70-5(c).
   (F)   The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same as
those penalties set forth in 5 ILCS 430/50-5 for similar violations of the Act.
   (G)   This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing
ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of city officers and
employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less
restrictive than this section, however, the provisions of this section shall
prevail in accordance with the provisions of 5 ILCS 430/70-5(a).
   (H)   Any amendment to the Act that becomes effective after the effective
date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by reference and
shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of
gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes
its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be
incorporated into this section by reference without formal action by the
corporate authorities of the city.
   (I)   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares the Act unconstitutional in its
entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois
Supreme Court’s decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals
or rehearings. This section shall be deemed repealed without further action by
the corporate authorities of the city if the Act is found unconstitutional by
the Illinois Supreme Court.
   (J)   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of the Act
unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the Act,
or does not address the remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the Act as
adopted by this section shall remain in full force and effect; however, that
part of this section relating to the part of the Act found unconstitutional
shall be deemed repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of
the city.
(Prior Code, § 34.02) (Ord. 04-486, passed 5-11-2004)
§ 34.03 SALARIES, BONDS AND EXPENSES.
   The salaries and bonds of city officials and employees shall be established
from time to time by ordinance adopted by City Council. The amount of
authorized expenses that are to be reimbursed shall be as established by
ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 34.04)
§ 34.04 DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN.
   (A)   The Mayor and City Council hereby adopt and establish a deferred
compensation plan to be known as the City of Blue Island Employees’ Deferred
Compensation Plan for the benefit of such city employees, appointed and elected
officials of the city, and city independent contractors who desire to
voluntarily participate in such plan.
   (B)   The Budget Director of the city is hereby authorized and directed to
execute on behalf of the city, individual participation agreements with each
city employee requesting participation in the plan, and the Budget Director is
further authorized to execute such agreements and contracts as are necessary to
implement the plan hereby established by the Mayor and City Council.
   (C)   The city shall not incur any expense in the operation and
administration of the City of Blue Island Employees’ Deferred Compensation Plan
other than for its obligation to pay the deferred compensation as provided for
in the plan.
(Prior Code, § 34.05) (Ord. 2535, passed 11-25-1980)
§ 34.05 RETIREE HEALTH CARE BENEFITS.
   The city will offer the following retiree health care benefits:
   (A)   Retiree insurance availability will be provided for individual
retirees only, as was originally prescribed in Ordinance 90-212, and not
provided for the retiree’s spouse and/or family members, absent a contractual
agreement for the same. If a spouse and/or family member is currently on an
insurance plan, they will be offered COBRA as required by law;
   (B)   Current retirees will be transferred to the city’s basic medical and
hospitalization plan, which is defined as the plan that is the lowest cost to
the city. If the retiree intends to remain on a premium health care plan, they
must request the specific plan they wish to be enrolled in during the annual
open enrollment period;
   (C)   The city shall only pay, as a contribution for basic medical and
hospitalization insurance for retired employees, as defined herein, an amount
of money which does not exceed the contribution for insurance which the city
pays, on a monthly or other periodic basis, for basic medical and
hospitalization insurance to insure an unretired, individual employee without
spousal or dependents insurance coverage;
   (D)   The amount of the city’s contribution for basic medical and
hospitalization insurance for retired employees is subject to adjustment,
modification, amendment, alteration, change or termination at any time and for
any reason as circumstances may dictate;
   (E)   Non-union employees who are hired after January 1, 2012, as prescribed
in the 2011 ordinance, are not eligible for retiree health insurance; and
   (F)   The city will partner with its insurance broker and insurance provider
to educate retirees on the implementation of this section and will assist
retirees with the transition to those benefits.
(Ord. 2023-040, passed 10-24-2023)
§ 34.06 PAID LEAVE POLICY.
   Pursuant to section 15(p) of the Paid Leave for All Workers Act, the city
hereby adopts its current paid- leave policy for all city employees as set
forth in this code; the city’s Policy and Procedure Handbook; annual salary or
budget ordinances; any collective bargaining agreements to which the city is a
party; and all other binding legislative actions governing paid leave adopted
by the Mayor and Aldermen of the city, as the same may be amended from time to
time. However, in no event shall the city, as an employer, provide less than
one day of paid leave per year to any city employee.
(Ord. 2023-043, passed 12-12-2023)
§ 34.07 POLICY PROHIBITING SEXUAL HARASSMENT.
   (A)   Prohibition on sexual harassment. It is unlawful to harass a person
because of that person’s sex. The courts have determined that sexual harassment
is a form of discrimination under Title VII of the U.S. Civil Rights Act of
1964, as amended in 1991 by Pub. Law No. 102-166, and being 42 U.S.C. §§ 2000e
et seq. and 42 U.S.C. § 1981. All persons have a right to work in an
environment free from sexual harassment. Sexual harassment is unacceptable
misconduct which affects individuals of all genders and sexual orientations. It
is a policy of city to prohibit harassment of any person by any municipal
official, municipal agent, municipal employee or municipal agency or office on
the basis of sex or gender. All municipal officials, municipal agents,
municipal employees and municipal agencies or offices are prohibited from
sexually harassing any person, regardless of any employment relationship or
lack thereof.
   (B)   Definition of sexual harassment. This policy adopts the definition of
sexual harassment as stated in the Illinois Human Rights Act, 775 ILCS 5/1-101,
which currently defines SEXUAL HARASSMENT as:
      (1)   Any unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors or any
conduct of a sexual nature when:
         (a)   Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or
implicitly a term or condition of an individual’s employment;
         (b)   Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is
used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; or
         (c)   Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially
interfering with an individual’s work performance or creating an intimidating,
hostile or offensive working environment.
      (2)   Conduct which may constitute sexual harassment includes:
         (a)   Verbal. Sexual innuendos, suggestive comments, insults, humor
and jokes about sex, anatomy or gender-specific traits, sexual propositions,
threats, repeated requests for dates or statements about other employees, even
outside of their presence, of a sexual nature;
         (b)   Non-verbal. Suggestive or insulting sounds (whistling), leering,
obscene gestures, sexually suggestive bodily gestures, “catcalls”, “smacking”
or “kissing” noises;
         (c)   Visual. Posters, signs, pin-ups or slogans of a sexual nature,
viewing pornographic material or websites;
         (d)   Physical. touching, unwelcome hugging or kissing, pinching,
brushing the body, any coerced sexual act or actual assault; and
         (e)   Textual/electronic. “Sexting” (electronically sending messages
with sexual content, including pictures and video), the use of sexually
explicit language, harassment, cyber stalking and threats via all forms of
electronic communication (email, text/picture/video messages, intranet/on-line
postings, blogs, instant messages and social network websites like Facebook and
Twitter).
      (3)   The most severe and overt forms of sexual harassment are easier to
determine. On the other end of the spectrum, some sexual harassment is more
subtle and depends, to some extent, on individual perception and
interpretation. The courts will assess sexual harassment by a standard of what
would offend a “reasonable person”.
   (C)   Procedure for reporting an allegation of sexual harassment.
      (1)   An employee who either observes sexual harassment or believes
herself or himself to be the object of sexual harassment should deal with the
incident(s) as directly and firmly as possible by clearly communicating her or
his position to the offending employee, and her or his immediate supervisor. It
is not necessary for sexual harassment to be directed at the person making the
report.
      (2)   Any employee may report conduct which is believed to be sexual
harassment, including the following.
         (a)   Electronic/direct communication. If there is sexual harassing
behavior in the workplace, the harassed employee should directly and clearly
express her or his objection that the conduct is unwelcome and request that the
offending behavior stop. The initial message may be verbal. If subsequent
messages are needed, they should be put in writing in a note or a memo.
         (b)   Contact with supervisory personnel.
            1.   At the same time direct communication is undertaken, or in the
event the employee feels threatened or intimidated by the situation, the
problem must be promptly reported to the immediate supervisor of the person
making the report, a department head, a director of human resources, an ethics
officer, the city manager or administrator, or the chief executive officer of
the municipality.
            2.   The employee experiencing what he or she believes to be sexual
harassment must not assume that the employer is aware of the conduct. If there
are no witnesses and the victim fails to notify a supervisor or other
responsible officer, the municipality will not be presumed to have knowledge of
the harassment.
         (c)   Resolution outside municipality.
            1.   The purpose of this policy is to establish prompt, thorough
and effective procedures for responding to every report and incident so that
problems can be identified and remedied by the municipality. However, all
municipal employees have the right to contact the Illinois Department of Human
Rights (IDHR) or the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) for
information regarding filing a formal complaint with those entities. An IDHR
complaint must be filed within 180 days of the alleged incident(s) unless it is
a continuing offense. A complaint with the EEOC must be filed within 300 days.
            2.   Documentation of any incident may be submitted with any report
(what was said or done, the date, the time and the place), including, but not
limited to, written records such as letters, notes, memos and telephone
messages.
            3.   All allegations, including anonymous reports, will be accepted
and investigated regardless of how the matter comes to the attention of the
municipality. However, because of the serious implications of sexual harassment
charges and the difficulties associated with their investigation and the
questions of credibility involved, the claimant’s willing cooperation is a
vital component of an effective inquiry and an appropriate outcome.
   (D)   Prohibition on retaliation for reporting sexual harassment
allegations.
      (1)   No municipal official, municipal agency, municipal employee or
municipal agency or office shall take any retaliatory action against any
municipal employee due to a municipal employee’s:
         (a)   Disclosure or threatened disclosure of any violation of this
policy;
         (b)   The provision of information related to or testimony before any
public body conducting an investigation, hearing or inquiry into any violation
of this policy; or
         (c)   Assistance or participation in a proceeding to enforce the
provisions of this policy.
      (2)   For the purposes of this policy, retaliatory action means the
reprimand, discharge, suspension, demotion, denial of promotion or transfer, or
change in the terms or conditions of employment of any municipal employee that
is taken in retaliation for a municipal employee’s involvement in protected
activity pursuant to this policy.
      (3)   No individual making a report will be retaliated against even if a
report made in good faith is not substantiated. In addition, any witness will
be protected from retaliation.
      (4)   Similar to the prohibition against retaliation contained herein,
the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act (5 ILCS 430/15-10) provides
whistleblower protection from retaliatory action such as reprimand, discharge,
suspension, demotion or denial of promotion or transfer that occurs in
retaliation for an employee who does any of the following:
         (a)   Discloses or threatens to disclose to a supervisor or to a
public body an activity, policy or practice of any officer, member, state
agency or other state employee that the state employee reasonably believes is
in violation of a law, rule or regulation;
         (b)   Provides information to or testifies before any public body
conducting an investigation, hearing or inquiry into any violation of a law,
rule or regulation by any officer, member, state agency or other state
employee; or
         (c)   Assists or participates in a proceeding to enforce the
provisions of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act.
      (5)   Pursuant to the Whistleblower Act (740 ILCS 174/15(a)), an employer
may not retaliate against an employee who discloses information in a court, an
administrative hearing, or before a legislative commission or committee, or in
any other proceeding, where the employee has reasonable cause to believe that
the information discloses a violation of a state or federal law, rule or
regulation. In addition, an employer may not retaliate against an employee for
disclosing information to a government or law enforcement agency, where the
employee has reasonable cause to believe that the information discloses a
violation of a state or federal law, rule or regulation. (740 ILCS 174/15(b)).
      (6)   According to the Illinois Human Rights Act (775 ILCS 5/6-101), it
is a civil rights violation for a person, or for two or more people to
conspire, to retaliate against a person because he or she has opposed that
which he or she reasonably and in good faith believes to be sexual harassment
in employment, because he or she has made a charge, filed a complaint,
testified, assisted, or participated in an investigation, proceeding, or
hearing under the Illinois Human Rights Act.
      (7)   An employee who is suddenly transferred to a lower paying job or
passed over for a promotion after filing a complaint with IDHR or EEOC, may
file a retaliation charge, due within 180 days (IDHR) or 300 days (EEOC) of the
alleged retaliation.
   (E)   Consequences of a violation of the prohibition on sexual harassment.
In addition to any and all other discipline that may be applicable pursuant to
municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/
or collective bargaining agreement, any person who violates this policy or the
prohibition on sexual harassment contained in 5 ILCS 430/5-65, may be subject
to a fine of up to $5,000 per offense, applicable discipline or discharge by
the municipality and any applicable fines and penalties established pursuant to
local ordinance, state law or federal law. Each violation may constitute a
separate offense. Any discipline imposed by the municipality shall be separate
and distinct from any penalty imposed by an ethics commission and any fines or
penalties imposed by a court of law or a state or federal agency.
   (F)   Consequences for knowingly making a false report.
      (1)   A false report is a report of sexual harassment made by an accuser
using the sexual harassment report to accomplish some end other than stopping
sexual harassment or retaliation for reporting sexual harassment. A false
report is not a report made in good faith which cannot be proven. Given the
seriousness of the consequences for the accused, a false or frivolous report is
a severe offense that can itself result in disciplinary action. Any person who
intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of
this policy shall be subject to discipline or discharge pursuant to applicable
municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/
or collective bargaining agreements.
      (2)   In addition, any person who intentionally makes a false report
alleging a violation of any provision of the State Officials and Employees
Ethics Act to an ethics commission, an inspector general, the state police, a
State’s Attorney, the Attorney General or any other law enforcement official is
guilty of a Class A misdemeanor. An Ethics Commission may levy an
administrative fine of up to $5,000 against any person who intentionally makes
a false, frivolous or bad faith allegation.
   (G)   Reporting and independent review of allegations of sexual harassment
against an elected official by an elected official.
      (1)   Pursuant to the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act (5 ILCS
430/70-5), City Council members and other elected city officials are encouraged
to promptly report claims of sexual harassment by a Council member or other
elected official. Every effort should be made to file such complaints as soon
as possible, while facts are known and potential witnesses are available. If
the official or Council member feels comfortable doing so, he or she should
directly inform the individual that the individual’s conduct or communication
is offensive and must stop.
      (2)   City Council members and other elected officials should report
claims of sexual harassment against a City Council member or other elected
official to the City’s Judiciary Committee for investigation. If the report is
made to the Mayor, the Mayor shall promptly notify the Judiciary Committee.
Reports of sexual harassment will be confidential to the greatest extent
possible.
      (3)   When a complaint of sexual harassment is made against a City
Council member or other elected city official by another City Council member or
another elected city official, the judiciary committee shall initiate an
investigation into the matter, and if necessary, shall appoint a qualified law
firm that has experience in workplace investigations to conduct an independent
review of the allegations. The independent investigator shall prepare a written
report and submit it to the Judiciary Committee and the other elected
officials.
      (4)   If the investigator concludes that a City Council member or other
elected city official has engaged in sexual harassment, the matter will be
addressed in accordance with the authority of the City Council.
      (5)   City Council members and other elected officials who perform acts
of sexual harassment under this code section, may be held personally liable for
the cost of any city investigation if the alleged sexual harassment claims are
substantiated.
(Ord. 2018-001, passed 1-9-2018; Ord. 2020-007, passed 2-25-2020)
CHAPTER 35: GENERAL POLICIES
Section
   
35.01   Economic Development Plan
   
35.02   Professional fees and costs; reimbursement
   
35.03   Public telephones on public and private property
   
35.04   Fees for photocopies of city records
   
35.05   Payment into City Treasury of fines and forfeitures collected
   
35.06   Depositories for city money
   
35.07   Sureties on personal bonds
   
35.08   Persons indebted to city
   
35.09   Dishonored checks received by city
   
35.10   Indemnification and defense of city officers, employees and agents
   
35.11   Travel, meals and lodging expenses
   
35.12   Disaster remote meeting policy
§ 35.01 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   (A)   The City Economic Development Plan shall be, and the same is hereby
adopted by reference, the same as if its terms and provisions were set forth
verbatim herein, as the primary economic development strategy of the city and
that all actions that the city takes or sanctions to promote economic
development should be in conformity with the Plan. Three certified copies of
the City Economic Development Plan shall be on file in the office of the City
Clerk.
   (B)   This section explicitly empowers the city administration to secure
public and private investments and otherwise take actions to implement the Plan
through means that include:
      (1)   Seeking grants from other units of government and issuing requests
for proposals of private investments to carry out projects described in the
plan;
      (2)   Negotiating dispositions of city-owned land, allocations of funds
from TIF districts, and other commitments of city resources in agreements with
public and private investment partners and service contractors, which
agreements would be individually approved by the City Council; and
      (3)   Developing proposals for zoning, land use and design guideline
ordinances, what would be individually approved by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 35.01) (Ord. 05-565, passed 9-13-2005)
§ 35.02 PROFESSIONAL FEES AND COSTS; REIMBURSEMENT.
   (A)   Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or interested party,
submitting an application, plan, proposal, project, plat or other documentation
or information to the city requiring review, approval or preparation of plats
or materials by the City Engineer or any other professional whom the city must
retain to perform the preparation or review, shall pay for and reimburse the
city for the cost of the professional services rendered.
   (B)   The city may require that an appropriate deposit be made by the
person, firm, partnership, corporation or interested party requiring the
performance of the professional services as a condition of retaining the
professional to perform the review. Any and all fees and costs for professional
services incurred by the city shall be paid in full by the applicant before the
final approval is authorized or the final document preparation is reviewed or
completed.
   (C)   The professional services for which payment and reimbursement shall be
required shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Plan review for all developments involving city streets and alleys;
      (2)   Preparation, review and recording of plats of vacation, plats of
subdivision or other plats;
      (3)   Plan review and periodic job site inspections for all sewer work
and waterway installation to be performed on private or public property
involving issuance of permits by the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District;
      (4)   Plan review involving proposed road work and curb openings,
relating to streets and highways controlled by the State Department of
Transportation;
      (5)   Site inspection services concerning road and highway projects and
infrastructure projects;
      (6)   Plan review and site inspection services for water, sewer,
lighting, curbing and sidewalk projects;
      (7)   Advice and services rendered to provide the city with information
regarding the location of benchmarks and property elevations;
      (8)   Plan review of all sewer work and waterworks installation for
commercial buildings; and
      (9)   Engineering, legal, architecture or other professional services
required due to the nature of the project, plan or proposal submitted to the
city.
   (D)   Payment shall be made to the city and shall be deposited with the
office of the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 35.02) (Ord. 98-201, passed 5-12-1998)
§ 35.03 PUBLIC TELEPHONES ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   Public property.
      (1)   The Mayor shall have the authority to enter into contracts that
grant to one or more persons, subject to the conditions set forth in the
contract and this section, the privilege of installing and maintaining pay
telephones in the public way. Any such contract must be approved as to form and
legality by the City Attorney. In the administration of this section, the Mayor
shall consult and cooperate with all appropriate city departments. The Mayor
may at any time cause to be advertised a request for proposals relating to such
contracts.
      (2)   Such contracts and the method of awarding such contracts shall, to
the greatest extent possible, be designed to:
         (a)   Discourage illegal drug sales and other criminal activity that
are sometimes associated with and facilitated by pay telephones in public ways;
         (b)   Reduce the disturbances that pay telephones may tend to promote
in residential areas;
         (c)   Reduce visual clutter in the public way;
         (d)   Reduce the unnecessary obstruction of pedestrian and vehicular
traffic;
         (e)   Ensure the availability of pay telephones where they are needed
for lawful purposes;
         (f)   Provide adequate access to pay telephones by disabled persons;
and
         (g)   Generate revenue for the city.
      (3)   Any contract entered into pursuant to this section shall provide
that the privileges granted by the contract are subject to the City Council’s
authority to order the removal of a pay telephone pursuant to division (A)(6)
below. Any such contract shall also permit the City Council or the Mayor to
require pay telephones in the public way to have special features designed to
reduce criminal activity. In addition, the contract must provide that the
Aldermen must be notified of the location of any pay telephone that is to be
situated in the public way in his or her ward pursuant to this section. No
person shall be awarded a contract under this section unless the person has a
valid certificate of service authority to provide pay telephone service granted
by the State Commerce Commission where required by law.
      (4)   No person may install a pay telephone in the public way on or after
the effective date of this section unless installation is made pursuant to a
contract entered into under this section. Beginning 10-1-1993, no pay telephone
may remain in the public way other than pursuant to a contract entered into
under this section. Any telephone installed or maintained in violation of this
division (A)(4) shall be subject to immediate removal at the owner’s expense by
the city.
      (5)   No later than 30 days after the effective date of this section,
every person who owns or maintains a pay telephone in the public way must file
with the Mayor a list of the locations of all such telephones owned or
maintained by that person. Any pay telephone in the public way that does not
appear on such a list shall be subject to immediate removal at the owner’s
expense by the city beginning 31 days after the effective date of this section.
      (6)   The City Council may at any time after 10-1-1993, or at any time
after the effective date of this section if pursuant to a contract under this
section, by ordinance order the removal of a particular pay telephone that is
in the public way. Such an ordinance must identify the location of the
telephone to be removed. Any pay telephone that is not removed within 14 days
after an ordinance ordering its removal is adopted shall be subject to
immediate removal at the owner’s expense by the city.
      (7)   Any pay telephone removed by the city pursuant to this section may
be reclaimed by its owner within 30 days after its removal. The owner must
reimburse the city for its removal and storage costs before any such telephone
may be reclaimed. Such costs shall also include the costs of removing any
installation ancillary to the pay telephone, and the costs of restoring the
public way to its original condition. Any telephone not so reclaimed may be
disposed of as unclaimed property.
      (8)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to fines pursuant to the city’s fee and fine schedule.
      (9)   As used in this division (A), PAY TELEPHONE means any self-service
or coin- or credit card-operated telephone; and PUBLIC WAY means any sidewalk,
parkway, road, street, highway, alley, lane, court, structure, place, trail
and/or bridge under the control or responsibility of the city or constructed or
erected for the use and/or benefit of the public.
      (10)   The Mayor, subject to the advice and consent of the City Council,
shall have the authority to promulgate rules and regulations to implement this
section.
      (11)   No provisions of this section or any contract issued pursuant to
this section may be applied to any transaction in interstate commerce to the
extent to which such business may not, under the constitution and statutes of
the United States, be made the subject of regulation by the city.
   (B)   Private property.
      (1)   The installation or continued maintenance of an outdoor public
telephone, including any telephone booth, on any property or attached to the
outside of any building or structure shall be allowed provided a permit is
issued by the City Clerk permitting the installation or continued maintenance
of such outdoor public telephone.
      (2)   The City Clerk shall only issue a permit to install or continue
maintenance of an outdoor public telephone upon the direction of the Judiciary
Committee of the City Council made after it has conducted a hearing to
determine whether such a permit should be issued.
      (3)   The Judiciary Committee of the City Council shall conduct a hearing
to determine whether a permit allowing installation or continued maintenance of
an outdoor public telephone shall be issued. This hearing will be conducted
within 30 days of receipt of an application by the office of the City Clerk
requesting a permit to install or continue maintenance of an outdoor public
telephone. The City Clerk shall prepare an application form which shall include
appropriate information identifying the applicant, the applicant’s business
address, telephone number and the proposed or existing location of the public
telephone. The City Clerk will give all filed applications to the Chairperson
of the Judiciary Committee who shall then immediately notify the Aldermen of
the ward where a permit is sought that an application has been made.
      (4)   The Judiciary Committee shall authorize issuance of the permit only
after hearing and determining, by a majority vote, that:
         (a)   The placement and location of the public telephone will not be
detrimental to the public welfare;
         (b)   The placement and location of the public telephone will not be
injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which it is
or will be located; and
         (c)   The public telephone is not or will not be located outside of or
attached to the outside of any building or structure in such a manner as to
impede or restrict the movement or access of the public on or about any public
way.
      (5)   Should the Judiciary Committee fail to act on the application
within 30 days of the date the application for permit is made in the office of
the City Clerk, said permit shall be considered to be granted.
      (6)   (a)   If the applicant desires to appeal a decision of the
Judiciary Committee denying a permit to install or continue maintenance of an
outdoor public telephone, the applicant may do so by filing a written notice of
appeal with the office of the City Clerk within ten business days of the date
of the decision of the Judiciary Committee. The appeal shall be to the entire
City Council and shall be heard within 30 days after the date the notice of
appeal is filed. The City Clerk shall prepare an appropriate notice of appeal
form.
         (b)   The City Council may reverse or affirm the decision of the
Judiciary Committee by a majority vote. The Mayor shall vote to break all ties.
         (c)   The decision of the City Council shall be final.
      (7)   (a)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no
outdoor public telephone may be installed on or after the effective date of
this section unless a permit has been obtained for the telephone pursuant to
this section.
         (b)   Any outdoor public telephone installed prior to the effective
date of this section for which a permit has not been obtained must be removed
no later than October 1, 1993, unless application for a permit and a permit
allowing continued maintenance of the outdoor public telephone has been issued
pursuant to the terms of this section.
      (8)   (a)   Any permit issued pursuant to this section shall be subject
to revocation if the Judiciary Committee makes a determination, after written
notice and a hearing, that:
            1.   The public telephone is detrimental to the public welfare;
            2.   The placement and location of the public telephone is
injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which it is
located; or
            3.   The public telephone is located outside of or attached to a
building or structure in such a manner as to impede or restrict the movement or
access of the public on or about any public way.
         (b)   The notice will be sent to the existing permitted at the address
shown in the permit application for the location in question. The hearing shall
be conducted in accordance with the provisions of division (B)(3) above. A
right of appeal shall exist and any appeal shall be conducted in accordance
with the provisions of division (B)(6) above.
      (9)   (a)   Every application for a permit filed pursuant to this section
shall be accompanied by a fee of $50 for each property affected if the
application is filed on or before 10-1-1993, and $100 for each property
affected if the application is filed thereafter. No other fee shall apply to
the filing of the application.
         (b)   The permitted shall pay an annual permit fee of $100 on or
before October 1 of each and every year subsequent to the year in which an
original permit is issued. The fee shall be paid in the office of the City
Clerk.
      (10)   As used in this division (B) PUBLIC TELEPHONE means any self-
service or coin or credit card operated telephone; and PUBLIC WAY means any
sidewalk, parkway, road, street, highway, alley, lane, court, structure, place,
trail and/or bridge under the ownership control or responsibility of the city
or constructed or erected for the use and/or benefit of the public.
      (11)   (a)   Any person who installs or continues maintenance of an
outdoor public telephone in violation of the terms and provisions of this
section shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50, and not more than
$250, for each offense. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute
a separate offense. Failure to obtain an annual permit on or before October 1
of each year shall be considered a specific violation of this section.
         (b)   Enforcement proceedings to correct any such violation may be
filed by the Building Department and processed by the Code Hearing Department
of the city in accordance with the provisions of this code of ordinances.
         (c)   Any public telephone that is found by the Hearing Officer, after
a hearing conducted pursuant to this code of ordinances, to have been installed
or maintained without a permit in violation of this section shall be subject to
immediate removal by the city at the owner’s expense.
      (12)   If any division of this section is determined by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be unenforceable in whole or in part, such
determination shall have no effect on those divisions of this section that are
unaffected by the courts decision. Enforcement of this section shall continue
unless the effect of the decision renders the ordinance unenforceable.
      (13)   No provisions of this section or any permit issued pursuant to
this section may be applied to any transaction in interstate commerce to the
extent to which such business may not, under the constitution and statutes of
the United States, be made the subject of regulation by the city.
(Prior Code, § 35.03) (Ord. 93-210, passed 3-9-1993; Ord. 93-211, passed 3-9-
1993; Ord. 94-262, passed 2-22-1994; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 35.04 FEES FOR PHOTOCOPIES OF CITY RECORDS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   RECORD. All writings or documents required by law to be kept in the custody
and control of the City Clerk.
   (B)   Any person ordering a photo-copy of any record, physically capable of
being photo-copied on the machine in the Clerk’s office, shall pay the fees as
set forth in the city’s fee and fine schedule.
   (C)   The fees provided for in division (B) of this section shall not apply
to elected or appointed officials of the city.
   (D)   The City Clerk shall make monthly reports of such fees collected and
shall transmit the same to the City Treasurer who shall deposit such fees so
transmitted in the general corporate fund.
(Prior Code, § 35.04) (Ord. 2051, passed 10-9-1967; Ord. 87-100, passed 11-24-
1987; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 35.05 PAYMENT INTO CITY TREASURY OF FINES AND FORFEITURES COLLECTED.
   All judges hearing cases brought by the city to recover any fine or to
enforce any penalty under any ordinance of the city shall pay into the treasury
of the city all fines and forfeitures collected by them during any calendar
month not later than the tenth day of the succeeding month.
(Prior Code, § 35.05)
§ 35.06 DEPOSITORIES FOR CITY MONEY.
   (A)   (1)   The funds and monies of the city may be invested and deposited
in the institutions and in the manner set forth herein:
         (a)   Bonds, notes, certificates of indebtedness, treasury bills or
other securities now or hereafter issued, which are guaranteed by the United
States of America as to principal and interest;
         (b)   Interest-bearing savings amounts, interest-bearing certificates
of deposit or interest-bearing time deposits constituting direct obligations of
any bank as deemed by the Illinois Banking Act, 205 ILCS 5/1 et seq., provided
said banks are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation;
         (c)   Short term obligations of corporations organized in the United
States with assets exceeding $500,000,000 if:
            1.   Such obligations are rated at the time of purchase within the
three highest classifications established by at least two standards rating
services and which mature not later than 180 days from the date of purchase;
            2.   No more than 25% of any fund is invested in such obligations
at any time; and
            3.   Such purchases do not exceed 10% of the corporation’s
outstanding obligations.
         (d)   Short-term discount obligations of the Federal National Mortgage
Association;
         (e)   Shares or other forms of securities legally issuable by savings
and loan association incorporated under the laws of the state or under the laws
of the United States, provided the savings and loan association shares,
investment certificates or other forms of securities legally issuable by
savings and loan associations are insured by the Federal Savings and Loan
Insurance Corporation;
         (f)   The Public Treasurer’s Investment Pool created under 15 ILCS
505/17 et. seq.; and
         (g)   In any other manner and institution permitted and designated by
30 ILCS 235/0.01 et seq.
      (2)   The City Treasurer shall be required to keep all monies in the
Treasurer’s hands belonging to the city in the above designated depositories;
provided, that the City Treasurer may divide and allocate the monies in the
Treasurer’s hands belonging to the city, between and among the above designated
depositories from time to time and in such proportions as the Treasurer may see
fit, provided, further that the amount of such deposits in any bank or savings
and loan association designated as a depository shall at no time exceed 75% of
the capital stock and surplus of the respective depository in which such
deposit is kept.
   (B)   The City Treasurer shall be discharged from responsibility for all
funds and monies which the Treasurer deposits in any one or all of the
foregoing designated depositories, provided such deposits are made in the
manner set forth herein and in accordance with the provisions of 30 ILCS 235/
0.01 et seq.
   (C)   Permission is granted to the City Treasurer and to the sureties on the
Treasurer’s official bond to amend such bond by the insertion of a provision to
the effect that the obligation of the sureties thereon shall not extend to any
loss sustained by the insolvency, failure or closing of any bank organized and
operating either under the laws of the state or the United States wherein the
City Treasurer has placed funds in the Treasurer’s custody or control, or any
part thereof if any such bank has been approved by the City Council as the
depository for such funds.
   (D)   Each of the depositories above designated and approved herein shall
furnish the City Council, from time to time hereafter, with copies of sworn
statements of resources and liabilities which they are required to furnish to
the Comptroller of Currency, the Commissioner of Banks and Trust Companies or
any agency of the United States government or the state having control or
oversight over their business and affairs.
(Prior Code, § 35.06) (Ord. 2741, passed 12-10-1985)
§ 35.07 SURETIES ON PERSONAL BONDS.
   (A)   All bonds in favor of the city on which personal surety is offered
shall be approved by the Judiciary Committee and by the City Attorney as to the
form of the bond, before such bond is presented to the City Council for
approval.
   (B)   There shall be submitted to the City Clerk by any person offering
themself as a personal surety on any bond in favor of the city a schedule
showing the real and personal property owned by such surety and showing other
information as may be desired by the City Clerk. The schedules shall be
furnished to the surety by the City Clerk.
   (C)   The schedules shall be attached to the bonds to which they refer and
the bond together with the attached schedule, after being approved by the
Judiciary Committee and the City Attorney, shall be presented to the City
Council for approval.
(Prior Code, § 35.07)
§ 35.08 PERSONS INDEBTED TO CITY.
   When any person, firm or corporation is indebted to the city and such
indebtedness has continued for 30 days, no money due to such person, firm or
corporation from the city shall be paid to such person, firm or corporation nor
shall any permit or license be issued to any such person, firm or corporation
until such past due indebtedness of such person, firm or corporation has been
fully paid.
(Prior Code, § 35.08)
§ 35.09 DISHONORED CHECKS RECEIVED BY CITY.
   In addition to all other charges, costs and fees which are due the city from
any person, firm or corporation, a processing fee as set forth in the city’s
fee and fine schedule shall be charged to the account of any person, firm or
corporation on whose behalf a check is tendered to the city in payment of any
charge, cost or fee in the event such check is dishonored.
(Prior Code, § 35.09) (Ord. 2587, passed 7-29-1982; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-
10-2015)
§ 35.10 INDEMNIFICATION AND DEFENSE OF CITY OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES AND AGENTS.
   (A)   The city shall indemnify any person who was or is a party or is
threatened to be made a party to any threatened, pending or completed action,
suit, or proceeding, whether civil, criminal, administrative or investigative
by reason of the fact that such person is or was an elected or appointed
official, employee or agent of the city against expenses (including attorney
fees), judgments, fines and amounts paid in settlement actually and reasonably
incurred by such person in connection with such action, suit or proceeding if
such person acted in good faith and in a manner such person reasonably believed
to be in or not opposed to the best interests of the city, and with respect to
any criminal action or proceeding had no reasonable cause to believe his or her
conduct was unlawful, except that no indemnification shall be made in respect
to any claim, issue or matter as to which such person shall have been adjudged
to be liable for willful and wanton negligence or misconduct in the performance
of such person’s duty to the city.
   (B)   Any indemnification under division (A) above shall be made by the City
Council upon receipt of a determination by legal counsel for the city that
indemnification is proper in the circumstances because applicable standards of
conduct set forth in division (A) above have been met. Such authorization shall
be made by the City Council by a majority vote of a quorum consisting of the
Mayor and City Council.
   (C)   The city reserves the right to select legal counsel in defending
elected or appointed officials, employees or agents of the city under the
provisions of this section. This selection of legal counsel to defend elected
or appointed officials, employees or agents for the city in any threatened,
pending or completed action, suit or proceeding, whether civil, criminal,
administrative or investigative, shall be final and binding. Should the elected
or appointed official, employee or agent choose to select other legal counsel
for their defense, the city shall have no obligation to indemnify, defend or
pay for the legal costs and expenses to defend and represent such elected or
appointed official, employee, or agent. In this instance the city may select
legal counsel of its choice to defend and represent the city’s interests.
   (D)   When, under the provisions of this section, the city is required or
requested to indemnify and select legal counsel for the defense or
representation of an elected or appointed official, employee or agent, the
individual or persons involved and requiring such indemnification and defense
or representation shall cooperate fully and completely with any legal counsel
selected by the city to represent their interests. Failure to cooperate may
result in the loss of indemnification by the city if the City Council
determines, by a majority vote of a quorum of its members consisting of the
Mayor and City Council, that the failure to cooperate was intentional. No such
revocation or termination of indemnification and defense shall be made until
the person or persons refusing to cooperate in their defense have been notified
of the possible revocation and termination and have been allowed a public
hearing by the City Council for the purpose of determining if their failure to
cooperate was intentional.
(Prior Code, § 35.10) (Ord. 86-19, passed 4-30-1986)
§ 35.11 TRAVEL, MEALS AND LODGING EXPENSES.
   (A)   Pursuant to the Local Government Travel Expenses Control Act, being 50
ILCS 150/, non-home rule units of local government are required to establish
regulations with respect to allowable travel, meal and lodging expenses.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ENTERTAINMENT. Includes, but is not limited to, shows, amusements,
theaters, circuses, sporting events or any other place of public or private
entertainment or amusement, unless ancillary to the purpose of the program or
event
      PUBLIC BUSINESS. Expenses incurred in the performance of a public purpose
which is required or useful for the benefit of the city to carry out the
responsibilities of city business.
      TRAVEL. Any expenditure directly incident to official travel by employees
and officers of the city or by wards or charges of the city involving
reimbursement to travelers or direct payment to private agencies providing
transportation or related services.
   (C)   (1)   The city shall only reimburse the following types of travel,
meal and lodging expenses incurred by its employees and officers up to the
following maximum allowable amounts:
Type of Reimbursement Rate
Type of Reimbursement                                                         Rate
Mileage
   Auto                                                                    Federal
                                                                              rate
Per Diem/Meals
   Within the State of Illinois
      Breakfast                                                         $5.50
      Lunch                                                             $5.50
      Dinner                                                            $17
      Per Diem - Quarter                                                $7
      Per Diem - Day                                                    $28
   Outside the State of Illinois
      Breakfast                                                         $6.50
      Lunch                                                             $6.50
      Dinner                                                            $19
      Per Diem - Quarter                                                $8
      Per Diem - Day                                                    $32
Lodging
   Chicago Metro                                                           Federal
                                                                              rate *
   Suburban Cook County
      Counties of DuPage, Kane, Lake,                                   $132
      McHenry and Will                                                  $80
   Downstate Illinois
      Counties of Champaign, Kankakee, LaSalle, McLean, Macon, Madison, $70
Peoria, Rock Island, St Clair, Sangamon, Tazewell, and Winnebago
      All other counties                                                $60
   Out-of-state                                                            $110
 
      (2)   Alcohol is specifically excluded from reimbursement.
   (D)   No reimbursement of travel, meal or lodging expenses incurred by a
city employee or officer shall be authorized unless the “Travel, Meal and
Lodging Expense Reimbursement Request Form”, attached to Ordinance 2017-003 and
made a part hereof as if set out in full herein, has been submitted and
approved. All documents and information submitted with the form shall be
subject to disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act (5 ILCS 140/1 et
seq.)
   (E)   Expenses for travel, meals and lodging of:
      (1)   Any officer or employee that exceeds the maximum reimbursement
allowed under the regulations adopted under division (C) above; or
      (2)   Any member of the corporate authorities of the city may only be
approved by roll call vote at an open meeting of the corporate authorities of
the city. However, in the event of an emergency or other extraordinary
circumstances, the corporate authorities may approve more than the maximum
allowable expenses set forth above.
   (F)   The city shall not reimburse any elected official, employee or officer
for any activities which would be considered entertainment activities which
would otherwise be considered entertainment, but which are excluded from the
prohibition on reimbursement due to being ancillary to the purpose of the
program or event, may be reimbursed in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
(Ord. 2017-003, passed 2-14-2017)
§ 35.12 DISASTER REMOTE MEETING POLICY.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   The purpose of this policy is to govern the procedure by which the
city may conduct open or closed meetings by audio or video conference, without
the physical presence of a quorum of the City Council, when circumstances
warrant and only as authorized by § 7(e) of the Illinois Open Meetings Act, 5
ILCS 120/1 et seq.
      (2)   To the extent that this policy and rules conflict with any other
rule of the City Council, this policy will control during a disaster and while
this policy is activated. This policy hereby applies to all subsidiary boards,
committees and commissions unless and until such boards, committees and
commissions adopt their own rules for remote meetings or hearings held during a
disaster and/or pursuant to the Illinois Open Meetings Act.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ACT. The Illinois Open Meetings Act, 5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
      ALDERMAN. One of the seven members of the City Council elected from wards
pursuant to Article 3.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code, being 65 ILCS 5/3.1.
      CITY COUNCIL. The City Council consisting of the Mayor and the seven duly
elected and/or appointed Aldermen pursuant to the Article 3.1 of the Illinois
Municipal Code.
      CLERK. The City Clerk elected pursuant to Article 3.1 of the Illinois
Municipal Code.
      CITY. City of Blue Island.
      CODE. The Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-1-1 et seq.
      DISASTER. An event where the Governor or the Director of the Illinois
Department of Public Health has issued a disaster declaration related to public
health concerns because of a disaster as defined in § 4 of the Illinois
Emergency Management Agency Act, being 20 ILCS 3305/, and all or part of the
jurisdiction of the public body is covered by the disaster area.
      MAYOR. The Mayor of the City of Blue Island, Cook County, State of
Illinois, as defined by Article 3.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code.
      MEETING. Any open meeting of the City Council that is subject to the Act.
      POLICY. This disaster remote meeting policy and any modifications that
may be approved from time to time.
      REMOTE MEANS. Video or audio conference only.
   (C)   Activation of remote meetings policy.
      (1)   Open or closed meetings held by remote means, without the physical
presence of a quorum of the City Council, may be held when the Governor or the
Director of the Illinois Department of Public Health has issued a disaster
declaration related to public health concerns because of a disaster as defined
in § 4 of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, and all or part of the
jurisdiction of the public body is covered by the disaster area.
      (2)   Upon such a declaration by the Governor or the Director of the
Illinois Department of Public Health, the Mayor may determine that an in-person
meeting or meeting conducted under the Illinois Open Meetings Act is not
practical or prudent because of the disaster and may activate this policy. Said
determination shall include any specific modifications or requirements related
to in-person meeting attendance as discussed further herein. Any subsequent
modifications that may be necessary during the period of the disaster may be
declared by the Mayor from time to time. The City Council may approve, by
resolution, modifications to conducting meetings under this policy subject to
the limitations of the Act and parameters of this policy.
      (3)   Once this policy is activated, the City Council shall convene open
and closed meetings subject to the parameters of this policy and the Act for
the period of the disaster unless the Mayor earlier determines that there no
longer remains a need for its activation.
   (D)   Disaster remote meeting procedures. When this policy is activated
pursuant to the division (C) above, meetings shall be held as follows.
      (1)   At least one member of the City Council, the Mayor, the City
Attorney or Chief Administrative Officer must be physically present at the
regular meeting location. The Mayor shall determine the official required to
physically attend the meeting. All other Aldermen may participate remotely in
City Council meetings. The Mayor may order some or all Aldermen to participate
remotely. However, the Mayor may declare, or City Council may resolve, that
physical attendance is unfeasible due to the disaster. The Mayor or Council are
not precluded from determining a specific limit on the number of people allowed
to physically attend a meeting. Such determination may be changed from time to
time during the disaster period when this policy is activated as the Mayor and
City Council may deem necessary and proper.
      (2)   Meetings shall comply with any parameters or orders required by the
disaster declaration, any executive orders, rules, regulations or any other
relevant law.
      (3)   All members of the City Council participating at a meeting,
wherever their physical location, must be verified and shall confirm that they
are able to hear all other participants, all discussion, and any testimony
prior to the meeting commencing. The platform for remote or electronic
attendance and participation at the City Council meeting will be arranged in
advance by the Mayor or his or her designee at least 48 hours prior to the
commencement of the meeting.
      (4)   Each member of the body participating in a meeting by audio or
video conference for a meeting held pursuant to this section is considered
present at the meeting for purposes of determining a quorum and participating
in all proceedings.
      (5)   All votes conducted while this policy is activated shall be by roll
call with each Alderman’s vote on each issue identified and recorded. No voice-
votes for routine, procedural motions or otherwise are allowed.
      (6)   A verbatim record, in the form of an audio or video recording,
shall be kept of both closed and open meetings conducted while this policy is
activated. Verbatim records of open meetings shall be made available to the
public and all verbatim records remain subject to § 2.06 of the Act, being 5
ILCS 120/2.06. In addition to a verbatim record, minutes shall be kept and
approved by the City Council as is done for any other open or closed meeting.
      (7)   When circumstances warrant and allow one or more city official to
be physically present at the regular meeting location, the following rules
shall apply.
         (a)   The number of persons admitted to physically attend an open
meeting may be limited based on the nature of the disaster and any such
limitations shall be stated on the meeting notice as discussed herein.
         (b)   The first persons to be admitted to this city’s City Council
meetings will be its elected and appointed officers choosing or otherwise
required to attend in person. If the in-person attendance maximum is not met,
the next person(s) to be admitted shall be one member of the Associated or
Local Press. To ensure eligibility for entry, the member of the press must
email City Clerk, Randy Heuser, at rheuser@cityofblueisland.org. The first
email received will determine the press member admitted to any City Council
meeting held during the disaster period where this policy is in place.
Thereafter, if the in-person attendance maximum is not met, members of the
public shall be admitted. Admittance will be determined by which member of the
public emails City Clerk, Randy Heuser, at rheuser@cityofblueisland.org and
requests admittance on a first-come, first-serve basis. If no person requests
admittance via email, admittance shall be granted on a first-come, first serve
basis.
         (c)   At the meeting, persons attending in-person shall comply with
any applicable health or other requirements that may be ordered.
         (d)   Members of the public attending in-person at the regular meeting
location of the city must be able to hear all discussion and testimony and all
votes of the City Council.
      (8)   When in-person attendance at the regular meeting location is not
feasible, in whole or in part, due to the disaster, the city shall make
alternative arrangements, and provide notice of such alternative arrangements
on the meeting notice, as discussed herein, whereby the members of the public
must be able to contemporaneously hear all discussion, testimony and roll call
votes. Such alternative access may include, but is not limited to, offering an
alternative physical location with a video and audio feed of the meeting, a
telephone conference number, or a web-based access link.
      (9)   In addition to providing any in-person comments, any person
desiring to make public comment may also email their public comment to City
Clerk, Randy Heuser, at rheuser@cityofblueisland.org by 4:00 p.m. on the day
upon which the City Council holds a meeting during the time when this policy is
activated. Public comments received by email will be read during the public
comment section and will be noted in the meeting minutes. Emailed public
comments must be limited to 200 words, must identify the commenter, and are
limited to one comment per person. If the remote meeting platform allows for
live public comment, then the rules applicable to public comment with respect
to length and number of comments shall be applicable thereto. Nothing herein
shall allow members of the public to speak, interrupt the proceedings, or
otherwise attempt to conduct city business unless otherwise recognized and
allowed by the City Council.
      (10)   All persons unable to attend a meeting in-person or by the
alternative arrangement, and who desire to know if action was taken on an
agenda item by the Mayor and City Council for the City of Blue Island may
contact City Clerk, Randy Heuser, at rheuser@cityofblueisland.org the following
day or thereafter.
      (11)   Except in the event of a bona fide emergency, 48 hours’ notice
shall be given of a meeting to be held pursuant to this policy. Notice shall be
given to all members of the public body, shall be posted on the website of the
public body, and shall also be provided to any news media who has requested
notice of meetings pursuant to § 2.02(a) of the Act, being 5 ILCS 120/2.02(a).
The meeting notice shall include any modifications and/or restrictions to
public attendance, shall include any alternative arrangements to access the
meeting, shall include the information concerning submission of public
comments, and shall include any and all such other rules or modifications to
the meeting rules as determined by the Mayor and City Council. In addition to
the meeting notice, the city shall endeavor to publicize the alternative
arrangements to access the meeting on the city’s website and/or social media
channels. In the event of a bona fide emergency declared by the city:
         (a)   Notice shall be given pursuant to § 2.02(a) of the Act, being 5
ILCS 120/2.02(a), and the Mayor shall state the nature of the emergency at the
beginning of the meeting; and
         (b)   The public body must comply with the verbatim recording
requirements set forth in § 2.06 of the Act, being 5 ILCS 120/2.06.
   (E)   Applicability. If any provision of this policy conflicts with any
provision of the Act, the provisions of the Act shall prevail.
(Ord. 2020-022, passed 7-16-2020)
CHAPTER 36: ELECTIONS
Section
   
36.01   Ward boundaries
   
36.02   City elections
§ 36.01 WARD BOUNDARIES.
   (A)   Wards. The city is divided into seven wards, as follows:
      (1)   First ward. Beginning at the intersection of Division Street and
Canal Street; thence south along Division Street to the south line of Calumet
Township; thence west along the south line of Calumet Township to the west
boundary of Calumet Township; thence west along 135th Street extended and 135th
Street in Bremen Township to Mozart Street; thence north along Mozart Street to
Broadway Street; thence easterly along Broadway Street to California Avenue;
thence north along California Avenue to John Street extended west; thence west
along John Street extended following the corporate limits of Blue Island to
Francisco Avenue; thence south along Francisco Avenue to 135th Street; thence
west along 135th Street to Sacramento Avenue; thence south along Sacramento
Avenue to 139th Street; thence west along 139th Street to Cooper Groves Road;
thence southwesterly along Cooper Groves Road to Kedzie Avenue; thence south
and east along Kedzie Avenue and generally counterclockwise around the city
boundary to California Avenue in Bremen Township; thence north along California
Avenue to 139th Street; thence east along 139th Street and generally
counterclockwise around the south and east city boundary to Interstate 57;
thence north along Interstate 57 to Broadway Street; thence westerly along
Broadway Street to Canal Street; thence westerly along Canal Street to the
point of beginning;
      (2)   Second ward. Beginning at the intersection of Gregory Street and
Vermont Street; thence east along Vermont Street to Division Street; thence
south along Division Street to the Cal-Sag Channel; thence easterly along the
Cal-Sag Channel to Ashland Avenue; thence easterly and southwesterly along the
Cal-Sag Channel and generally clockwise along the eastern city boundary to
Interstate 57; thence north along Interstate 57 to Broadway Street; thence
westerly along Broadway Street to Canal Street; thence westerly along Canal
Street to Division Street; thence south along Division Street to the south line
of Calumet Township; thence west along the south line of Calumet Township to
the west boundary of Calumet Township; thence west along 135th Street extended
and 135th Street in Bremen Township to Mozart Street; thence north along Mozart
Street to Broadway Street; thence easterly along Broadway Street to California
Avenue; thence north along California Avenue following the corporate limits of
Blue Island to Vermont Street; thence east along Vermont Street to the G. T. &
W. Railroad; thence southerly along the G. T. & W. Railroad to Stony Creek;
thence southeasterly along Stony Creek to Grove Street extended west; thence
east along said Grove Street extended west and Grove Street to Ann Street;
thence south along Ann Street to James Street; thence east along James Street
to Old Western Avenue; thence northerly along Old Western Avenue to Grove
Street; thence east along Grove Street extended to Gregory Street; thence
northerly along Gregory Street to the point of beginning;
      (3)   Third ward. Beginning at the intersection of Vermont Street and
Division Street; thence south along Division Street to the Cal-Sag Channel;
thence easterly along the Cal-Sag Channel to Ashland Avenue; thence north along
Ashland Avenue to Vermont Street; thence westerly along Vermont Street and
generally counterclockwise around the east city boundary to 127th Street;
thence west along 127th Street to the C. R. I. & P. Railroad; thence southerly
along the C. R. I. & P. Railroad to Vermont Street; thence east along Vermont
Street to the point of beginning;
      (4)   Fourth ward. Beginning at the intersection of Vermont Street and
Western Avenue; thence west along Vermont Street to Maple Avenue; thence north
along Maple Avenue to York Street; thence east along York Street to Greenwood
Avenue; thence north along Greenwood Avenue to the east and west alley lying
between Walnut Street and Oak Street; thence west along said alley to the north
and south alley lying just west of Greenwood Avenue; thence north along north
and south alleys to 127th Street; thence east along 127th Street to Greenwood
Avenue; thence north along Greenwood Avenue to Grunewald Street; thence east
along Grunewald Street to Western Avenue; thence south along Western Avenue to
Krueger Street; thence east along Krueger Street to Gregory Street; thence
north along Gregory Street to 122nd Street; thence east along 122nd Street to
Vincennes Road; thence southerly along Vincennes Road to 123rd Street; thence
east along 123rd Street extended east to Division Street extended north; thence
south along said Division Street extended north and Division Street to 127th
Street; thence west along 127th Street to the C. R. I. & P. Railroad just east
of Irving Avenue; thence southerly along the C. R. I. & P. Railroad to Prairie
Street; thence west along Prairie Street to Irving Avenue; thence south along
Irving Avenue to the east and west alley lying just south of Prairie Street;
thence west along said alley to Gregory Street; thence south along Gregory
Street to Walnut Street; thence west along Walnut Street to Western Avenue;
thence south along Western Avenue to the point of beginning;
      (5)   Fifth ward. Beginning at the intersection of Lewis Street and
Greenwood Avenue; thence north along Greenwood Avenue to Grunewald Street;
thence east along Grunewald Street to Western Avenue; thence south along
Western Avenue to Krueger Street; thence east along Krueger Street to Gregory
Street; thence north along Gregory Street to 122nd Street; thence east along
122nd Street to Vincennes Road; thence southerly along Vincennes Road to 123rd
Street; thence east along 123rd Street extended east to Division Street
extended north; thence south along said Division Street extended north and
Division Street to the C. R. I. & P. Railroad; thence northerly along the C. R.
I. & P. Railroad and generally counterclockwise around the east and north city
boundary to the intersection of 119th Street and Western Avenue; thence south
along Western Avenue to 121st Street; thence west along 121st Street to the
north and south alley lying between Ann Street and Maple Avenue; thence south
along north and south alleys to Cochran Street; thence west along Cochran
Street to Maple Avenue; thence south along Maple Avenue to Birdsall Street;
thence east along Birdsall Street to the north and south alley lying between
Maple Avenue and Ann Street; thence north along said alley to Lewis Street;
thence east along Lewis Street to the point of beginning;
      (6)   Sixth ward. Beginning at the intersection of 121st Street and
Western Avenue; thence; thence west along 121st Street to the north and south
alley lying between Ann Street and Maple Avenue; thence south along north and
south alleys to Cochran Street; thence west along Cochran Street to Maple
Avenue; thence south along Maple Avenue to Birdsall Street; thence west along
Birdsall Street to Elm Street; thence south along Elm Street to 127th Street;
thence west along 127th Street to California Avenue; thence north along
California to Birdsall Street extended west; thence west along Birdsall Street
extended to the G. T. & W. Railroad; thence northerly along the G. T. & W.
Railroad and generally clockwise on the west and north city boundary to the
intersection of 119th Street and Western Avenue; thence south along Western
Avenue to the point of beginning; and
      (7)   Seventh ward. Beginning at the intersection of Vermont Street and
Western Avenue; thence west along Vermont Street to Maple Avenue; thence north
along Maple Avenue to York Street; thence east along York Street to Greenwood
Avenue; thence north along Greenwood Avenue to the east and west alley lying
between Walnut Street and Oak Street; thence west along said alley to the north
and south alley lying just west of Greenwood Avenue; thence north along north
and south alleys to 127th Street; thence east along 127th Street to Greenwood
Avenue; thence north along Greenwood Avenue to Lewis Street; thence west along
Lewis Street to the north and south alley lying between Ann Street and Maple
Avenue; thence south along said alley to Birdsall Street; thence west along
Birdsall Street to Elm Street; thence south along Elm Street to 127th Street;
thence west along 127th Street to California Avenue; thence north along
California to Birdsall Street extended west; thence west along Birdsall Street
extended west to the G. T. & W. Railroad; thence south, west and east and
generally counterclockwise on the west city boundary to the intersection of
California Avenue and Vermont Street; thence east along Vermont Street to the
G. T. & W. Railroad; thence southerly along the G. T. & W. Railroad to Stony
Creek; thence southeasterly along Stony Creek to Grove Street extended west;
thence east along Grove Street to Ann Street; thence south along Ann Street to
James Street; thence east along James Street to Old Western Avenue; thence
northerly along Old Western Avenue to Grove Street; thence east along Grove
Street extended to Gregory Street; thence northerly along Gregory Street to
Vermont Street; thence east along Vermont Street to the C. R. I. & P. Railroad;
thence northerly along the C. R. I. & P. Railroad to Prairie Street; thence
west along Prairie Street to Irving Avenue; thence south along Irving Avenue to
the east and west alley lying just south of Prairie Street; thence west along
Prairie Street to Gregory Street; thence south along Gregory Street to Walnut
Street; thence west along Walnut Street to Western Avenue; thence south along
Western Avenue to the point of beginning.
   (B)   Interpretation.
      (1)   The boundaries in this section are those set forth on the official
2010 census maps published by the United States Department of Commerce, Bureau
of the Census. Where a boundary is given as a street, road or similar feature,
the boundary shall be the centerline of the street, road or similar feature.
      (2)   Any part of the city which has not been described as included in
one of the wards described in this section is included in the ward that is
contiguous to the part and that contains the least population of all wards
contiguous to the part according to the 2010 United States census.
      (3)   If any part of the city is described in this section as being in
more than one ward such part is included within the ward that:
         (a)   Is one of the wards in which that part is listed in this
section;
         (b)   Is contiguous to that part; and
         (c)   Contains the least population according to the 2010 United
States census.
      (4)   If any part of the city is described in this section as being in
one ward and is entirely surrounded by another ward, such part shall be
incorporated into the ward that surrounds the part.
      (5)   If any part of the city is described in this section as being in
one ward and is not contiguous to another part of the ward, such part is
included within the contiguous ward that contains the least population
according to the 2010 United State census.
   (C)   Newly annexed areas.
      (1)   Newly annexed areas contiguous to only one ward are part of the
ward to which they are contiguous.
      (2)   If a newly annexed area is contiguous to more than one ward, it
shall be part of the ward which contains the least population. Council shall
determine which ward contains the least population in the annexation ordinance
or by another method after the annexation is completed.
   (D)   Ward maps. The City Clerk shall cause maps showing the boundaries of
the wards established by this section to be printed in sufficient quantity to
meet demand. A copy of the map shall be available for public inspection during
regular office hours and be available for sale to the general public for the
amount indicated on the city’s fee and fine schedule. The City Clerk shall
furnish free copies of the map to the County Clerk and the public library. If
there is any discrepancy between the map and this section, this ordinance this
section is based on shall govern.
(Prior Code, § 36.01) (Ord. 96-394, passed 5-28-1996; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-
10-2015; Ord. 2016-003, passed 2-9-2016)
§ 36.02 CITY ELECTIONS.
   All city elections in the city shall be held in accordance with the
redistricting of the city as set forth in §
36.01.
(Prior Code, § 36.02) (Ord. 2021, passed 1-9-1967)
CHAPTER 37: TAXATION AND FINANCE
Section
Locally Imposed and Administered Tax
Rights and Responsibilities
   
37.001   Title
   
37.002   Scope
   
37.003   Definitions
   
37.004   Notices
   
37.005   Late payment
   
37.006   Payment
   
37.007   Certain credits and refunds
   
37.008   Audit procedure
   
37.009   Appeal
   
37.010   Hearing
   
37.011   Interest and penalties
   
37.012   Abatement
   
37.013   Installment contracts
   
37.014   Statute of limitations
   
37.015   Voluntary disclosure
   
37.016   Publication of tax ordinances
   
37.017   Internal review procedure
   
37.018   Application
   
37.019   Effective date
Municipal Service Occupation Tax
   
37.030   Service occupation tax established
   
37.031   Filing of tax report
   
37.032   Payment of tax
   
37.033   Copy of tax law to State Department of Revenue
Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax
   
37.045   Retailers’ occupation tax established
   
37.046   Filing of tax report
   
37.047   Payment of tax
   
37.048   Copy of tax law to State Department of Revenue
   
37.049   Publication of tax law
Municipal Cannabis Retailers’ Occupation Tax
   
37.060   Tax imposed
   
37.061   Tax collection
   
37.062   Records
   
37.063   Cannabis license
   
37.064   Effective date
Utility Tax
   
37.075   Definitions
   
37.076   Tax imposed
   
37.077   Persons not subject to utility tax
   
37.078   Tax in addition to payment of money
   
37.079   Tax based on gross receipts
   
37.080   Filing of return; payment of tax
   
37.081   Overpayments
   
37.082   Action to recover tax due; time limit
Fire Insurance Tax
   
37.095   Tax on fire insurance companies
   
37.096   Agent to render account
   
37.097   Agents pay tax
   
37.098   Unlawful to do business if in default
   
37.099   Proceeds for benefit of Fire Department; Treasurer’s bond
Special Assessments
   
37.110   City Treasurer to make pro-rata payment on bonds and vouchers
   
37.111   Date of payment
   
37.112   Mayor to appoint special agent
   
37.113   Quit claim deed
Local Motor Fuel Tax
   
37.125   Imposition of tax
Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax and Non-Home Rule Municipal
Service Occupation Tax
   
37.135   Imposition of tax
Municipal Grocery Retailers Occupation Tax and Municipal Grocery Service
Occupation Tax
   
37.145   Imposition of tax
 
   
37.999   Penalty
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED
TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
§ 37.001 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the “Locally Imposed
and Administered Tax Rights and Responsibility Ordinance”.
(Prior Code, § 37.001) (Ord. 00-340, passed 12-2-2000)
§ 37.002 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to the city’s procedures in
connection with all of the city’s locally imposed and administered taxes.
(Prior Code, § 37.002) (Ord. 00-340, passed 12-2-2000)
§ 37.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Local Government Taxpayer’s Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et
seq.
   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES. The Mayor and City Council.
   LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX or TAX. Each tax imposed by the city
that is collected or administered by the city not an agency or department of
the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the
Property Tax Code or fees collected by the city other than infrastructure
maintenance fees.
   LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The city’s Finance Director, is charged with the
administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes,
including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the
local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator’s stead. The
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR shall have the authority to implement the terms of this
subchapter to give full effect to this subchapter. The exercise of such
authority by the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this
subchapter and the Act.
   NOTICE. Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the city’s locally imposed and
administered taxes.
   TAX ORDINANCE. Each ordinance adopted by the city that imposes any locally
imposed and administered tax.
   TAXPAYER. Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered
tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax
is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the
city.
(Prior Code, § 37.003) (Ord. 00-340, passed 12-2-2000)
§ 37.004 NOTICES.
   Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the
notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven calendar days prior to
the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the
local tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax
administrator as follows:
   (A)   First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the
persons concerned at the persons’ last known address; or
   (B)   Personal service or delivery.
(Prior Code, § 37.004) (Ord. 00-340, passed 12-2-2000)
§ 37.005 LATE PAYMENT.
   Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the
city pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is
physically received by the city on or before the due date, or received in an
envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark dated on
or before the due date, properly addressed to the city, with adequate postage
prepaid.
(Prior Code, § 37.005) (Ord. 00-340, passed 12-2-2000)
§ 37.006 PAYMENT.
   Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the
following order: first to the tax due for the applicable period; second to the
interest due for the applicable period; and third to the penalty for the
applicable period.
(Prior Code, § 37.006) (Ord. 00-340, passed 12-2-2000)
§ 37.007 CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS.
   (A)   The city shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without
written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally imposed and
administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional by a court
of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed to have paid
the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to
protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid the taxes
under duress.
   (B)   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be
four years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was
made. The city shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties to a person who has not paid the
amounts directly to the city.
   (C)   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
      (1)   The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing
a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
         (a)   The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to
the claim;
         (b)   The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
         (c)   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the
cancelled check or receipt for the payment;
         (d)   The taxpayer’s recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
         (e)   A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and,
as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that
there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes
any monies to the city.
      (2)   Within 30 days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of any
claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
         (a)   Grant the claim; or
         (b)   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement
as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
   (C)   In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in part,
a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or credit
shall bear interest at the rate of 4% per annum, based on a year of 365 days
and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to the date of
mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit.
(Prior Code, § 37.007) (Ord. 00-340, passed 12-2-2000)
§ 37.008 AUDIT PROCEDURE.
   Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall
comply with the notice requirements of this subchapter.
   (A)   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The tax;
      (2)   The time period of the audit; and
      (3)   A brief description of the books and records to be made available
for the auditor.
   (B)   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the
date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within 30 days
after the originally designated audit and during normal business hours.
   (C)   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven days nor more than
30 days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the local
tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the event taxpayer
is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the taxpayer may
request another date within the 30 days, approved in writing, that is
convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
   (D)   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer’s
business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry
denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any
tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English
language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the city.
   (E)   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available
its books and records for inspection by the city. If the taxpayer or tax
collector fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time
provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and
assessment based on the tax administrator’s determination of the best estimate
of the taxpayer’s tax liability.
   (F)   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally
imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the
amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within 30 days of the
city’s determination of the amount of overpayment.
   (G)   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing such tax.
(Prior Code, § 37.008) (Ord. 00-340, passed 12-2-2000)
§ 37.009 APPEAL.
   (A)   The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer
upon the local tax administrator’s issuance of a protestable notice of tax due,
a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The
notice shall include the following information:
      (1)   The reason for the assessment;
      (2)   The amount of the tax liability proposed;
      (3)   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
      (4)   The obligations of the city during the audit, appeal, refund and
collection process.
   (B)   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax
administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the
local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting
forth the basis of the taxpayer’s request for a hearing. The written protest
and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within
45 days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and
assessment.
   (C)   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the
local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give
written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date
within 14 days of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing,
unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
   (D)   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the
45-day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a final
bill due and owing without further notice.
   (E)   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full
payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the
due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time
for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than 90 days after the expiration of the 45-day period.
(Prior Code, § 37.009) (Ord. 00-340, passed 12-2-2000)
§ 37.010 HEARING.
   (A)   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely protest and
petition for hearing under §
37.009, the local tax administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any
appeal.
   (B)   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance
is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted
shall not exceed 14 days.
   (C)   At the hearing, the local tax administrator shall preside and shall
hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit
or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings
shall not apply.
   (D)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall
make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the
hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the
written decision.
(Prior Code, § 37.010) (Ord. 00-340, passed 12-2-2000)
§ 37.011 INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing,
through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the
time frame otherwise indicated.
   (A)   Interest. The city hereby provides for the amount of interest to be
assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be 9%
per annum, based on a year of 365 days and the number of days elapsed.
   (B)   Late filing and payment penalties. If a tax return is not filed within
the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing
penalty of 5% of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return
shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of 5% of the tax due shall be
imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by the
controlling tax ordinance and prior to the city issuing a notice of tax
delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be
assessed equal to 25% of the total tax due for the applicable reporting period
for which the return was required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty
shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling
ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 37.011) (Ord. 00-340, passed 12-2-2000)
§ 37.012 ABATEMENT.
   The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any
late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the
local tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or
failure to make a filing.
(Prior Code, § 37.012) (Ord. 00-340, passed 12-2-2000)
§ 37.013 INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS.
   The city may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the
payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is 30 days delinquent, the taxpayer
shall have 14 working days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to
cure the delinquency within the 14-day period or fails to demonstrate good
faith in restructuring the installment contract with the local administrator,
the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the
taxpayer.
(Prior Code, § 37.013) (Ord. 00-340, passed 12-2-2000)
§ 37.014 STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.
   The city, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns
in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and
owing. The taxpayer shall have 45 days after receiving notice of the reviewed
tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still due and
owing.
   (A)   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four
years maximum after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
   (B)   If any tax return is not filed or if during any four-year period for
which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the city,
the tax paid was less than 75% of the tax due, the statute of limitations shall
be six years maximum after the end of the calendar year in which return for the
applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was filed.
   (C)   No statute of limitations shall not apply if a fraudulent tax return
was filed by the taxpayer.
(Prior Code, § 37.014) (Ord. 00-340, passed 12-2-2000)
§ 37.015 VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE.
   For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not
received a written notice of an audit, investigation or assessment from the
local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the
local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer
filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax
due, along with interest of 1% per month, for all periods prior to the filing
of the application but not more than four years before the date of filing the
application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application may not
be liable for any additional tax, interest or penalty for any period before the
date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly determined
and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid
tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the
underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case
the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment of tax and
interest must be made by no later than 90 days after the filing of the
voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to by the local tax
administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a result of an
underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this section must be
paid within 90 days after a final determination and the exhaustion of all
appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to by the local tax
administrator, whichever is longer.
(Prior Code, § 37.015) (Ord. 00-340, passed 12-2-2000)
§ 37.016 PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES.
   Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
Internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the City
Clerk’s Office.
(Prior Code, § 37.016) (Ord. 00-340, passed 12-2-2000)
§ 37.017 INTERNAL REVIEW PROCEDURE.
   The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure
regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien
shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be
improper, the local tax administrator shall:
   (A)   Timely remove the lien at the city’s expense;
   (B)   Correct the taxpayer’s credit record; and
   (C)   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.
(Prior Code, § 37.017) (Ord. 00-340, passed 12-2-2000)
§ 37.018 APPLICATION.
   (A)   This subchapter shall be liberally construed and administered to
supplement all of the city’s tax ordinances.
   (B)   To the extent that any tax ordinance is in conflict with or
inconsistent with this subchapter, this subchapter shall be controlling.
(Prior Code, § 37.018) (Ord. 00-340, passed 12-2-2000)
§ 37.019 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect after passage, approval
and publication as required by law.
(Prior Code, § 37.019) (Ord. 00-340, passed 12-2-2000)
MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
§ 37.030 SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX ESTABLISHED.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in the
business of making sales of service at the rate of 1% of the cost price of all
tangible personal property transferred by such serviceperson either in the form
of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an incident to a
sale of service, pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Service Occupation
Tax Act, 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.4.
(Prior Code, § 37.030) (Ord. 2108, passed 9-3-1969)
§ 37.031 FILING OF TAX REPORT.
   Every supplier or serviceperson required to account for municipal service
occupation tax for the benefit of the city shall file all reports as required
by 35 ILCS 115/9, to the State Department of Revenue.
(Prior Code, § 37.031) (Ord. 2108, passed 9-3-1969) Penalty, see §
37.999
§ 37.032 PAYMENT OF TAX.
   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State
Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed.
(Prior Code, § 37.032) (Ord. 2108, passed 9-3-1969) Penalty, see §
37.999
§ 37.033 COPY OF TAX LAW TO STATE DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE.
   The City Clerk is hereby directed to transmit to the State Department of
Revenue a certified copy of this chapter not later than five days after the
effective date of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 37.033) (Ord. 2108, passed 9-3-1969)
MUNICIPAL RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX
§ 37.045 RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX ESTABLISHED.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property at retail in the city, at the rate of 1% of the
gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this
chapter is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.3.
(Prior Code, § 37.045) (Ord. 2109, passed 9-3-1969)
§ 37.046 FILING OF TAX REPORT.
   Every such person engaged in the business of selling tangible personal
property at retail in the city shall file all reports as required by 35 ILCS
120/3, to the State Department of Revenue.
(Prior Code, § 37.046) (Ord. 2109, passed 9-3-1969) Penalty, see §
37.999
§ 37.047 PAYMENT OF TAX.
   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State
Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the
receipts from sales of tangible personal property during the preceding month.
(Prior Code, § 37.047) (Ord. 2109, passed 9-3-1969) Penalty, see §
37.999
§ 37.048 COPY OF TAX LAW TO STATE DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE.
   The City Clerk is hereby directed to transmit to the State Department of
Revenue a certified copy of this chapter not later than five days after the
effective date of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 37.048) (Ord. 2109, passed 9-3-1969)
§ 37.049 PUBLICATION OF TAX LAW.
   Sections 37.045 through 37.047 shall be published within 30 days of their
enactment as provided in 65 ILCS 5/1-2-4 and shall be effective from and after
10-1-1969.
(Prior Code, § 37.049) (Ord. 2109, passed 9-3-1969)
MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX
§ 37.060 TAX IMPOSED.
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions of § 8-11-22
of the Illinois Municipal Code upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling cannabis at retail in the city at a rate of 2.5% of the gross receipts
from the sales made in the course of that business.
   (B)   This tax does not apply to cannabis purchased under the Compassionate
Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act.
   (C)   This tax is in addition to all other taxes and fees imposed by the
city and state.
(Ord. 2019-045, passed 9-30-2019)
§ 37.061 TAX COLLECTION.
   (A)   The tax imposed by this subchapter and all civil penalties that may be
assessed as an incident of the tax shall be collected and enforced by the
Illinois Department of Revenue.
   (B)   Persons subject to any tax imposed under this subchapter may reimburse
themselves for their seller’s tax liability hereunder by separately stating
that tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in
a single amount, with any state tax that sellers are required to collect.
(Ord. 2019-045, passed 9-30-2019)
§ 37.062 RECORDS.
   Every person who is subject to this tax shall keep and maintain accurate and
complete documents, books and records of each transaction or activity subject
to this subchapter, from start to completion, including all original source
documents. All such books and records shall be kept by the owner and shall, at
all reasonable times during normal business hours, be open to inspection, audit
or copying by the Mayor or his/her designee.
(Ord. 2019-045, passed 9-30-2019) Penalty, see §
37.999
§ 37.063 CANNABIS LICENSE.
   If the holder of a city adult-use cannabis business license fails to remain
current in the payment of the tax imposed by this subchapter, the adult-use
cannabis business license may be suspended or revoked by the local Cannabis
Commissioner or his or her designee, or by the Mayor if the position of
Cannabis Commissioner is not established, until said tax is made current. No
adult-use cannabis may be sold from said premises until the tax has been paid.
(Ord. 2019-045, passed 9-30-2019) Penalty, see §
37.999
§ 37.064 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect upon its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law, provided, however, that the tax provided
for herein shall take effect for all sales on or after January 1, 2020. Copies
of this subchapter shall be certified and sent to the Illinois Department of
Revenue prior to September 30, 2019.
(Ord. 2019-045, passed 9-30-2019)
UTILITY TAX
§ 37.075 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GROSS RECEIPTS. The consideration received for the transmission of messages,
or for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas or electricity, for
use or consumption and not for resale, as the case may be; and for all services
rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether received in money or
otherwise, including cash, credit, services and property of every kind and
material and for all services rendered therewith; and shall be determined
without any deduction on account of the cost of transmitting said messages,
without any deduction on account of the cost of the service, product or
commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, or any
other expenses whatsoever. GROSS RECEIPTS shall not include receipts received
from the city for the sale to said municipality of any of the utility products
or services mentioned above.
   TRANSMITTING MESSAGES. In addition to the usual and popular meaning of
person to person communication, shall include the furnishing, for a
consideration, of services or facilities, whether owned or leased, or both, to
persons in connection with the transmission of messages where such persons do
not, in turn, receive any consideration in connection therewith, but shall not
include such furnishing of services or facilities to persons for the
transmission of messages to the extent that such services or facilities for the
transmission of messages are furnished for a consideration, by such persons to
other persons, for the transmission of messages.
(Prior Code, § 37.060) (Ord. 2706, passed 7-9-1985)
§ 37.076 TAX IMPOSED.
   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or
privileges:
   (A)   Persons engaged in the business of transmitting messages by means of
electricity or radio magnetic waves, or fiber optics, at the rate of 5% of the
gross receipts from such business originating within the corporate limits of
the city;
   (B)   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing
or selling gas for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the city,
and not for resale, at the rate of 5% of the gross receipts therefrom; and
   (C)   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing
or selling electricity for the use or consumption within the corporate limits
of the city, and not for resale, at the rate of 5% of the gross receipts
therefrom.
(Prior Code, § 37.061) (Ord. 2706, passed 7-9-1985; Ord. 97-186, passed 12-9-
1997)
§ 37.077 PERSONS NOT SUBJECT TO UTILITY TAX.
   No tax is imposed by this subchapter with respect to any transaction in
interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent of which such business may not,
under the Constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to
taxation by this state or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any
persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or
selling gas or electricity, or engaged in the business of transmitting messages
be subject to taxation under the provisions of this subchapter for such
transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of
the Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act authorized by 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.3.
(Prior Code, § 37.062) (Ord. 2706, passed 7-9-1985)
§ 37.078 TAX IN ADDITION TO PAYMENT OF MONEY.
   Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of products
or services furnished to this municipality by the taxpayer as compensation for
the use of its streets, alleys or other public places, or installation and
maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other
equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer’s business.
(Prior Code, § 37.063) (Ord. 2706, passed 7-9-1985)
§ 37.079 TAX BASED ON GROSS RECEIPTS.
   This subchapter shall take effect after publication and the tax provided for
hereinafter shall be based on the gross receipts, as herein defined, actually
paid to the taxpayer for services billed on or after August 1, 1985.
(Prior Code, § 37.064) (Ord. 2706, passed 7-9-1985)
§ 37.080 FILING OF RETURN; PAYMENT OF TAX.
   (A)   On or before the last day of each month, each taxpayer shall make a
return to the City Treasurer for the preceding month stating:
      (1)   Taxpayer’s name;
      (2)   Taxpayer’s principal place of business;
      (3)   Taxpayer’s gross receipts during those months upon the basis of
which the tax is imposed;
      (4)   Amount of tax; and
      (5)   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
   (B)   The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall at the time
of making such return, pay to the City Treasurer, the amount of tax herein
imposed; provided that, in connection with any return, the taxpayer may, if the
taxpayer so elects, report and pay an amount based upon the taxpayer’s total
billings of business subject to the tax during the period for which the return
is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of
later payments based upon any differences between such billings and the taxable
gross receipts.
(Prior Code, § 37.065) (Ord. 2706, passed 7-9-1985) Penalty, see §
37.999
§ 37.081 OVERPAYMENTS.
   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due
under the provisions of this subchapter, whether as the result of a mistake of
fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax
due, or to become due, under this subchapter from the taxpayer who made the
erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three
years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited.
(Prior Code, § 37.066) (Ord. 2706, passed 7-9-1985)
§ 37.082 ACTION TO RECOVER TAX DUE; TIME LIMIT.
   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this
subchapter shall be commenced more than three years after the due date of such
amount.
(Prior Code, § 37.067) (Ord. 2706, passed 7-9-1985)
FIRE INSURANCE TAX
§ 37.095 TAX ON FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES.
   All corporations, companies and associations, not incorporated under the
laws of this state, and which are engaged in the city in effecting or
soliciting fire insurance, shall pay to the City Treasurer upon the July 15 of
each and every year, a sum equal to 2% (not exceeding 2%) of the gross receipts
of premiums received by such corporation, company or association, or their
agency or agents for business effected or transacted for fire insurance within
the city for the year ending July 1, preceding such dates. The sum above named
shall be a tax or license fee upon all such corporations, companies or
associations transacting such business within the city.
(Prior Code, § 37.080) Penalty, see §
37.999
§ 37.096 AGENT TO RENDER ACCOUNT.
   Every person acting as agent or otherwise for or upon behalf of such
corporation, company or association, shall on or before July 15 of each and
every year, render to the City Clerk a full, true and just account verified by
oath, of all the premiums which during the year ending on July 1 of each year
shall have been received by the agent or any other person for the agent, in
behalf of such corporation, company, or association and shall fully and
specifically set out in such report the amount or amounts received as premiums
for fire insurance.
(Prior Code, § 37.081) Penalty, see §
37.999
§ 37.097 AGENTS PAY TAX.
   The agent or agents shall also at the time of the making of the above
mentioned report pay to the City Treasurer a sum equal to 2% of the gross
receipts of such corporation, company, or association obtained as premiums for
effecting fire insurance in the city as specified aforesaid.
(Prior Code, § 37.082) Penalty, see §
37.999
§ 37.098 UNLAWFUL TO DO BUSINESS IF IN DEFAULT.
   If such account be not rendered on or before the day herein designated for
that purpose; or if the above mentioned rates for the tax or license fee shall
remain unpaid after that day, it shall be unlawful for any such corporation,
company or association to transact any business of fire insurance in the city
until the requirements hereof have been fully complied with, nevertheless this
provision shall in no way effect the validity of any risk that may be taken in
violation thereof, between such corporation, company or association and the
person so insured.
(Prior Code, § 37.083) Penalty, see §
37.999
§ 37.099 PROCEEDS FOR BENEFIT OF FIRE DEPARTMENT; TREASURER’S BOND.
   Any and all sums so received under the provisions of §§
37.095 through
37.099, inclusive, shall be paid by the City Treasurer or to the Treasurer of
the Fire Department and shall be kept by the latter, as a fund separate and
apart from other funds in his or her hands, and shall be used for the
maintenance, use and benefit of the Fire Department of the city, provided,
however, that the Treasurer of the Fire Department shall give a sufficient bond
to the city, to be approved by the Mayor, conditioned for the faithful
performance of his or her duties under the ordinances passed by this city and
the Treasurer of the Fire Department shall receive the money so collected and
shall pay out the same, upon the order of the Fire Department, for the purposes
of the maintenance, use, and benefit of the Department.
(Prior Code, § 37.084)
SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
§ 37.110 CITY TREASURER TO MAKE PRO-RATA PAYMENT ON BONDS AND VOUCHERS.
   The City Treasurer is directed and instructed to make a pro rata payment on
account of respective outstanding bonds and vouchers issued in anticipation of
the collection of the respective installments, of such special assessments, on
account of which the monies were collected and received according to the same
as if appears from the books and records and from the audit thereof for the
fiscal year.
(Prior Code, § 37.095)
§ 37.111 DATE OF PAYMENT.
   The City Treasurer shall send notice by registered mail to the address of
the known owner of each of such bonds as set out in the Treasurer’s records
specifying a day not less than 30 days after the date of the notice, upon which
the designated bonds will be paid either in full or in part, as the case may
be, at the Treasurer’s office and the Treasurer shall also supplement such
posted notice by not less than 15 days notice by publication in a newspaper
published in this city, of the number of bonds to be so paid, the series
thereof, the assessment to which they relate and the particular bonds so
selected to be paid if payment is to be made in full or in case a pro rata
payment is to be made, naming the particular series upon which the partial
payment is to be made, and that the same will be paid at a place to be
specified in the notice.
(Prior Code, § 37.096)
§ 37.112 MAYOR TO APPOINT SPECIAL AGENT.
   The Mayor is authorized and empowered, subject to the control and approval
of the Committee on Finance of the City Council, to appoint an agent, who shall
attend all tax sales and bid on all property subject to sale on account of
delinquent special assessments, in which the city is interested and to purchase
same for and on behalf of the city in default of other bidders, also to make
such contract or contracts as may be necessary or desirable by one or more
persons, who shall receive as compensation for their services such fees,
commissions or percentage of collections or proceeds as the Committee on
Finance may determine, whose duties shall be to dispose of all tax certificates
and tax deeds which the city has acquired or may hereafter acquire, by reason
of such tax sale, to prevent resale and forfeiture of penalties accruing to the
city, to serve the notices required by law, to secure tax deeds, within
statutory period, and to protect the city’s interests in all matters growing
out of such sales.
(Prior Code, § 37.097)
§ 37.113 QUIT CLAIM DEED.
   In all cases where the city has acquired or may hereafter acquire a tax
deed, by reason of sales for delinquent special assessments, in case same can
be disposed of for the amount shown on the face thereof to have been paid for
same by the city, together with the expense of obtaining the deed, and not less
than 5% interest from the date of such sale, upon the recommendations of the
Mayor and the committee on finance, the Mayor and City Clerk shall execute a
quit claim deed for the property described in the deed, or such parts thereof,
as can be so disposed of.
(Prior Code, § 37.098)
LOCAL MOTOR FUEL TAX
§ 37.125 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the city in the business
of selling motor fuel, as defined in the Motor Fuel Tax Law, being 35 ILCS 505/
1 et seq., at retail for the operation of motor vehicles upon public highways
or for recreational watercraft upon waterways at a rate of $0.03 per gallon of
motor fuel sold at retail in the municipality for the purpose of use or
consumption and not for the purpose of resale. This tax shall be collected and
discharged in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2.3.
(Ord. 2020-012, passed 3-10-2020)
NON-HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX AND NON-HOME RULE MUNICIPAL
SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
§ 37.135 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   (A)   That the recitals and legislative findings laid out in Ord. 2025-001
are found to be true and correct and are hereby incorporated herein and made a
part hereof, as if fully set forth in their entirety.
   (B)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal
property titled or registered with an agency of this state's government, at
retail in this municipality at the rate of 1.00% of the gross receipts from
such sales made in the course of such business while this section is in effect.
The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the provisions
of § 8-11-1.3 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.3).
   (C)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality
in the business of making sales of service, of the selling price of all
tangible personal property transferred by such serviceman as an incident to a
sale of service. The rate of this tax shall be the same rate identified in
division (B) above. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and
subject to the provisions of § 8-11-1.4 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS
5/8-11-1.4).
   (D)   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed
as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of
Revenue of the State of Illinois. The Department of Revenue shall have full
power to administer and enforce the provisions of this section.
   (E)   As required under § 8-11-1.3 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS
5/8-11-1.3), the City Clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of Ord.
2025-001 with the Illinois Department of Revenue on or before April 1, 2025.
   (F)   This section shall take effect on: (i) the first day of July next
following the adoption and filing of Ord. 2025-001 with the Department of
Revenue, if filed on or before the preceding April 1; or, (ii) the first day of
January next following the adoption and filing of Ord. 2025-001 with the
Department of Revenue, if filed on or before the preceding October 1.
   (G)   The city shall only expend the proceeds generated from any tax imposed
by virtue of this section on: (a) expenditures related to “municipal roads and
streets, access roads, bridges, and sidewalks; waste disposal systems; and
water and sewer line extensions, water distribution and purification
facilities, storm water drainage and retention facilities, and sewage treatment
facilities”; (b) efforts to "reduce the levy for real estate taxes or avoid an
increase in the levy for real estate taxes that would otherwise have been
required" by the city; or (c) any other or further permitted uses under § 8-11-
1 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1) as may now or hereafter be
authorized therein.
   (H)   No provision of this section shall be interpreted to impose any tax on
aviation fuel, as defined in Section 3 of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act (35
ILCS 120/3), unless the proceeds of said tax are expended for airport-related
purposes, as that term is defined in Section 6z-20.2 of the State Finance Act
(30 ILCS 105/6z-20.2), and said expenditures are made in compliance with the
certification requirements for airport-related purposes under Section 2-22 of
the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act (35 ILCS 120/2-22).
(Ord. 2025-001, passed 1-28-2025)
MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX AND MUNICIPAL GROCERY SERVICE
OCCUPATION TAX
§ 37.145 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   (A)   That the recitals and legislative findings in Ord. 2025-002 are found
to be true and correct and are hereby incorporated herein and made a part
hereof, as if fully set forth in their entirety.
   (B)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling groceries at retail in this municipality at the rate of 1% of the gross
receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this section
is in effect. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to
the provisions of § 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24).
   (C)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality
in the business of making sales of service, who, as an incident to making those
sales of service, transfer groceries as an incident to a sale of service. The
rate of this tax shall be the same rate identified in division (B) above. The
imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the provisions of §
8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24).
   (D)   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed
as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of
Revenue of the State of Illinois. The Department of Revenue shall have full
power to administer and enforce the provisions of this section.
   (E)   As required under § 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/
8-11-24), the City Clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of Ord.
2025-002 with the Illinois Department of Revenue on or before April 1, 2025.
   (F)   The taxes imposed by Ord. 2025-002 shall take effect on the later of:
(i) January 1, 2026; (ii) the first day of July next following the adoption and
filing of Ord. 2025-002 with the Department of Revenue, if filed on or before
the preceding April 1; or, (iii) the first day of January next following the
adoption and filing of Ord. 2025-002 with the Department of Revenue, if filed
on or before the preceding October 1.
(Ord. 2025-002, passed 1-28-2025)
§ 37.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent
return, or who willfully violates any other provision of §§
37.030 through
37.033 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $750, and in addition shall be
liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due.
   (C)   If any corporation, company or association not incorporated in the
city, and engaged in the city in effecting or soliciting fire insurance shall
fail to render the account or report designated in §
37.096 of this chapter, by the day required, or if the above mentioned rates,
as a tax license fee, shall remain unpaid after that day designated, to-wit:
July 15, every such corporation, company or association shall forfeit and pay
to the city the sum of $200, upon conviction for each and every offense, and in
addition to such penalty, the city shall recover in an action in its name, for
its use, against such corporation, company or association, so failing to make
such report, or pay such license fee or tax, the full amount of the license fee
or tax, which would be due under the provisions hereof.
(Prior Code, § 37.999)
CHAPTER 38: INVESTMENT POLICY
Section
   
38.01   Policy
   
38.02   Scope
   
38.03   Definitions
   
38.04   Prudence required
   
38.05   Objectives
   
38.06   Delegation of authority
   
38.07   Ethics and conflicts of interest
   
38.08   Authorized financial dealers and institutions
   
38.09   Authorized and suitable investments
   
38.10   Collateralization
   
38.11   Safekeeping and custody
   
38.12   Diversification
   
38.13   Maximum maturities
   
38.14   Internal controls
   
38.15   Performance standards
   
38.16   Reporting
   
38.17   Investment policy adoption
   
Appendix A:   Investment Firm Certification Form
   
Appendix B:   Use of Derivatives by State and Local Governments
   
Appendix C:   Collateralization of Public Deposits
   
Appendix D:   Public Body-Financial Institution Security and Custody Agreement
   
Appendix E:   Internal Controls
   
Appendix F:   Mark-to-Market Practices for State and Local Government
Investment Portfolios and Investment Pools
§ 38.01 POLICY.
   It is the policy of the city to prudently invest public funds in a manner
which will provide the highest investment return with the maximum security
while meeting the daily cash flow demands of the city and conforming to all
state statutes governing the investment of public funds.   
(Prior Code, § 38.01) (Ord. 99-286, passed 12-14-1999)
§ 38.02 SCOPE.
   (A)   This investment policy applies to all financial assets of the city.
The financial assets of the Police and Firefighter’s Pension Funds are subject
to the orders of their respective Boards of Trustees. The following funds are
accounted for in the city’s comprehensive annual financial report and include:
2.1 Funds
   2.1.General Fund
   2.1.Special Revenue Funds
   2.1.Capital Project Funds
   2.1.Debt Service Funds
   2.1.Enterprise Funds
   2.1.Trust and Agency Funds
   2.1.(Any new fund created by the City Council, unless specifically
          exempt)
 
(Prior Code, § 38.02) (Ord. 99-286, passed 12-14-1999)
§ 38.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENCIES. Informal name that refers to securities issued by the United
States government and U.S. government-sponsored agencies.
   ASKED. The trading price proposed by the prospective seller of securities.
Also called the offer or offered price.
   BANKER’S ACCEPTANCE (BA). A short-term financial instrument that is the
unconditional obligation of the accepting bank.
   BASIS POINT (BP). A unit of measurement for interest rates or yields that
are expressed in percentages. (One hundred basis points equal 1%.)
   BID. The trading price acceptable to a prospective buyer of securities.
   BOND EQUIVALENT YIELD (BEY). An annual yield, expressed as a percentage,
describing the return provided to bond holders. The BEY is a way to compare
yields available from discount securities such as treasury bills and BAs with
yields available from coupon securities.
   BROKER. A party who brings buyers and sellers together. BROKERS do not take
ownership of the property being traded. They are compensated by commissions.
They are not the same as dealers; however, the same individuals and firms that
act as brokers in some transactions may act as dealers in other transactions.
   CERTIFICATE OF DEPOSIT (CD). A deposit of funds, in a bank or savings and
loan association, for a specific term that earns interest at a specified rate
or rate formula. CDs may be secured or unsecured, may be in negotiable or
nonnegotiable form and may be issued in either physical or book entry form.
   COLLATERAL. Securities, evidence of deposit or other property which a
borrower pledges to secure repayment of a loan. Also refers to securities
pledged by a bank to secure deposits of public monies.
   COMMERCIAL PAPER (CP). Unsecured, short-term promissory notes issued by
corporations for specific amounts and with specific maturity dates.
   COMPREHENSIVE ANNUAL FINANCIAL REPORT (CAFR). The official annual report for
the city. It includes five combined statements and basic financial statements
for each individual fund and account group prepared in conformity with GAAP. It
also includes supporting schedules necessary to demonstrate compliance with
finance-related legal and contractual provisions, extensive introductory
material and a detailed statistical section.
   COUPON.
      (1)   The annual rate of interest that a bond’s issuer promises to pay
the bondholder on the bond’s face value.
      (2)   A certificate attached to a bond evidencing interest due on a
payment date.
   DEALER. A firm or individual who buys and sells for their own account.
Dealers have ownership between a purchase from one party and a sale to another
party. Dealers are compensated by the spread between the price they pay and the
price they receive.
   DEBENTURE. A bond secured only by the general credit of the issuer.
   DELIVERY VERSUS PAYMENT (DVP). The simultaneous exchange of securities and
cash. The safest method of settling either the purchase or sale of a security.
In a DVP settlement, the funds are wired from the buyer’s account and the
security is delivered from the seller’s account in simultaneous independent
wires.
   DISCOUNT. The amount by which the price for a security is less than its par.
   DISCOUNT SECURITIES. Securities that do not pay periodic interest. Investors
earn the difference between the discount issue price and the full face value
paid at maturity. Treasury bills, banker’s acceptances and zero coupon bonds
are DISCOUNT SECURITIES.
   DIVERSIFICATION. Dividing investment funds among a variety of securities
offering independent returns.
   FEDERAL CREDIT AGENCIES. Agencies of the federal government set up to supply
credit to various classes of institutions and individuals, such as, S & L’s,
small business firms, students, farmers, farm cooperatives and exporters.
   FEDERAL DEPOSIT OF INSURANCE CORPORATION (FDIC). A federal agency that
insures bank deposits, currently up to $250,000 per deposit.
   FEDERAL FUNDS RATE. The rate for which overnight federal funds are traded.
   FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANKS (FHLB). The institutions that regulate and lend to
savings and loan associations. The federal home loan banks play a role
analogous to that played by the federal reserve banks vis-a-vis member
commercial banks.
   FEDERAL NATIONAL MORTGAGE ASSOCIATION (FNMA or FANNIE MAE). FNMA is a
federal corporation working under the auspices of the Department of Housing and
Urban Development, HUD. It is the largest single provider of residential
mortgage funds in the United States. Fannie Mae, as the corporation is called,
is a private stockholder- owned corporation. The corporation’s purchases
include a variety of adjustable mortgages and second loans in addition to
fixed-rate mortgages. FNMA assumes and guarantees that all security holders
will receive timely payment of principal and interest.
   FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE (FOMC). Consists of seven members of the
Federal Reserve Board and five of the 12 Federal Reserve Bank presidents. The
President of the New York Federal Reserve Bank is a permanent member while the
other presidents serve on a rotation basis. The Committee periodically meets to
set Federal Reserve guidelines regarding purchases and sales of government
securities in the open market as a means of influencing the volume of bank
credit and money.
   FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM. The central bank of the United States created by
Congress and consisting of a seven-member Board of Governors in Washington,
D.C., 12 regional banks and about 5,700 commercial banks that are members of
the system.
   GOVERNMENT NATIONAL MORTGAGE ASSOCIATION (GNMA or GINNIE MAE). GNMA, like
FNMA, was chartered under the Federal National Mortgage Association Act of
1938. Securities guaranteed by GNMA and issued by mortgage bankers, commercial
banks, savings and loan associations and other institutions. Security holder is
protected by full faith and credit of the U.S. government. Ginnie Mae
securities are backed by FHA, VA or FMHM mortgages. The term passthroughs is
often used to describe Ginnie Maes.
   INTERNAL CONTROLS. Must be designed to ensure that the assets of the city
are protected from loss, theft or misuse. The internal control structure should
be designed to provide reasonable assurance that these objectives are met. The
concept of reasonable assurance recognizes that the cost of a control should
not exceed the benefits likely to be derived and the valuation of costs and
benefits requires estimates and judgments by management. Internal controls
should address the following points.
      (1)   Control of collusion. Collusion is a situation where two or more
employees are working in conjunction to defraud their employer.
      (2)   Separation of transaction authority from accounting and record
keeping. By separating the person who authorizes or performs the transaction
from the people who record or otherwise account for the transaction, a
separation of duties is achieved.
      (3)   Custodial safekeeping. Securities purchased from any bank or dealer
including appropriate collateral (as defined by state law) shall be placed with
an independent third party for custodial safekeeping.
      (4)   Avoidance of physical delivery securities. Book-entry securities
are much easier to transfer and account for since actual delivery of a document
never takes place. Delivered securities must be properly safeguarded against
loss or destruction. The potential for fraud and loss increases with physically
delivered securities.
      (5)   Clear delegation of authority to subordinate staff members.
Subordinate staff members must have a clear understanding of their authority
and responsibilities to avoid improper actions. Clear delegation of authority
also preserves the internal control structure that is contingent on the various
staff positions and their respective responsibilities.
      (6)   Written confirmations or telephone transactions for investments and
wire transactions. Due to the potential for error and improprieties arising
from telephone transactions, all telephone transactions should be supported by
written communications and approved by the appropriate person. Written
communications may be via fax if on letterhead and if the safekeeping
institution has a list of authorized signatures.
      (7)   Development of a wire transfer agreement with the lead bank or
third party custodian. The designated official should ensure that an agreement
will be entered into and will address the following points: controls, security
provisions, and responsibilities of each party making and receiving wire
transfers.
   LIQUIDITY. A liquid asset is one that can be readily converted to cash
through sale in an active secondary market.
   LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT POOL (LGIP). Pools through which governmental
entities may invest short term cash. Examples of LGIP’s are the Illinois Funds,
administered by the Illinois State Treasurer and the Illinois Metropolitan
Investment Fund.
   MARKET VALUE. The price at which a security could presumably be purchased or
sold.
   MARK TO MARKET. The process of restating the carrying value of an asset or
liability to equal its current market value.
   MASTER REPURCHASE AGREEMENT. A written contract covering all future
transactions between the parties to repurchase - reverse repurchase agreements
that establishes each party’s rights in the transactions. A MASTER AGREEMENT
will often specify, among other things, the right of the buyer-lender to
liquidate the underlying securities in the event of default of the seller-
borrower.
   MATURITY. The date upon which the principal or stated value of an investment
becomes due and payable.
   MONEY MARKET. The aggregation of buyers and sellers actively trading money
market instruments.
   OFFER OF OFFERED PRICE. The trading price proposed by the prospective seller
of securities (also called the asked or asking price).
   OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS. Purchases and sales of government and certain other
securities in the open market by the New York Federal Reserve Bank as directed
by the FOMC in order to influence the volume of money and credit in the
economy. Purchases inject reserves into the bank system and stimulate growth of
money and credit; sales have the opposite effect. OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS are
the Federal Reserve’s most important and most flexible monetary policy tool.
   PORTFOLIO. Collection of financial assets belonging to a single owner.
   PREMIUM. The amount by which the price for a security is greater than its
par amount.
   PRIMARY DEALER. A group of government securities dealers that submit daily
reports of market activity and positions and monthly financial statements to
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and are subject to its informal oversight.
Primary dealers include Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)-registered
securities broker-dealers, banks and a few unrelated firms.
   PRUDENT PERSON RULE. An investment standard. In some states, the law
requires that a fiduciary, such as a trustee, may invest money only in a list
of securities selected by the state - the so-called legal list. In other
states, the trustee may invest in a security if it is one which would be bought
by a prudent person of discretion and intelligence who is seeking a reasonable
income and preservation of capital.
   QUALIFIED PUBLIC DEPOSITORIES. A financial institution which does not claim
exemption from the payment of any sales or compensating use or ad valorem taxes
under the laws of this state, which has segregated for the benefit of the
commission eligible collateral having a value of not less than its maximum
liability and which has been approved by the Public Deposit Protection
Commission to hold public deposits.
   RATE OF RETURN. The yield obtainable on a security based on its purchase
price or its current market price. This may be the amortized yield to maturity
on a bond or the current income return.
   REINVESTMENT RISK. The risk that all or part of the principal may be
received when interest rates are lower than when the security was originally
purchased, so that the principal must be reinvested at a lower rate than the
rate originally received by the investor.
   REPURCHASE AGREEMENT (RP or REPO). A holder of securities sells these
securities to an investor with an agreement to repurchase them at a fixed price
on a fixed date. The security “buyer” in effect lends the “seller” money for
the period of the agreement, and the terms of the agreement are structured to
compensate him or her for this. Dealers use RP extensively to finance their
positions. Exception: When the Fed is said to be doing RP, it is lending money,
that is, increasing bank reserves.
   SAFEKEEPING. A service rendered by banks whereby securities and valuables of
all types and descriptions are held by the bank.
   SEC RULE 15C3-1. See UNIFORM NET CAPITAL RULE.
   SECONDARY MARKET. Markets for the purchase and sale of any previously issued
financial instrument.
   SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC). The federal agency with
responsibility for regulating financial exchanges for cash instruments.
   SPREAD OVER TREASURIES. The difference between the bond equivalent yield for
any investment and the bond equivalent yield for a treasury investment with the
same maturity.
   TREASURY BILLS (T-BILLS). Short-term obligations issued by the U.S. Treasury
for maturities of one year or less. They do not pay interest but are issued on
a discount basis instead.
   TREASURY BOND (T-BONDS). Long-term obligations issued by the U.S. Treasury
with initial maturities of more than ten years.
   TREASURY NOTES (T-NOTES). Medium-term obligations issued by the U.S.
Treasury with initial maturities of from one to ten years.
   UNIFORM NET CAPITAL RULE. Securities and Exchange Commission requirement
that member firms as well as non-member broker dealers in securities maintain a
maximum ratio of indebtedness to liquid capital of 15 to 1; also called net
capital rule and net capital ratio. Indebtedness covers all money owed to a
firm including margin loans and commitments to purchase securities, one reason
new public issues are spread among members of underwriting syndicate. Liquid
capital includes cash and assets easily converted to cash.
   YIELD. Loosely refers to the annual return on an investment expressed as a
percentage on an annual basis. For interest-bearing securities, the yield is a
function of the rate, the purchase price, the income that can be earned from
the reinvestment of income received prior to maturity, call or sale. Different
formulas or methods are used to calculate YIELDS.
(Prior Code, § 38.03) (Ord. 99-286, passed 12-14-1999)
§ 38.04 PRUDENCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under circumstances
then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and intelligence
exercise in the management of their own affairs, not for speculation, but for
investment, considering the probable safety of their capital, as well as the
probable income to be derived.
   (B)   The standard of prudence to be used by investment officials shall be
the “prudent person” standard and shall be applied in the context of managing
an overall portfolio. Investment officers acting in accordance with written
procedures and the investment policy and exercising due diligence shall be
relieved of personal responsibility for an individual security’s credit risk or
market price changes, provided deviations from expectations are reported in a
timely fashion and appropriate action is taken to control adverse developments.
(Prior Code, § 38.04) (Ord. 99-286, passed 12-14-1999)
§ 38.05 OBJECTIVES.
   The primary objectives, in priority order of the city’s investment
activities shall be:
   (A)   Legality. Investments of the city will be made in conformance with
federal and state laws, as well as complying with local ordinances and internal
policies.
   (B)   Safety. Safety of principal is the foremost objective of the
investment program. Investments of the city shall be undertaken in a manner
that seeks to insure the preservation of capital in the portfolio.
      (1)   Credit risk. Credit risk is the risk of loss due to the failure of
the security issuer or backer. Credit risk may be mitigated by:
         (a)   Limiting investments to the safest types of securities;
         (b)   Pre-qualifying the financial institutions, broker/dealers,
intermediaries and advisers with which the city will do business; and
         (c)   Diversifying the investment portfolio so that potential losses
on individual securities will be minimized.
      (2)   Interest rate risk. Interest rate risk is the risk that the market
value of securities in the portfolio will fall due to changes in general
interest rates. Interest rate risk may be mitigated by:
         (a)   Structuring the investment portfolio so that securities mature
to meet cash requirements for ongoing operations, thereby avoiding the need to
sell securities on the open market prior to maturity; and
         (b)   By investing operating funds primarily in shorter-term
securities.
   (C)   Liquidity. The investment portfolio shall remain sufficiently liquid
to meet all operating requirements that may be reasonably anticipated. This is
accomplished by structuring the portfolio so that securities mature concurrent
with cash needs to meet anticipated demands. Furthermore, since all possible
cash demands cannot be anticipated, the portfolio should consist largely of
securities with active secondary markets.
   (D)   Return on investments. Return on investment is of tertiary concern
when compared to the safety and liquidity objectives described above. The
investment portfolio shall be designed with the objective of attaining a market
rate of return throughout budgetary and economic cycles, taking into account
the investment risk constraints and liquidity needs. Investments are limited to
very low risk securities in anticipation of earning a fair return relative to
the risk being assumed. Securities shall not be sold prior to maturity with the
following exceptions:
      (1)   A declining credit security could be sold early to minimize loss of
principal;
      (2)   A security swap would improve the quality yield or target duration
in the portfolio; or
      (3)   Liquidity needs of the portfolio require that the security be sold.
(Prior Code, § 38.05) (Ord. 99-286, passed 12-14-1999)
§ 38.06 DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.
   Authority to manage the city’s investment program is derived from the
following: the establishment of investment policies is the responsibility of
the City Council. Management and administrative responsibility for the
investment program is hereby delegated to the Finance Director who, under the
direction of the Chief of Staff, shall establish written procedures for the
operation of the investment program consistent with this investment policy.
Procedures should include references to: safekeeping, delivery vs. payment,
investment accounting, repurchase agreements, wire transfer agreements,
collateral/depository agreements and banking service contracts. Such procedures
shall include explicit delegation of authority to persons responsible for
investment transactions. No person may engage in an investment transaction
except as provided under the terms of this policy and the procedures
established by the Finance Director. The Finance Director shall be responsible
for all transactions undertaken and shall establish a system of controls to
regulate the activities of subordinate officials. The Finance Director may from
time to time amend the written procedures in a manner not inconsistent with
this policy or with state statutes.
(Prior Code, § 38.06) (Ord. 99-286, passed 12-14-1999)
§ 38.07 ETHICS AND CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
   Individuals involved in the investment process shall refrain from personal
business activity that could conflict with the proper execution and management
of the investment program, or that could impair their ability to make impartial
decisions. Individuals involved in the investment process shall disclose any
interests in financial institutions with which they conduct business. In
addition, such individuals shall disclose any personal financial/investment
positions that could be related to the performance of the investment portfolio.
Individuals involved in the investment process shall refrain from undertaking
personal investment transactions with the same individual with whom business is
conducted on behalf of the city.
(Prior Code, § 38.07) (Ord. 99-286, passed 12-14-1999)
§ 38.08 AUTHORIZED FINANCIAL DEALERS AND INSTITUTIONS.
   (A)   The Finance Director will maintain a list of financial institutions
authorized to provide investment services. In addition, a list will also be
maintained of approved security broker/dealers. These may include “primary”
dealers or regional dealers that qualify under Securities and Exchange
Commission Rule 15C3-1 (uniform net capital rule). No public deposit shall be
made except on qualified public depository as established by state statutes.
   (B)   All financial institutions and broker/dealers who desire to become
approved bidders for investment transactions must supply the Finance Director
with the following:
      (1)   Audited financial statements;
      (2)   Proof of National Association of Security Dealers (NASD)
certification;
      (3)   Proof of state registration; and
      (4)   Certification of having read the city’s investment policy (see
Appendix A).
   (C)   An annual review of the financial condition and registration of
qualified bidders will be conducted by the Finance Director.
   (D)   A current audited financial statement must be on file for each
financial institution and broker/dealer through which the city invests.
(Prior Code, § 38.08) (Ord. 99-286, passed 12-14-1999)
§ 38.09 AUTHORIZED AND SUITABLE INVESTMENTS.
   The city may invest in any type of security allowed for in state statutes
regarding the investment of public funds. Current approved investments include:
   (A)   Bonds, notes, certificates of indebtedness, treasury bills, treasury
strips or other securities, including obligation of the Governmental National
Mortgage Association, (GNMA), which are guaranteed by the full faith and credit
of the government of the United States of America, or other similar obligations
of the United States of America or its agencies;
   (B)   Interest bearing savings accounts, interest bearing certificates of
deposit or interest bearing time deposits or any other investment constituting
direct obligations of any institution as defined by the Illinois Banking Act,
being 205 ILCS 5/1 et seq., and is insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation;
   (C)   The Illinois Funds, including the Illinois Public Treasurer’s
Investment Pool, (IPTIP);
   (D)   Short-term obligations of corporations (banker’s acceptances and
commercial paper) organized in the United States with assets exceeding
$500,000,000 and rated at the time of purchase at the highest classification
established by at least two standard rating services. Such investments must
mature within 180 days from the date of purchase and may not exceed 10% of the
corporations outstanding obligations. No more than a combined 33% of the city’s
funds may be invested in banker’s acceptances or commercial paper at any given
time;
   (E)   Short-term discount obligations of the Federal National Mortgage
Association (FNMA) or in shares of other forms of securities legally issued by
savings and loan associations incorporated under the laws of this state or any
other state or under the laws of the United States. Investments may be made
only in those savings and loan associations of which the shares, or investment
certificates are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC);
and
   (F)   Consistent with the GFOA Recommended Practice on Use of Derivatives by
State and Local Government, (see Appendix B), extreme caution should be
exercised in the use of derivative instruments.
(Prior Code, § 38.09) (Ord. 99-286, passed 12-14-1999)
§ 38.10 COLLATERALIZATION.
   (A)   It is the policy of the city and in accordance with the GFOA’s
recommended practices on the collateralization of public deposits, (see
Appendix C), that the city requires that funds on deposit in excess of FDIC
limits be secured by some form of collateral. The city will accept any of the
following assets as collateral:
      (1)   Government securities;
      (2)    Obligations of federal agencies;
      (3)   Obligations of federal instrumentalities; and
      (4)   Obligations of the state.
   (B)   The city reserves the right to accept/reject any form of the above
named securities.
   (C)   The city also requires that all depositories that hold city deposits
in excess of the FDIC limit must agree to utilize the city’s collateralization
agreement, (see Appendix C).
   (D)   The amount of collateral provided will not be less than 110% of the
fair market value of the net amount of public funds secured. The ratio of fair
market value of collateral to the amount of funds secured will be reviewed
monthly, and additional collateral will be required when the ratio declines
below the level required and collateral will be released if the fair market
value exceeds the required level. Pledged collateral will be held in
safekeeping, by an independent third party depository, or the Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago, designated by the city and evidenced by a safekeeping
agreement. Collateral agreements will preclude the release of the pledged
assets without an authorized signature from the city. The city realizes that
there is a cost factor involved with collateralization and the city will pay
any reasonable and customary fees related to collateralization.
(Prior Code, § 38.10) (Ord. 99-286, passed 12-14-1999)
§ 38.11 SAFEKEEPING AND CUSTODY.
   All security transactions, including collateral for repurchase agreements,
entered into by the city shall be conducted on a delivery-verses-payment (DVP)
basis. Securities will be held by a third party custodian designated by the
Finance Director and evidenced by safekeeping receipts and a written custodial
agreement (see Appendix D).
(Prior Code, § 38.11) (Ord. 99-286, passed 12-14-1999)
§ 38.12 DIVERSIFICATION.
   (A)   The city shall diversify its investments to the best of its ability
based on the types of funds invested and the cash flow needs of those funds.
   (B)   In order to reduce the risk of default, the investment portfolio of
the city shall not exceed the following diversification limits unless
specifically authorized by the City Council:
      (1)   Monies deposited at a financial institution shall not exceed 75% of
the capital stock and surplus of that institution;
      (2)   Commercial paper shall not exceed 33% of the city’s investment
portfolio;
      (3)   Deposits in the Illinois Public Treasurer’s Investment Pool shall
not exceed 66% of the city’s investment portfolio; or
      (4)   Brokered certificates of deposit shall not exceed 25% of the city’s
investment portfolio.
(Prior Code, § 38.12) (Ord. 99-286, passed 12-14-1999)
§ 38.13 MAXIMUM MATURITIES.
   (A)   To the extent possible, the city will attempt to match its investments
with anticipated cash flow requirements. Unless matched to a specific
anticipated expenditure, the city will not directly invest in securities
maturing more than three years from the date of purchase.
   (B)   Reserve funds may be invested in securities exceeding three years if
the maturity of such investments are made to coincide as nearly as practicable
with the expected use of the funds.
(Prior Code, § 38.13) (Ord. 99-286, passed 12-14-1999)
§ 38.14 INTERNAL CONTROLS.
   (A)   The Finance Director is responsible for establishing and maintaining
an internal control structure designed to insure that the assets of the city
are protected from loss, theft or misuse. The internal control structure shall
be designed to provide reasonable assurance that these objectives are met. The
concept of reasonable assurance recognizes that the cost of the control should
not exceed the benefits likely to be derived; and the valuation of costs and
benefits require estimates and judgments by management.
   (B)   Accordingly, the Finance Director shall establish a process for annual
independent review by an external auditor to assure compliance with policies
and procedures.
   (C)   The internal controls (see Appendix E) shall address the following
points:
      (1)   Control of collusion;
      (2)   Separation of transaction authority from accounting and record
keeping;
      (3)   Custodial safekeeping;
      (4)   Avoidance of physical delivery securities;
      (5)   Clear delegation of authority to subordinate staff members;
      (6)   Written confirmation of telephone transactions for investments and
wire transfers; and
      (7)   Development of a procedure for making wire transfers.
(Prior Code, § 38.14) (Ord. 99-286, passed 12-14-1999)
§ 38.15 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Generally. The investment portfolio will be managed in accordance with
the parameters specified within this chapter. The portfolio should obtain a
market average rate of return during a market/economic environment of stable
interest rates. Portfolio performance should be compared to appropriate
benchmarks on a regular basis.
   (B)   Market yield (benchmark). The city’s investment strategy is passive.
Given this strategy, the basis used by the Finance Director to determine
whether market yields are being achieved shall be the three-month U.S. Treasury
Bill.
(Prior Code, § 38.15) (Ord. 99-286, passed 12-14-1999)
§ 38.16 REPORTING.
   (A)   Generally. The Finance Director shall prepare an investment report at
least monthly, including a succinct management summary that provides a clear
picture of the status of the current investment portfolio. This management
summary will be prepared in a manner which will allow the city to ascertain
whether investment activities during the reporting period have conformed to the
investment policy. The report should be provided to the Chief of Staff, City
Council and available for review by the general public. The report may include
the following:
      (1)   A listing of individual securities or accounts held at the end of
the reporting period;
      (2)   Listing of investments by maturity date;
      (3)   The percentage of the total portfolio which each type of investment
represents;
      (4)   The percentage of the total portfolio which each institution is
holding;
      (5)   The percentage of the total portfolio broken down by defined
maturity periods; and
      (6)   Principal and type of investment by fund.
   (B)   Marking to market. A statement of the market value of the portfolio
shall be issued at least quarterly. This will ensure that the minimal amount of
review has been performed on the investment portfolio in terms of value and
subsequent price volatility. Review should be consistent with the GFOA
Recommended Practice on Mark-to-Market Practices for State and Local Government
Investment Portfolios and Investment Pools (see Appendix F).
(Prior Code, § 38.16) (Ord. 99-286, passed 12-14-1999)
§ 38.17 INVESTMENT POLICY ADOPTION.
   The city’s investment policy shall be adopted by resolution of the city.
This chapter shall be reviewed on an annual basis by the Finance Director and
any modifications made thereto must be approved by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 38.17) (Ord. 99-286, passed 12-14-1999)
APPENDIX A: INVESTMENT FIRM CERTIFICATION FORM
   CITY OF BLUE ISLAND, ILLINOIS
   DIRECTOR OF FINANCE
   INVESTMENT FIRM CERTIFICATION FORM
As an authorized account representative for
_______________________________________________, I hereby certify that I have
personally read and understand the investment policies of the City of Blue
Island, Illinois, in such form as said policies of the City were provided to
me. I agree to abide by said policy in all transactions between myself, on
behalf of the above referenced firm, and the City and further agree to
undertake reasonable efforts to preclude imprudent transactions involving the
City’s funds.
Authorized Account Representative
______________________________________         ________________________________________
(Signature)                              (Title)
______________________________________         ________________________________________
(Name - Printed)                           (Date)
(Prior Code, Ch. 38, App. A) (Ord. 99-286, passed 12-14-1999)
APPENDIX B: USE OF DERIVATIVES BY STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS
   GOVERNMENT FINANCE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION
   Recommended Practice
   Use of Derivatives by State and Local Governments
   A derivative is a financial instrument created from or whose value depends
on (is derived from) the value of one or more underlying assets or indexes of
asset values. The term “derivative products” refers to instruments or features
such as collateralized mortgage obligations (CMO’s), interest-only (IOs) and
principal-only (POs), forwards, futures, currency and interest swaps, options,
floaters/inverse floaters and caps/floors/collars. State and local governments
are potential users of derivatives in their roles as debt, cash and pension
fund managers.
   The Government Finance Officers Association (GFOA) urges government finance
officers to exercise extreme caution in the use of derivative instruments and
to consider their use only when they have developed a sufficient understanding
of the products and the expertise to manage them. Because new derivative
products are increasingly complex, state and local governments considering
derivatives should use these instruments only if they can evaluate the
following factors, among others, to determine the appropriateness of derivative
use for their jurisdiction:
   1.   Government entities must observe the objectives of sound asset and
liability management policies that ensure safety, liquidity and yield. Because
of the risks involved, the use of derivatives by government entities should
receive particular scrutiny. Certain derivative products may not be appropriate
for all government investors. Characteristics of such products can include:
      •   High price volatility;
      •   Illiquid markets;
      •    Products that are not market-tested;
      •    Highly leveraged products;
      •    Products requiring a high degree of sophistication to manage; and
      •    Products that are difficult to value.
   2.   Government entities should understand that state and local laws may not
specifically address the use of derivatives. Therefore, analysis should include
an examination of considerations, such as:
      •    The constitutional and statutory authority of the governmental
entity to execute derivative contracts;
      •    The potential for violating constitutional or statutory provisions
limiting the entity’s authority to incur debt resulting from the transaction;
and
      •    The application of the government entity’s procurement statutes to
derivative transactions.
   3.   Government entities should be aware of the risks incurred as a result
of use of derivatives. These include, in addition to legal risk, counter party
credit risk, custodial risk, market risk, settlement risk and operating risk.
   4.   Government entities should establish internal controls for each type of
derivative in use to ensure that these risks are adequately managed. Examples
include:
      •   The entity should provide a written statement of purpose and
objectives for derivative use.
      •    Written procedures should be established that provide for periodic
monitoring of derivative instruments.
      •    Managers should have sufficient expertise and technical resources to
oversee derivative programs. Periodic training should be provided.
      •    Recordkeeping systems should be sufficiently detailed to allow
governing bodies, auditors and examiners to determine if the program is
functioning in accordance with established objectives.
      •    Managers should report regularly on the use of derivatives to their
governing body, and appropriate disclosure should be made in official
statements and other disclosure documents.
      •    Reporting on derivative use should be in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principals. Because use of these instruments is a complex
matter, early discussion with public accountants is essential. Specialized
reporting may be required.
   5.   Government entities should be aware if the broker or dealer with whom
they are dealing is merely acting as an agent or intermediary in a derivative
transaction or is taking a proprietary position. Any possible conflict of
interest should be taken into consideration before entering into a transaction.
   6.   Government entities should be aware that there may be little or no
pricing information or standardization for some derivatives. Competitive price
comparisons are recommended before entering into a transaction.
   7.   Government entities should exercise caution in their selection of
brokers, dealers or investment managers and ensure that these agents are
knowledgeable about, understand and provide disclosure regarding the use of
derivatives, including benefits and risks. The entity should secure written
acknowledgment from the
broker or dealer that they have received, read and understood the entity’s debt
and investment policies, including whether derivatives are currently authorized
under the entity’s investment policy, and that the broker, dealer or investment
manager has ascertained that the recommended product is suitable for the
government entity.
   8.   Government entities are responsible for ensuring this same level of
safeguards when derivative transactions are conducted by a third party acting
on behalf of the governmental entity.
(Prior Code, Ch. 38, App. B) (Ord. 99-286, passed 12-14-1999)
APPENDIX C: COLLATERALIZATION OF PUBLIC DEPOSITS
GOVERNMENT FINANCE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION
Recommended Practice
Collateralization of Public Deposits
   Safety of public funds should be the foremost objective in managing public
funds. Collateralization of public deposits through pledging of appropriate
securities is the only way to fully guarantee the safety of such deposits.
   Additionally, public entities should implement programs of prudent risk
control. Such programs could include a formal depository risk policy, credit
analysis and use of fully secured investments.
   Statewide collateralization programs have generally proved to be cost
effective and beneficial for both the public sector and its depositories. In
the absence of an effective statewide collateral program, local officials
should establish and implement collateralization procedures.
(Prior Code, Ch. 38, App. C) (Ord. 99-286, passed 12-14-1999)
APPENDIX D: PUBLIC BODY-FINANCIAL INSTITUTION SECURITY AND CUSTODY AGREEMENT
This Agreement is made and executed this _____ day of ___________________
20_____, by and between the City of Blue Island, Illinois, a body politic and
corporate in the State of Illinois; (“Public Body”),
_____________________________ (“Financial Institution”) and
____________________________(“Custodian”).
WHEREAS, the Public Body desires to continue to maintain deposits of the Public
Body’s funds at the Financial Institution.
WHEREAS, the Financial Institution desires to hold the funds of the Public Body
and can provide pledged securities as collateral security for those deposits;
and
WHEREAS, the Public Body and the Financial Institution desire the Custodian to
maintain custody from time to time of certain of the Financial Institution’s
securities for the benefit of the Public Body as collateral security for the
Public Body’s deposit accounts maintained at the Financial Institution;
NOW, THEREFORE, it is agreed by and between the Public Body, the Financial
Institution and the Custodian as follows:
1.   Securities Interest.
The Financial Institution hereby pledges and grants in favor of the Public Body
a lien and continuing security interest in the securities deposited with the
Custodian from time to time, all substitutions and additions thereto, all other
rights and privileges incident to such securities, all proceeds and profits of
any of the foregoing (“Collateral”) as collateral security for all deposit
accounts maintained from time to time by the Public Body with the Financial
Institution. The Financial Institution shall take all necessary steps to
transfer and perfect this security interest pursuant to Illinois Commercial
Code. The lien and security interest pursuant for hereunder shall not be deemed
to disaffirm, replace or otherwise adversely affect the existence and
effectiveness of any lien or security interest previously or hereafter granted
by the Financial Institution in favor of the Public Body, pursuant to this
agreement or otherwise.
2.   Identification and Value of Securities.
The Financial Institution agrees to deposit and the Custodian agrees to accept
any documents necessary to facilitate transfer of title in the event of
subsequent release to the Public Body. With respect to each deposit of pledged
securities made with the Custodian, the Financial Institution will execute and
deliver to the Public Body a written confirmation identifying the pledged
securities and the value thereof (and, if delivered in substitution or
replacement of existing Collateral with the written authorization of the Public
Body, the Collateral being proposed for substitution). The Financial
Institution will also deliver to the Public Body a copy of a receipt by the
Custodian accepting the pledged securities. As used in this agreement, “value”
of Collateral means the lesser of the face principal amount of the securities
constituting Collateral or the current market value. Current market value of
any pledged securities shall be as determined and agreed between the Public
Body and the Financial Institution from time to time, each acting reasonably in
good faith.
3.   Permitted Securities.
Securities pledged hereunder and deposited with the Custodian shall be of one
or more of the following types:
   Government Securities;
   Obligations of Federal Agencies;
   Obligations of Federal Instrumentalities; or
   Obligation of the State of Illinois.
The types of securities may be modified from time to time by agreement between
the Public Body and the Financial Institution.
4.   Public Body Demand for Additional Collateral.
In the event that the amount of all deposits of the Public Body maintained with
the Financial Institution at the close of any business day exceeds 102% of the
value of the Collateral, the Public Body may, by notice to the Financial
Institution, demand that the Financial Institution deliver additional
Collateral to the Custodian, of a value which together with the Collateral then
held by the Custodian, shall equal or exceed 110% (or such other percentage
agreed upon by the Public Body and the Financial Institution) of the amount of
deposits at the close of business that day. The failure of the Financial
Institution to deliver the requested additional Collateral within 24 hours
after the demand by the Public Body shall constitute a default. In addition to
the rights enumerated in Section 13 of this agreement, the Public Body shall
have the right to immediately collect its deposits with the Financial
Institution without penalty.
5.   Release or Substitution of Securities.
The Financial Institution shall have the right at any time to seek to
substitute Collateral of equal value and of the type as permitted under Section
3 and otherwise acceptable to the Public Body. Substituted Collateral shall be
considered Collateral for all purposes. If the substitute collateral is of
equal or greater value, similar maturity and included in Section 3 above,
substitution can take place without approval of the Public Body. Notice of the
substitution should be sent to the Public Body, as provided in this agreement.
If the substitute collateral is not of equal or greater value, the Financial
Institution shall provide to the Public Body, at least 72 hours before the time
of any substitution, a statement of the respective values of the Collateral to
be replaced and the Collateral to be substituted. Except as provided herein,
the Custodian agrees that no Collateral may be released and substituted without
the prior written approval of the Public Body. At all times, the Custodian will
maintain on file the signatures of agents of the Public Body authorized to
approve releases and substitutions.
6.   Financial Institution Representations and Warranties.
   a.   The Financial Institution represents and warrants to the Public Body
that it is the owner of the Collateral and that such Collateral is and will
remain free and clear of any and all security interests, liens and claims of
any other person, except for the security interest granted hereunder to the
Public Body. The Financial Institution shall be deemed to repeat such
representation with respect to Collateral delivered in addition to or in
substitution of then-existing Collateral. The Public Body’s sole obligation to
the Financial Institution with respect to Collateral is to return or cause the
return of the Collateral to the Financial Institution at the termination, and
full performance by the Financial Institution of, its obligations with respect
to all deposits of the Public Body secured hereunder.
   b.   The Financial Institution agrees that all of the statements contained
in this Agreement and in documents executed pursuant to this Agreement are made
to induce the Public Body to deposit its funds in the Financial Institution and
with the knowledge that the Public Body will rely on these statements. This
Agreement shall prevail over the term of any other agreement between the
Financial Institution and the Public Body with which it may conflict.
7.   Approval by Board or Loan Committee of the Financial Institution.
The Financial Institution represents that it is duly authorized, by resolution
of the Board of Directors or the Loan Committee of the Financial Institution,
and has full right, power and authority, to execute this Agreement and the
Custody Agreement, and to pledge and grant a security interest with respect to
the Collateral. The Financial Institution has furnished a certified copy of the
authorizing resolution, attached hereto as Exhibit A. The Financial Institution
shall also furnish additional resolutions, if any, approved by the Board of
Directors or the Loan Committee of the Financial Institution authorizing the
substitution of Collateral or reauthorizing the granting of a security interest
with respect to the existing Collateral.
8.   Continuously Maintain Agreement as Official Record.
The Financial Institution further agrees that it will immediately upon
execution keep and continuously maintain, as part of its official record, an
executed copy of this Agreement, and confirmations executed hereunder and such
other customary writings and records sufficient to identify those securities
which have been pledged to the Public Body.
9.   Maintaining Custody.
The Financial Institution may participate in and use the Federal Book-Entry
Account System, a service provided by the Federal Reserve Bank for its member
banks for deposit of United States Treasury bills, bonds, notes, certificates
of indebtedness and Federal agency securities or the DTC system. The Custodian
may hold securities in its vault and may deposit securities with a depository.
The certificates representing securities, including those in bearer form, may
be held in bulk form with, and may be merged into certificates of the same
class of the issuer which constitutes assets of other accounts or owners
without certification as to the ownership attached. Utilization of a book-entry
system may be made for the transfer or pledge of securities held by the
Custodian or by the securities depository. However, it is understood that the
Custodian shall, at all times, maintain a separate and distinct record of the
securities in the account(s).
10.   Liability of the Custodian.
In the event of its failure to exercise ordinary care, the Custodian will be
liable only for direct damages. The Custodian shall be deemed to have exercised
ordinary care if its actions or failure to act is in conformity with reasonable
practice of the banking industry. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
Agreement, if it becomes necessary for the Public Body to obtain court
enforcement of its rights against the Custodian and the Public Body should
prevail, the Custodian shall be liable for the legal fees and cost of the
Public Body.
11.   Instructions.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the Custodian may accept and act upon
instructions from the Financial Institution or the Public Body which
instructions must be in writing on the letterhead of the Financial Institution
or Public Body containing the signature of the person or persons authorized to
provide instructions. Instructions may also be sent by facsimile on the
letterhead of the Financial Institution or Public Body, provided the
instructions are also sent in writing on letterhead within one business day and
both the facsimile and the writing contain the signature of the person or
persons authorized to provide instructions. All instructions and confirmations
given to you hereunder shall be given pursuant to authority contained in
currently effective resolutions of the Public Body and by persons authorized by
such resolutions to give the same. The Public Body will from time to time
furnish you with certified copies of such resolutions and you may rely on
authorizations contained therein until we notify you in writing of a change
thereto.
12.   Events Constituting Default.
The following events shall constitute a default by the Financial Institution
under this Agreement:
   a.   The Financial Institution shall fail to pay when due principal or
interest with respect to any deposit of the Public Body maintained with the
Financial Institution;
   b.   Any representation of the Financial Institution herein shall prove to
have been untrue as of the date made or any date hereafter;
   c.   The Financial Institution shall fail to comply with any covenant or
agreement contained herein and such non-compliance has not been cured within 30
days of the Public Body’s notice thereof to the Financial Institution;
   d.   The failure or suspension of active operations of the Financial
Institution;
   e.   The Financial Institution shall make a general assignment for the
benefit of creditors; admit in writing its inability to pay its debts as they
become due; file a petition in bankruptcy or a petition seeking reorganization,
arrangement, composition, readjustment, liquidation, dissolution or similar
relief under any present or future bankruptcy, insolvency or similar statute,
law or regulation or seek the appointment of any trustee, receiver or
liquidator for the Financial Institution or any material part of its
properties; or
   f.   Any Federal or State agency or any creditor of the Financial
Institution shall file any petition or seek any appointment specified in
subsection e. above, or a conservator, receiver, liquidator or similar person
shall be appointed with respect to the Financial Institution.
13.   Rights Upon Default.
In the event of a default hereunder, the Public Body shall have all the rights
and remedies of a secured party under the Illinois Commercial Code with respect
to the Collateral, including without limitation the right upon default to
collect, liquidate, sell or dispose of the same and to apply the proceeds
thereof (after deduction therefrom all costs and expenses relating to such
collection, liquidation, sale or disposition, including reasonable attorney
fees and court costs) to the payment of any deposit or other liabilities of the
Financial Institution to the Public Body arising out of or as a result of the
default of the Financial Institution in such manner and at such time as the
Public Body may deem appropriate, with the Financial Institution to remain
liable for and to immediately pay to the Public Body any deficiency and with
any overplus to be returned to the Financial Institution as soon as
practicable. Any requirement of the Illinois Uniform Commercial Code for
reasonable notice shall be met by the mailing of written notice to the
undersigned by regular mail at its address set forth below at least five days
prior to the sale or other event giving rise to the requirement of such notice.
The rights and remedies specified herein shall be in addition to and
supplementary of all rights and remedies which the Public Body would otherwise
have at law or in equity. Any delay or failure on the Public Body’s part in
exercising any right or remedy hereunder shall not constitute a waiver thereof
or preclude the later or further exercise thereof. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this Agreement, if it becomes necessary for the Public Body to
obtain court enforcement of its rights against the Custodian and the Public
Body should prevail, the Custodian shall be liable for the legal fees and costs
of the Public Body.
14.   Successors and Assigns.
This Agreement is continuing and binding upon the Financial Institution, its
successors and assigns and shall inure to the benefit of the Public Body and
the Custodian, and their respective successors and assigns.
15.   Notice.
All notices, demands, consents and other communications hereunder shall be in
writing, and shall be deemed effective when delivered personally, or sent by
telegraph or telecopy, or five days after being sent by registered or certified
mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, at the addresses specified
below, or at such other addresses or to such other parties as may be specified
in writing by the parties hereto:
Public Body:         ______________________________________
               ______________________________________
               ______________________________________
Financial Institution:   ______________________________________
               ______________________________________
               ______________________________________
Custodian:         ______________________________________
               ______________________________________
               ______________________________________
16.   Fees and Expenses of Custodian.
The fees and expenses of the Custodian will be paid by the Financial
Institution.
17.   Custodian’s Right to Terminate.
The Custodian shall have the right to terminate any of this Agreement and its
custody of any securities held pursuant hereto, upon providing thirty days
written notice of termination to the Financial Institution and the Public Body.
Upon termination of its custody, the Custodian will take necessary steps to
transfer the securities to the destination directed by the Financial
Institution and the Public Body, jointly, and at the risk and expense of the
Financial Institution. In the event that no joint direction is received, the
Custodian shall transfer the securities to a trust account established by the
Public Body in a financial institution having deposits of at least one hundred
million dollars. Thereafter, the Custodian’s liability with respect to such
securities shall be fully discharged. The Custodian shall remain responsible
however for any prior breaches of this Agreement.
18.   Amendments.
This agreement may be modified at any time by a mutual written agreement of the
parties.
19.   Governing Law.
This agreement shall be construed in accordance with the laws of the State of
Illinois.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have executed the foregoing Agreement the day
and year first mentioned above.
PUBLIC BODY:            ______________________________________
   By:                  ______________________________________
   Its:                   ______________________________________
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION:   ______________________________________
   By:                  ______________________________________
   Its:                  ______________________________________
CUSTODIAN:            ______________________________________
   By:                  ______________________________________
   Its:                  ______________________________________
(Prior Code, Ch. 38, App. D) (Ord. 99-286, passed 12-14-1999)
APPENDIX E: INTERNAL CONTROLS
Separation of Duties.
Individuals who perform investment transactions shall not be responsible for
the reconciliation of the accounts; furthermore, adequate separation of duties
requires that persons who perform investment transactions should not also be
responsible for writing checks or preparing bank deposit slips.
Duties and Responsibilities.
The Finance Director shall be responsible for the management of the City’s
Investment Program, including the purchases and sales of securities, bank
transfers, and wires. All such transactions must be authorized and signed off
by the Finance Director.
The Chief of Staff shall review the reconciliation of all investment
transactions and reports required in the “Monthly Financial Statement.”
Security Selection Process.
When purchasing an investment, the City shall select the security which
provides the highest bond equivalent yield (BEY) for a given investment. For
investments which require bidding, at least two (2) bids shall be secured. If
no security is offered for the date(s) requested, the Finance Director may
select the security with the highest BEY closest to the date(s) requested, or
may rebid the investment.
On an exception basis, when in the determination of the Finance Director
competitive bidding would inhibit the selection process, securities may be
purchased utilizing the comparison to current market price method. Acceptable
current market price providers include, but are not limited to:
   1.   The Bloomberg Information System;
   2.   The Wall Street Journal, or comparable nationally recognized financial
publication; and
   3.   Market pricing provided by the City’s safekeeping institution.
Examples of when this method may by used include:
   1.   When time constraints due to unusual circumstances preclude the use of
the competitive bidding process;
   2.   When no active market exists for the issue being traded due to the age
or depth of the issue;
   3.   When a security is unique to a single institution, (i.e., as a result
of a portfolio being purchased by a broker); and
   4.   When the transaction involves new issues “purchased at the window” or
issues in the “when issued” market.
When selection is made based on comparison to market prices, the following
information shall become part of the record of the security involved:
   1.   Reason for use of this method;
   2.   Source of the current market value used; and
   3.   Price and/or interest rate quoted by said source.
Safekeeping.
All settlements shall be executed by faxing a signed cover sheet and a
settlement note from the successful bidder to the City’s safekeeping
institution. All transactions, whether purchases or sales, shall require the
signature of two (2) authorized signors.
Delivery versus Payment.
Settlements shall be on a delivery versus payment (“DVP”) basis and shall
settle and be held at the City’s safekeeping institution. Except for Banker’s
Acceptances (which are only deliverable in physical form), the City will not
purchase any security requiring physical delivery.
Investment Accounting.
Following the execution and settlement of a transaction, all transaction
documentation shall be utilized by the Director of Finance for preparation of
the required journal entry.
Hard copy confirmations of all transactions shall be reviewed by the Chief of
Staff to ensure they agree with the settlement note received by the City on the
day of the transaction. Any deviation between the two documents must be
immediately brought to the attention of the Finance Director for remediation.
On a monthly basis, all outstanding investments shall be reconciled by the
Finance Director between:
   the general ledger and the City’s investment software, and
   the City’s investment software and the City’s safekeeping trust statement.
In addition, on a monthly basis, bank statements, investment reconciliations
and investment journal entries shall be reviewed by the Chief of Staff for
unusual or unauthorized transactions. Should there not be a reasonable
explanation for any such transaction, same should be brought to the immediate
attention of the Finance Director.
A listing of all outstanding investments shall be produced monthly and reviewed
by the Finance Director and shall be contained in the “Monthly Financial
Statement” and distributed to the Mayor, City Council and Chief of Staff.
Wire Transfer Agreements.
All wire transactions will be made in accordance with the procedures contained
in the executed wire transfer agreement between the City and its safekeeping
institution.
Repurchase Agreements.
While the City does not intend to utilize repurchase agreements (repos)
directly as a component of its investment portfolio at this time, it is mindful
that the majority of funds deposited into IPTIP are invested in repos. The City
believes that IPTIP’s collateralization requirement (equal to 102% of the value
of the repo at time of execution, and marked to market on a daily basis
thereafter) makes it a prudent vehicle in which to place short term cash.
(Prior Code, Ch. 38, App. E) (Ord. 99-286, passed 12-14-1999)
APPENDIX F: MARK-TO-MARKET PRACTICES FOR STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT
PORTFOLIOS AND INVESTMENT POOLS GOVERNMENT FINANCE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION
   Recommended Practice
   Mark-to-Market Practices for State and Local Government Investment
Portfolios and Investment Pools
   As the investment portfolios of state and local governments are subjected to
increased scrutiny, it is essential that reporting standards be enhanced so
that investors, governing bodies and the public remain informed of the current
market value of the portfolio. Regular disclosure of the value of a
governmental entity’s investments is an important step to furthering taxpayer
and market confidence in state and local government investment practices.
   The Government Finance Officers Association (GFOA) recommends that state and
local government officials responsible for investment portfolio reporting
should determine the market value of all securities in the portfolio on at
least a quarterly basis. These values should be obtained from a reputable and
independent source and disclosed to the governing body or other oversight body
at least quarterly in a written report. It is recommended that the report
include the market value, book value and unrealized gain or loss of the
securities in the portfolio.
   Many state and local government officials are allowed to invest in various
state and local government investment pools available in their state or region.
Pool administrators should, on at least a monthly basis, determine the market
value of all securities in the pool and report this information to all pool
participants on at least a quarterly basis. These values should be obtained
from a reputable and independent source. This information should be included in
the report to the governing body prepared on at least a quarterly basis.
(Prior Code, Ch. 38, App. F) (Ord. 99-286, passed 12-14-1999)
CHAPTER 39: FEE AND FINE SCHEDULE
Section
   
39.01   Fee and fine schedule
§ 39.01 FEE AND FINE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   Water Department.
Monthly billing rate for water usage                     
   Within corporate limit                            $6.88/1,000 gallons
   Wholly or partly outside the corporate limit      $8.60/1,000 gallons
   Late fee                                          10% of bill
   Sewer charge                                      20% of bill
   Turn on fee after delinquency                     $50
   NSF check returned                                $40
   Water turn off/turn on same day - potential sale  $500
   Water turn off/turn on same day - because of      $200
delinquency
   Water turn off/turn on same day - during business $150
hours
   Water turn off/turn on same day - after business  $300
hours
   Multi-unit dwelling single meter                  $5 each additional unit
   Trailer parks                                     $10 each additional
                                                        unit
Minimum usage                                            
   Meter size                                        Corp/Outside Corp
      Senior - 1,000 gallons                      $6.88/$8.60
      5/8 in. and 3/4 in. - 2,000 gallons         $13.76/$17.20
      1 in. - 7,000 gallons                       $48.16/$60.20
      1-1/2 in. - 11,000 gallons                  $75.68/$94.60
      2 in. - 15,000 gallons                      $103.20/$129
      3 in. - 26,000 gallons                      $178.88/$233.60
      4 in - 35,000 gallons                       $240.80/$301.00
      6 in. - 52,000 gallons                      $357.76/$447.20
      Over 6 in. - 100,000 gallons                $688/$860
Fire service lines                                       
   Meter size                                         
      1 in. - 3,000 gallons                       $20.64
      1-1/2 in. - 5,000 gallons                   $34.40
      2 in. - 7,000 gallons                       $48.16
      3 in. - 13,000 gallons                      $89.44
      4 in. - 17,000 gallons                      $116.96
      6 in. - 26,000 gallons                      $178.88
      Over 6 in. - 50,000 gallons                 $344
New water meters                                         
   3/4 in.                                           $350
   1 in.                                             $430
   1-1/2 in.                                         $667
Miscellaneous                                            
   No show for appointment                           $350
   Tapping fee/connection fee                        Residential - $150
                                                        Commercial - $350 - 550
   Penalty - illegal water service                   $750
   Phone payment by credit card                      $5
 
   (B)   Sanitation fees.
 
Single-family $33.68
Senior        $21.18
2-flat        $58.36
3-flat        $85.74
A contractually required increase of no more than 6% will be assessed annually
based upon the city’s contract with the garbage disposal services provider.
 
   (C)   Clerk’s office.
Miscellaneous                                       
   Birth certificate                            $15 - 1st
                                                   $3 each additional
   Death certificate                            $20 - 1st
                                                   $7 each additional
   Animal tag                                   $10
Miscellaneous                                       
   Parking tokens                               $1
   Block party                                  $50
Business license                                    
   Class I                                      $35
   Class II                                     $75
   Class III                                    $100
   Late fee                                     25%
   Out of town business                         $100
   Entertainment license                        $100
   Fire alarm registration                      $50
   Raffles                                       
      Non-progressive license (individual)   $10
      Non-progressive license (yearly)       $25
      Progressive license                    $200
   Video gaming license - truck stop establishme$750
Emblems (such as poker, games and the like)         
   Gambling devices                             $250 per device
   Food                                         $35
   Games                                        $100
   Vending - gumball type                       $35 up to 2 heads
                                                   $15 additional per head
   Vending - toys                               $25
Vehicle stickers                                    
   Passenger                                    $50
   Senior                                       $5
   Antique vehicle with AV plates               $5
   Disabled                                     $8
   Not-for-profit                               $5
   Motorcycle                                   $35
   Truck B                                      $55
   Truck C                                      $65
   Truck D                                      $75
   Truck F                                      $100
   Truck H                                      $125
Vehicle stickers                                    
   Truck J                                      $150
   RV - 3,001 to 8,000 pounds                   $50
   RV - 8,001 to 10,000 pounds                  $60
   RV - over 10,000 pounds                      $70
   Motor bus                                    $80
   Late fee                                     100% of sticker cost
   Vehicle sticker transfer fee                 $5
 
   (D)   Liquor licenses.
 
Class A     $1,000
   Class $800
   Class $900
   Class $700
   Class $900
   Class $600
   Class $800
 
   (E)   Building Department. The Building Commissioner, with the approval of
the City Administrator, may waive fines for permits obtained to improve City of
Blue Island property. All other permit fees can not be waived.
Contractor license                                                             
   Contractor license                                                      $100
   Penalty                                                                 $100
Building permit                                                                
   General remodel                                                          
      Residential                                                    $50 plus 2.5%
                                                                              of cost
      Commercial                                                     $100 plus 5%
                                                                              of cost
   Residential additions                                                   $100 plus 2.5%
                                                                              of cost
   Residential new construction                                            $300 plus 2.5%
                                                                              of cost
   Commercial additions                                                    $200 plus 5%
                                                                              of cost
   Commercial new construction                                             $400 plus 5%
                                                                              of cost
      Penalty - starting work without permit                            $100 - $750
      Inspection and first reinspection                                 No charge
      Reinspection                                                      $50 doubles
                                                                              each time
      Expediting fee on construction permits                            $100
Plumbing permit                                                                
   Single-family/townhome/trailer/condo                                    $100
      Fixture replacement                                               $15
      New fixture                                                       $20
   Multi-unit/commercial/industrial                                        $150
      Fixture replacement                                               $25
      New fixture                                                       $30
   Sewer                                                                    
                                                                              $100 plus $10/
      Residential                                                       foot over 10
                                                                              feet
                                                                              $150 plus $10/
      Commercial                                                        foot over 100
                                                                              feet
      Sewer tap (residential)                                           $300
      Sewer tap (commercial)                                            $350 - $550
   Water service (greater than 1 in. tap) (residential)                    $200
   Water service (greater than 1 in. tap) (commercial)                     $350 - $550
   Sprinkler system                                                        $100 plus $1
                                                                              per head
                                                                              $600 per
   Street opening                                                          opening plus
                                                                              $500 deposit
                                                                              $400 per
   Parkway opening                                                         opening plus
                                                                              $500 deposit
                                                                              $400 per
   Sidewalk opening                                                        opening plus
                                                                              $500 deposit
   City residents who have to open the street, parkway, and sidewalk for a $500 for all
project will be given a discounted fee. (This is not applicable to            openings plus
contractors).                                                                 $500 deposit
   Penalty                                                                  
                                                                              Keep $500
      Parkway, sidewalk, street                                         deposit and
                                                                              $750 fine
      Starting work without permit/failure to have registered contractor$100 - $750
Electrical permit                                                              
   Single-family/townhome/trailer/condo                                    $100
   Multi-unit/commercial/industrial                                        $150
   100-amp service                                                         $50
   200-amp service                                                         $75
   400-amp service                                                         $100
   Over 400-amp service                                                    $250
   15-amp circuit                                                          $15
   20-amp circuit                                                          $20
   Over 20-amp circuit                                                     $25
   One motor or equivalent                                                 $30
   Each additional motor                                                   $15
   Penalty - starting work without permit                                  $100 - $750
   Inspection and first reinspection                                       No charge
   Reinspection                                                            $50 doubles
                                                                              each time
Demo permit                                                                    
   Single-family home                                                      $200 plus 2.5%
                                                                              of cost
   Residential garage                                                      $50 plus 2.5%
                                                                              of cost
   Multi-unit/commercial/industrial                                        $300 plus 5%
                                                                              of cost
Plan review                                                                    
   Plan review                                                             $100 per trade
                                                                              per review
   Site plan review                                                        $200
                                                                              Professional
   Plan review by professional agency                                      fee plus
                                                                              administrative
                                                                              fee
Vacant property registration                                                   
                                                                              $200 required
   Registration                                                            once property
                                                                              is officially
                                                                              vacant
                                                                              Required with
   Inspection                                                              initial
                                                                              registration
                                                                              fee
                                                                              Required every
                                                                              year property
   Reregistration                                                          stays vacant -
                                                                              due September
                                                                              1
                                                                              $100 - $750
   Penalty - maintenance                                                   per violation
                                                                              per day
Inspection for sale                                                            
   Single-family home/condo/townhome                                       $100
   Residential multi-unit building                                         $150 plus $25
                                                                              per unit
   Commercial building/multi-unit                                           
      Commercial property up to 2,000 square feet                       $300
      Commercial property between to 2,000 to 4,000 square feet         $400
      Commercial property that exceeds 4,000 square feet                $600
   Industrial building                                                     $300
                                                                              Required
                                                                              commercial
   Mixed use                                                               property fee
                                                                              plus $100 per
                                                                              additional
                                                                              unit
   Mobile trailer                                                          $75
   Penalty - intent to sell                                                $200 - $750
Inspection for rental                                                          
   Single family/townhome/trailer/condo                                    $75
   Apartment                                                               $50 per unit
                                                                              $25 per unit
   Reinspection - intent to rent                                           per re-
                                                                              inspection
   Annual multi-unit registration/inspection                               $25 per unit
                                                                              No charge for
                                                                              1st
                                                                              reinspection
                                                                              Second re-
      Penalty - annual registration                                     inspection and
                                                                              every re-
                                                                              inspection
                                                                              thereafter:
                                                                              $50
                                                                              Same as
                                                                              commercial
                                                                              intent to sell
                                                                              fees
                                                                              First re-
                                                                              inspection no
Inspection for commercial rental                                              charge
                                                                              Second re-
                                                                              inspection and
                                                                              every re-
                                                                              inspection
                                                                              thereafter:
                                                                              $50
Planning and Zoning                                                            
   Zoning Board of Appeals application fee                                 $200 +
                                                                              publication
   Plan Commission application fee                                         $200 +
                                                                              publication
Elevator inspections                                                           
   Elevator inspection fee                                                 $64
   Elevator reinspection fee                                               $35
   Penalty - operating without permit                                      $75
Garage sale permit                                                             
                                                                              $5 per permit
   Garage sale permit                                                      (maximum 3 per
                                                                              year)
   Deposit                                                              $25
   Penalty - operating without permit                                   $100
Property maintenance                                                           
   Board up fee                                                            $300 minimum
   Vacant property grass cutting fine                                      $500 per
                                                                              occurrence
   Garbage/rubbish violations                                              $50 - $75 per
                                                                              occurrence
   Bulk pick up                                                            $50 (1/2 small
                                                                              dump)
      Penalty                                                           $100 per day
   Leaf pick up                                                            No charge
      Penalty                                                           $50 per day
Signage permit                                                                 
   Temporary business banners                                              $25
   Business sign permit                                                    $2/square foot
                                                                              - minimum $50
   Penalty - not removing temporary banner                                 $50 per day
Housing court                                                                  
                                                                              As assigned by
   Fines                                                                   Hearing
                                                                              Officer
 
   (F)   Miscellaneous.
 
Penalty - NSF check return             $50
Penalty - stop work order              $100
Penalty - stop work order removal      $100 - $750
Administrative fee                     $100
Water turn-on inspection - residential $50
 
   (G)   FOIA fee schedule. The following fees shall be assessed for FOIA
requests.
      (1)   All requests (includes commercial and voluminous).
         (a)   Generally. $0.15 per page for black and white copies of letter
or legal size documents or the maximum allowable by statute. No fees shall be
charged for the first 50 pages of black and white letter or legal size
documents. (Double sided pages count as two copies.)
         (b)   Letter or legal size color documents. $0.35 per copy if copied
by the city or actual cost to reproduce if the city uses a copy service or
other provider to copy the requested records or, if higher, the maximum allowed
by statute.
         (c)   Oversized documents. Documents larger than legal size (11 inches
by 17 inches) $0.15 per square foot if copied by the city in black and white;
and $0.35 per square foot is copied by the city in color or actual cost to
reproduce if the city uses a copy service or other provider to copy the
requested records or, if higher, the maximum allowed by statute.
         (d)   Vehicle crash reports. $5 per copy of an accident report, $20
for accident reports which were investigated by an accident reconstruction
officer or accident reconstruction team or, if higher, the fees specified in
625 ILCS 5/6-118 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, approved September 29, 1969, as
amended.
         (e)   Certification. $1 per certification or, if higher, the maximum
allowed by statute.
         (f)   Any other fee. Fixed or allowable by statute, at its maximum
rate.
      (2)   All requests except for voluminous; electronic or media
reproduction. Actual cost of recording medium (e.g. cd, dvd, disk, cassette),
or, if higher, the maximum allowed by statute.
      (3)   Voluminous requests.
Electronic or Media reproduction
   Records not in PDF
      2 or fewer megab$20s
      2+ to 4 megabyte$40
      4+ megabytes    $100
      If higher       The maximum allowed by statute
   PDF records
      80 or fewer mega$20es
      80+ to 160 megab$40s
Electronic or Media reproduction
   PDF records
      160+ megabytes  $100
      If higher       The maximum allowed by statute
                            If records requested are in both PDF and non-PDF
   Combined format recordformat, the city may separate the fees and charge
                            the requester under both fee scales
 
      (4)   Commercial requests.
         (a)   $10 per hour fee, for rime spent by personnel (in excess of
eight hours) searching for and retrieving a requested record and examining the
record for necessary redactions, or, if higher, the maximum allowed by statute.
         (b)   Actual cost for retrieval of records stored in an off-site
facility that is maintained by a third-party storage company under contract
with the city or, if higher, the maximum allowed by statute.
      (5)   Fee waiver or reduction.
         (a)   In accordance with FOIA, the city will only waive or reduces
fees when the requester states in the FOIA request the specific purpose for the
request and indicates that a waiver or fee reduction is in the public interest.
A waiver or fee reduction is in the public interest only if the principal
purpose of the request is to access and disseminate information regarding the
health, safety and welfare or the legal rights of the general public and is not
for the principal purpose of personal or commercial benefit.
         (b)   The FOIA Officer is authorized by the corporate authorities to
waive or reduce fees in accordance with this division (G)(5).
(Ord. 2014-015, passed 3-25-2014; Ord. 2015-021, passed 8-25-2015; Ord. 2018-
021, passed 3-27-2018; Ord. 2018-049, passed 9-25-2018; Ord. 2021-038, passed
9-14-2021; Ord. 2022-007, passed 1-25-2022; Ord. 2023-008, passed 1-24-2023;
Ord. 2023-021, passed 4-25-2023; Ord. 2024-030, passed 5-28-2024; Ord. 2025-
026, passed 5-27-2025)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GARBAGE
      
51.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
52.   WATER AND SEWERS
CHAPTER 50: GARBAGE
Section
Garbage Collection
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Receptacles; specifications
   
50.03   Preparation of garbage for collection
   
50.04   Special service
   
50.05   (Reserved)
   
50.06   (Reserved)
   
50.07   Allowing garbage or the like to blow or become scattered
   
50.08   Deposits on streets or alleys prohibited; exception
   
50.09   (Reserved)
   
50.10   Fees and charges; exception
Mechanical Garbage Disposals
   
50.25   Food waste disposal units
   
50.26   Food waste grinder units
   
50.27   Commercial grinder units
   
50.28   Grease interceptors
   
50.29   Plumbing Inspector to enforce; inspections
 
   
50.99   Penalty
GARBAGE COLLECTION
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR. For purposes herein shall mean the City Administrator or
designee authorized to administer the terms and conditions of this agreement
for the city.
   BAGS. Shall refer to plastic sacks designed to store refuse with sufficient
wall strength to maintain physical integrity when lifted by the top. Total
weight of a bag and its contents shall not exceed 50 lbs.
   BIN. A metal receptacle designed to be lifted and emptied mechanically for
use primarily at selected municipal facilities.
   CONTAINER FOR GARBAGE, RUBBISH & YARD WASTE COLLECTION. A receptacle that is
designated for the purpose of curbside collection of garbage, rubbish and yard
waste and is constructed of plastic, metal or fiberglass having handles of
adequate strength for lifting and having a tight-fitting lid. The weight of a
container and its contents shall not exceed 35 pounds.
   CONTAINER FOR RECYCLING. A receptacle designed for the purpose of curbside
collection of recyclable materials, and is constructed of plastic, metal or
fiberglass, having handles of adequate strength for lifting, and having a
tight-fitting lid. The weight of a container and its contents shall not exceed
50 pounds.
   MANURE. All excrement of domestic animals and fowls, hay, straw or other
substance which has been used for stable bedding.
   MULTI-FAMILY DEVELOPMENTS. Refers to all residential dwelling units of more
than one unit considered to be condominiums, apartment houses or grouped
housing.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIAL.  Shall include, but is not limited to, aluminum food
and beverage containers, steel or bimetal food and beverage containers, empty
(cleaned) paint containers (tin and bimetal), newsprint and all material that
comes with newspapers, mixed paper, junk mail, catalogs, phonebooks), all
corrugated cardboard (OCC and "Kraft" paper), glass food and beverage
containers (clear, amber and green), plastics PETE #1 (soft drink, liquor
bottles, food containers), HDPE #2 (milk, juice, water containers, laundry
detergent, bleach bottles).
   REFUSE. Means:
      (1)   All household and kitchen wastes, as discarded food or food residue
and paper necessarily used for wrapping, aluminum and tin cans, books,
newspapers, boxes and cartons, providing all such materials are of a size
sufficiently small to permit being placed in the fixed volume collection cart
or in a conventional waste container or plastic bag;
      (2)   Rubbish. All waste wood, wood chips, shavings, sawdust, printed
paper, paper, pasteboard, rags, straw, used and discarded mattresses, used and
discarded clothing, used and discarded shoes boots, combustible waste pulp and
other products such as are used for packaging or wrapping crockery and glass,
ashes cinders, floor sweepings, glass, mineral or metallic substances, and any
and all other waste materials not included in the definition of excluded waste;
      (3)   Small dead animals. Animals or portions thereof less than ten
pounds in weight that have expired from any cause, except those slaughtered or
killed for human waste;
      (4)   Solid waste. Useless, unwanted or discarded materials with
insufficient liquid content to be free-flowing, that result from domestic,
industrial, commercial, agricultural, governmental and community operations
which require proper storage, collection, transportation and disposal to
prevent environmental pollution detrimental to public health, safety and
welfare. Solid waste does not include sewage, earth or material used to fill
land in accordance with construction codes, mining residues, slag, dissolved or
suspended solids in industrial waste water effluents which are not acceptable
for disposal in sanitary sewage treatment system or any material included in
the definition of excluded waste;
      (5)   Waste material. Waste material is all non-hazardous solid waste
(including garbage, rubbish, yard waste and recyclable materials generated at
residential units that is not excluded by this subchapter. Waste material shall
not include any excluded waste;
      (6)   Bulky waste. Household items of such size as to render them
unsuitable for deposit in a refuse container, but which one person can lift
into a refuse truck, such as furniture, storm doors and windows, carpet,
drywall and certain wood, and not exceed 50 pounds. ‘White goods' are typically
defined as: All discarded refrigerators, ranges, water heaters, freezers, air
conditioners, humidifiers and other small domestic and commercial appliances
and are NOT included in the Bulky Waste definition. Bulky Waste must be placed
out for pickup on the designated collection day. Each stop (as defined below)
may place out for collection from the garbage disposal services provider two
bulky items per week. If a resident has more than two items of bulky waste that
can be fit into a two cubic yard dumpster, the resident can contact the Public
Works Department for pick up by appointment. If a resident has more than two
items of bulky waste that can not fit into a two cubic yard dumpster, the
resident is responsible for removal/disposal of the same and is subject to
fines if removal/disposal is not completed.
      (7)   Amounts of sod, earth and rocks, provided these items are put in
suitable containers not exceeding 50 pounds in weight each and placed out for
pickup on the designated collection day; and
      (8)   All mattresses, without exception, must be adequately wrapped or
covered in order to be collected. Contractor will purchase and provide the city
with 500 king-size mattress covers within 30 days of the execution of this
agreement.
   RESIDENTIAL LOCATIONS. All single-family homes, two-family developments and
three-family developments within the city.
   STOP. Shall mean a residential location, which is allowed to have a mobile
collection container(s). In the case of a residential location having more than
one dwelling unit, such residential location shall be considered to have the
number of stops equal to the number of dwelling units contained within the
respective residential location (for example, a three-flat shall be considered
to have three stops).
   YARD WASTE MATERIAL (also known as landscape waste). Grass, garden
clippings, branch and tree trimmings, shrubbery and leaves.
(Prior Code, § 50.01) (Ord. 1889, passed 9-11-1961; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-
10-2015; Ord. 2021-053, passed 10-26-2021; Ord. 2023- 008, passed 1-24-2023)
§ 50.02 RECEPTACLES; SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The owner, or his or her agent, or the occupant of every house,
building, store or apartment where persons live or conduct business of any
kind, or where food of any kind is handled, prepared or consumed, shall provide
for the house, building, store or apartment and at all times maintain in good
order and repair separate receptacles for refuse, ashes, recyclable materials,
and yard waste. Each house, building or store, other than an apartment
building, shall have one receptacle for refuse (the “Refuse Bin”) supplied by
the garbage disposal service provider and one receptacle for recyclable
materials (the “Recycle Bin”) supplied by the garbage disposal service
provider. Should a refuse bin or recycle bin need replacement, the resident
must inform the Public Works Department of the same.
   (B)   Each apartment or dwelling unit in a residential location shall have
one refuse bin and one recycle bin for each apartment or dwelling unit of the
building.
   (C)   Additional volumes of refuse may be placed in a tightly covered metal
or other non-corrodible refuse material collection container which is water-
tight and does not exceed 50 pounds total weight when filled. Metal or other
non-corrodible material containers shall have secure handles for convenient
lifting and carrying.
   (D)   Residents may also use “Kraft” or other paper disposal bags designed
for the collection and disposal of yard waste materials or conventional waste
containers as long as the containers are clearly marked as containing “Yard
Waste Material Only” and are not co-mingled with refuse, recyclables or other
waste material and do not exceed 50 pounds in weight. No other forms of waste
may be placed in the “Yard Waste Only” containers.
   (E)   Refuse containers and garbage containers shall not be placed upon city
streets or sidewalks or any city property for pick-up prior to 6:00 p.m. on the
evening before the assigned pick- up day for the particular area of the city
and all such aforementioned refuse containers shall be removed and placed back
upon private property by 10:00 p.m. the day of the pick-up assignment. Further,
after garbage pick-up, it shall be the duty of every owner or occupant of any
premises within the city to place such receptacles or cause them to be stored
on private property out of the view of a person facing the front of said
premises.
   (F)   All multi-family dwellings and non- residential properties shall have
adequate dumpsters or receptacles to completely contain and secure any garbage,
waste or recyclable materials in accordance with this section. At no time shall
such receptacles overflow with garbage, waste or recyclable materials, or
otherwise allow the same to be blown or scattered by any means. The owners of
such properties shall be responsible for ensuring the prompt removal of such
garbage, waste or recyclable materials to comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 50.02) (Ord. 1889, passed 9-11-1961; Ord. 86-21, passed 5-13-
1986; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015; Ord. 2019-048, passed 10-22-2019; Ord.
2021-034, passed 9-14-2021; Ord. 2023-008, passed 1-24-2023) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.03 PREPARATION OF GARBAGE FOR COLLECTION.
   Each occupant, tenant or person in possession of any house, building, store
or apartment shall cause all refuse and recyclable materials brought into or
produced therein to be deposited in appropriate receptacles as detailed in §
50.02 for collecting the same.
   (A)   All refuse or recyclable materials shall be securely contained in the
appropriate receptacles to prevent scattering or blowing by the wind and to
prevent access by animals or other vermin.
   (B)   Trimmings from trees, plants, weeds, grass and similar waste must be
placed into Kraft bags or receptacles labeled as “Yard Waste Only” as detailed
in §
50.02 and tightly secured in a manner to prevent scattering or blowing by the
wind.
   (C)   Two bulky items, under 50 pounds in weight, may be placed outside next
to the refuse and recycle bins for pick up by the garbage disposal service
provider. If a resident has more than two items of bulky waste that can be fit
into a two cubic yard dumpster, the resident can contact the Public Works
Department for pick up by appointment, if in the judgment of the Superintendent
of Public Works, it does not unduly interfere with the operation of the Public
Works Department. In order to make such request, a resident must call the
Department of Public Works and place a work order for the pickup. Once the work
order is approved, the resident will be informed of the date of pick up. Only
on the date of pick-up by the city can the resident place the bulky item
outside of their home. In the event the requested removal involves articles,
that in the judgment of the Public Works Department, are too large, too bulky
or so difficult to handle that the collection and disposal thereof would
constitute an unreasonable burden on or interference with the normal routine of
the operation of the Public Works Department, such articles shall be disposed
of by and shall be at the cost and expense of the owner or occupant of the
premises where the same are located.
   (D)   All commercial properties and multiple dwelling properties shall
comply with the requirements of this section in addition to the following.
      (1)   All multiple dwelling properties with four or more units not
serviced under the residential unit collection process must provide on-site
garbage disposal and recycling services.
      (2)   All dumpsters or large garbage containers shall be of sufficient
size to securely contain all refuse and shall not remain overfilled or
overflowing at any time.
      (3)   All dumpsters or large garbage containers provided for such
properties shall be maintained in a manner which eliminates the dissipation of
foul odors.
      (4)   All commercial or restaurant establishments shall obtain
appropriate containers of sufficient size to dispose of grease and eliminate
dissipation of foul odors.
(Prior Code, § 50.03) (Ord. 1889, passed 9-11-1961; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-
10-2015; Ord. 2023-008, passed 1-24-2023) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.04 SPECIAL SERVICE.
   (A)   No refuse, recyclable material, or yard waste material shall be
allowed to accumulate on any property or premises within the city other than in
the receptacles described in §
50.02. In no case may any bulky waste remain on a city curb for more than 24
hours.
   (B)   If a resident violates this section of the municipal code, the
resident will be subject to a municipal code citation; and upon a finding of
liability, fined pursuant to
Chapter 39 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 50.04) (Ord. 1889, passed 9-11-1961; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-
10-2015; Ord. 2021-053, passed 10-26-2021; Ord. 2023- 008, passed 1-24-2023)
Penalty, see §  
10.99
§ 50.05 (RESERVED).
§ 50.06 (RESERVED).
§ 50.07 ALLOWING GARBAGE OR THE LIKE TO BLOW OR BECOME SCATTERED.
   (A)   No person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the city
any substance, article or thing defined in §
50.01 of this chapter in such manner that it or any of them may be carried or
deposited by the action of the sun, wind, rain or snow, into or upon any
street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other public place, or upon any
private premises.
   (B)   No ashes, coal, lime or other substance that is in a similar manner
liable to be blown by the wind shall be sifted or exposed over or in any street
or public place, or in any place within the city where particles therefrom set
in motion thereby will pass into any such street or public place or upon any
private premises.
(Prior Code, § 50.07) (Ord. 1889, passed 9-11-1961; Ord. 2023-008, passed 1-24-
2023) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.08 DEPOSITS ON STREETS OR ALLEYS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   No person shall deposit or place in or upon any sidewalk, street,
alley, parkway or public place in the city, any refuse of any kind, any
furniture of any kind, or any cones/buckets/signs/other materials used by a
resident to save a parking spot on a city street during the winter months or
any time of snowfall. However, this section shall not apply to the deposit of
material under a permit authorized by an ordinance of the city; nor to goods,
wares or merchandise deposited upon any street, sidewalk, alley or other public
place temporarily in the necessary course of trade and removed therefrom within
two hours after being deposited; nor to articles or things deposited in or
conducted into the city sewerage system through lawful drains, in accordance
with the ordinances of the city relating thereto; nor to receptacles placed
lawfully on city property in accordance with this chapter.
   (B)   If a resident violates this section of the municipal code, the
resident will be subject to a municipal code citation; and upon a finding of
liability, fined pursuant to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 50.08) (Ord. 1889, passed 9-11-1961; Ord. 2019-048, passed 10-
22-2019; Ord. 2022-064, passed 12-13-2022; Ord. 2023- 008, passed 1-24-2023)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.09 (RESERVED).
§ 50.10 FEES AND CHARGES; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   Sanitation user fee.
      (1)   There are hereby established charges and rates to be known as the
sanitation user fee for the purpose of maintaining, improving, operating and
caring for the city’s sanitation system and for the purpose of developing,
implementing, operating and maintaining a program of waste and refuse and
recycling in the city. Such fees shall be as set forth in the city’s fee and
fine schedule.
      (2)   The sanitation user fee shall be billed as a separate charge on
every single-family, two-family and three-family dwelling unit water bill. The
sanitation user fee is due when water bills are rendered and no discounts
whatsoever shall be allowed. Each and every bill rendered shall be plainly
marked with a date after which a penalty as provided in the city’s fee and fine
schedule shall be added, and each bill shall be mailed or otherwise rendered to
the consumer not less than ten days prior to such penalty date. If the bill is
not paid on or prior to such penalty date, the penalty shall be added and,
thereafter, such bill shall not be considered paid unless and until the
original amount, plus the penalty is fully paid.
      (3)   Payments received for charges billed in accordance with this
section and charges for the use of the city’s water and sewer services shall
first be applied to the payment of the sanitation user fee herein established.
   (B)   Senior rate exemption for primary residence.
      (1)   Qualified residents over 65 years of age may be eligible for
discounted sanitation user fees if:
         (a)   The resident completes and submits an annual application for the
reduced senior rate on forms supplied by the Water Department;
         (b)   The property address for which the reduced rate applies is the
primary residence of the applicant; and
         (c)   The resident provides proof of residency and identification
showing age, including but not limited, to driver’s license, state
identification card, property tax bill, Social Security card or other forms of
proof acceptable to the City Clerk.
      (2)   The senior may only submit one application per property and will
only be granted the senior rate exemption for one property, regardless of if
the senior owns multiple properties within the city. The rate shall apply on
the following bill subsequent to approval, of the application and shall, not
apply retroactively.
      (3)   The reduced rate shall not apply to multi-family dwellings.
      (4)   Any person receiving the reduced sanitation rate that does not meet
the requirements set forth herein shall be deemed to have violated this section
and shall be subject to fines and penalties provided for violation of local
ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 50.10) (Ord. 2636, passed 10-11-1983; Ord. 87-104, passed 12-8-
1987; Ord. 2001-370, passed 10-9-2001; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015; Ord.
2023-008, passed 1-24-2023)
MECHANICAL GARBAGE DISPOSALS
§ 50.25 FOOD WASTE DISPOSAL UNITS.
   (A)   No food waste disposal unit intended to be used for purposes which
cause, result in, produce or develop food wastes in the direct preparation of
food in any dwelling, restaurant, hotel, boarding house, hospital, grocery
store or any other similar occupancy shall be installed, operated or maintained
unless it complies with the provisions hereinafter set forth.
   (B)   The installation, operation and maintenance of any equipment or method
to be used for food waste disposal units shall comply with the applicable
provisions and regulations of the building, housing, electrical, health,
sanitation and fire prevention ordinances of the city.
(Prior Code, § 50.25) (Ord. 2054, passed 10-23-1967) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.26 FOOD WASTE GRINDER UNITS.
   (A)   Separate connections for domestic and commercial food waste disposal
units shall be connected and trapped separately from any other fixture or
compartment; except that, a continuous waste with a flow directing partition
will be acceptable for domestic units. All units may have either automatic or
hand operated water supply control. However, domestic units shall be provided
with an approved inlet cover having waterway passages for use during grinding
operation.
   (B)   (1)   All food waste grinder equipment shall be designed to meet the
following requirements:
         (a)   Particle size:
            1.   One hundred percent shall pass a No. 2 screen (2-mesh); and
            2.   Ninety-five percent shall pass a No. 4 screen (4-mesh).
         (b)   Fibers shall not exceed two and one-half inches in length.
Vegetable stems shall not exceed one inch in length. Leaf sections shall not
exceed one-half inch in the largest dimension.
      (2)   In addition, the Building Department shall approve only that
equipment which is self-scouring with no fouling surfaces to cause
objectionable odors, which is free from electrical or mechanical hazards and
which is of durable construction.
   (C)   All food waste grinders shall be installed under and in direct
connection with a sink or other approved receptacle, supplied with water and
discharged through a trap to a sanitary drainage system.
   (D)   Waste grinders and their installation in food processing or storage
plants and similar operations shall, if they meet the requirements of this
subchapter, also be approved by the Building Department; provided that, the
Department of Municipal Services determines, prior to installation, that the
city sewerage system can properly handle the waste.
(Prior Code, § 50.26) (Ord. 2054, passed 10-23-1967; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-
10-2015) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.27 COMMERCIAL GRINDER UNITS.
   Commercial type food grinders shall be provided with not less than a two-
inch waste line. Each waste line shall be trapped and vented as provided in the
Plumbing Code.
(Prior Code, § 50.27) (Ord. 2054, passed 10-23-1967) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.28 GREASE INTERCEPTORS.
   All waste from a food waste grinder shall be discharged into or through a
grease interceptor or catch basin.
(Prior Code, § 50.28) (Ord. 2054, passed 10-23-1967) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.29 PLUMBING INSPECTOR TO ENFORCE; INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The Plumbing Inspector shall enforce the provisions of this
subchapter.
   (B)   The Plumbing Inspector shall have the same rights of entry for
inspection of the premises as are provided for in the Plumbing Code.
(Prior Code, § 50.29) (Ord. 2054, passed 10-23-1967)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $750. A separate offense shall
be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
chapter relating to bulky waste will be subject to a fine of $750.
(Ord. 2023-008, passed 1-24-2023)
CHAPTER 51: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
51.001   Railroad crossings; maintenance
   
51.002   Littering prohibited
   
51.003   Public parkway
   
51.004   Honorary street name designation
Complete Streets Policy
   
51.015   Transportation system; principles
   
51.016   Exceptions
   
51.017   Partnerships
   
51.018   Map; coordination and implementation
   
51.019   Future development
   
51.020   Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals
   
51.021   Grades; success of policy
   
51.022   Implementation responsibility
Street Excavations
   
51.035   Permit required
   
51.036   Permits; validation by Department of Public Works
   
51.037   Application; deposit and inspection fee; backfilling
   
51.038   Disposition of deposit
   
51.039   Barricades; warning lights
Construction and Repair of Sidewalks
   
51.050   Land owner to construct sidewalk
   
51.051   Sidewalks required at new or altered buildings; deposit
   
51.052   Specifications and regulations
   
51.053   Walkways as access to vehicles
   
51.054   Construction for private use prohibited
   
51.055   Barricades; warning lights
Driveways
   
51.070   Permit required
   
51.071   Driveway installation application; bond
   
51.072   Grading; obstruction
   
51.073   Revocation of permit
   
51.074   Bond required before permit issued
Street Obstructions
   
51.085   Width of streets
   
51.086   Permit required to obstruct streets
   
51.087   Issuance of permit; deposit
   
51.088   Removal of obstruction
   
51.089   Refund of deposit
   
51.090   Signs and obstructions prohibited; exceptions
   
51.091   Political signs prohibited
Removal of Snow and Ice
   
51.105   Removal of snow and ice required
   
51.106   Width of sidewalk to be cleared
   
51.107   Time limits for removal
   
51.108   Removal of ice on sidewalk; temporary measures
   
51.109   Occupant compliance
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.001 RAILROAD CROSSINGS; MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   The railroad corporation in the city shall construct and maintain
railroad crossings at all highways, streets, public walks and approaches,
within their respective rights-of-way, so that, at all times, the crossing
shall be safe for persons and property.
   (B)   (1)   The railroad corporation responsible for crossings needing
repair shall make necessary repairs to protect the crossings and make them safe
for persons and property.
      (2)   The railroad corporation authorities shall maintain their crossings
so that there are no openings larger than four inches square and two inches
deep in the pavements of the crossings or between tracks and surrounding
roadway or crossway. It shall be the duty and obligation of the respective
railroads in the city to inspect and maintain their crossings.
   (C)   It shall be considered a violation of this section if the openings
exist for more than 72 hours.
(Prior Code, § 97.001) (Ord. 2395, passed 3-28-1978; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-
10-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.002 LITTERING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall throw, sweep or deposit, or cause to be thrown, swept or
deposited, any papers, wrappers, containers, food stuffs, vegetables, dirt,
waste, filth or any other litter or refuse in or upon any street, avenue,
alley, sidewalk, gutter or other public place in the city.
(Prior Code, § 97.002) (Ord. 1763, passed 7-23-1956; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-
10-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.003 PUBLIC PARKWAY.
   (A)   The parkway shall be planted with grass or other decorative material
in all residential districts. There shall be no parking, standing or stopping
of vehicles, except in an emergency, or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer (or other designated traffic safety official) on or over a
parkway. Violators shall be subject to fine and shall also be responsible for
any damage to city property caused by driving over or parking on a parkway.
Blacktop or concerting a parkway for any reason must first be approved by the
City Building Department with proper permits issued.
   (B)   Parkways in residential districts shall not be asphalted, black-
topped, stoned or concreted, except to provide a walkway to the residence. No
such asphalt, black-top, stone or concrete shall be installed until an
appropriate permit is obtained from the Building Department.
   (C)   No person, firm or business entity shall install any type of
irrigation system or sprinkling system in the parkway on property unless
approved by the Building Department with the proper permit issued.
   (D)   It shall be the duty of each person residing on property abutting on
city streets to maintain the area between the lot line of the residence and the
curb (or street line where no curb exists) and to keep the area free from weeds
and other noxious herbage or matter. Any person notified by the Public Works
Department or Building Department to remove such offensive matter from the area
fronting upon his or her place of residence shall comply within seven days, or
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $250 per day, unless otherwise
provided in the city’s fee and fine schedule, for each day that the offense
exists and is not abated.
   (E)   While the city recognizes the desire of citizens to beautify the
portion of land owned by the city, and located between the residence and the
adjoining curb (or street line where no curb exists), no encumbrance other than
grass, bushes, shrubs, flowers, trees and decorative rock shall be allowed
therein. No shrubs, trees or bushes may be planted within 30 feet of any
intersection.
   (F)   No driveway over or through a parkway shall be installed by anyone
unless a permit is first obtained from the Building Department allowing
construction and installation of the driveway. Any person, firm or business
entity who installs a driveway over or through a parkway without first
obtaining a permit, shall be subject to fine and shall be responsible to remove
the driveway within seven days of being notified to do so by the Department of
Municipal Services or Building Department.
   (G)   Any city sidewalk that is removed pursuant to a permit allowing
constructions of a driveway over or through a parkway shall be replaced by the
permittee with concrete in accordance with the specifications of the Building
Department which shall be provide at the time the permit is issued.
   (H)   In the event that it becomes necessary for the city to excavate any
portions of the public parkway, the parkway shall be returned to grade and
seeded by the city after said excavation. The city shall not be responsible to
repair or replace any bushes, shrubs, flowers, trees, other decorative matter
or any irrigation or sprinkling system installed in the parkway by any person
or entity which may have been damaged, destroyed or removed during the work
performed in the parkway by the city or other utilities.
(Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 51.004 HONORARY STREET NAME DESIGNATION.
   (A)   City residents that have distinguished themselves by significant
contributions to the community may be honored through an honorary street-name
designation.
   (B)   An honorary street name designation shall be proposed through a stand-
alone ordinance introduced into the City Council. The ordinance submission
shall state the name of the individual intended to be honored and the single
block to receive the designation. The ordinance submission shall be accompanied
by a typed request including the biography of the resident, the reason(s) for
honoring the resident, and a map indicating the block requested for the
designation.
   (C)   Only one honorary street sign will be awarded per year per ward for a
single block. The honorary street signs will be awarded on a first-come first-
served basis. When the City Council passes a designation ordinance, the street
shall retain its official name and its legal status.
   (D)   Honorary street name recipients shall meet the following standards:
      (1)   The individual proposed to be honored with an honorary street name
must have resided or worked in Blue Island for at least 25 years during their
lifetime and must have made significant and long-term contributions through
cultural, humanitarian, historic or military achievement.
      (2)   There shall be a clear geographical relationship to the street and
the nominee.
      (3)   The location for honorary street names shall be restricted to non-
arterial streets and may not be longer than one block in length.
      (4)   The proposed honorary street name shall not duplicate any existing
street name or be similar either phonetically or in spelling to any other
honorary or actual street name.
      (5)   Honorary street name signs will be distinctive in size and color
from the official street name sign and will be installed below the official
street name sign. The applicant will be responsible for the cost of the
materials and installation of the honorary street sign.
      (6)   Payment of the $300 fee for each installation is to be made to the
City of Blue Island prior to fabrication and installation of sign(s). The $300
fee is for a two-faced sign on one side of the street.
      (7)   Sign(s) will be installed by city crews.
      (8)   If a designation ordinance is considered and rejected, no new
designation ordinance on behalf of the same resident may be proposed for a
period of one year.
      (9)   When a section of street has received a designation, no other
proposals for that section of street shall be considered while it has that
designation.
(Ord. 2024-042, passed 10-22-2024)
COMPLETE STREETS POLICY
§ 51.015 TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM; PRINCIPLES.
   (A)   The city will strive to create a safe and efficient transportation
system for users of all ages and abilities.
   (B)   The city will ensure that the safety and convenience of all users of
the transportation system are accommodated in all future roadway projects,
including pedestrians, bicyclists, mass transit users, people with
disabilities, the youth, the elderly, scooterists, motorcyclists, private
motorists, commercial vehicle drivers, freight providers, emergency responders
and adjacent land users.
   (C)   (1)   Divisions (A) and (B) above constitute the principles of this
subchapter and shall be applied to all public right-of-way projects, including
new construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation, maintenance and planning of
roadways, intersections or other transportation facilities.
      (2)   Routes providing access to key destinations, historic districts,
sites and significant travelways, as indicated in the city’s Complete Streets
Map shall be prioritized.
      (3)   Through on-going operations and maintenance, the city shall
identify cost-effective opportunities to include complete streets practices.
      (4)   Planning, design, reconstruction, rehabilitation and maintenance
shall be executed in a balanced, transparent, responsible and equitable manner.
Complete streets principles will be integral when developing, modifying and
updating city plans, manuals, programs, rules and zoning regulations.
(Prior Code § 97.015) (Ord. 11-134, passed 7-12-2011; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-
10-2015)
§ 51.016 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Any exception to applying the provision of this subchapter must be
approved by the City Council, accompanied by documentation that indicates:
      (1)   The cost of establishing bicycle or pedestrian facilities would be
excessively disproportionate to the need or probable use;
      (2)   Existing level of service grade of “B” or better following the
measurement standards adopted in §
51.021 of this chapter;
      (3)   The absence of use by all except motorized users or other factors
that indicate an absence of need, with consideration given to future users; or
      (4)   Non-motorized uses are prohibited by law.
   (B)   Ordinary maintenance activities designed to keep the public right-of-
way in serviceable condition (e.g., mowing, cleaning, sweeping, patching, basic
repair and other interim surface treatments) may be exempt from this policy.
   (C)   Exceptions to this policy shall not be allowed for roadways
functionally classified as arterials.
(Prior Code § 97.016) (Ord. 11-134, passed 7-12-2011; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-
10-2015)
§ 51.017 PARTNERSHIPS.
   (A)   It shall be the goal of the city to foster partnerships with the
state, the county, the Regional Transportation Authority, Metra, Pace, the
Metropolitan Water Reclamation District, local townships, local school
districts, the city park district, the Blue Island Public Library, the Blue
Island Chamber of Commerce and Industry and other city stakeholders to enhance
local connectivity.
   (B)   The city shall coordinate with neighboring municipalities and
jurisdictions to enhance regional connectivity in furtherance of the provisions
of this subchapter, promoting the continuation of such facilities and
accommodations beyond the city’s borders.
(Prior Code § 97.017) (Ord. 11-134, passed 7-12-2011; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-
10-2015)
§ 51.018 MAP; COORDINATION AND IMPLEMENTATION.
   (A)   In furtherance of the complete streets policy adopted by the city,
there shall be established a City of Blue Island Complete Streets Map which may
be amended from time to time by the City Council upon recommendation by the
Plan Commission or other designated committee.
   (B)   The city shall identify county, state and federal transportation
projects and coordinate implementation of this subchapter with the relevant
agencies.
(Prior Code § 97.018) (Ord. 11-134, passed 7-12-2011; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-
10-2015)
§ 51.019 FUTURE DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   The city shall call on its heritage to guide future development in a
manner that is sensitive to local context and character by providing an
interconnected network of streets, sidewalks and trails that supports walking,
bicycling and transit use.
   (B)   The city shall refer to the most current recommendations, requirements
and standards provided by the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) to ensure
safe and accessible travel for all. In recognition of various jurisdictions and
the needs of many users, a flexible and balanced approach that follows other
appropriate design standards may be considered; provided, there is an emphasis
on innovative design options where a comparable level of safety for all users
is present.
   (C)   Accepted design standards and best practices shall be followed in
conjunction with the construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation or
maintenance of the public right-of-way. The planning, design and implementation
for all corridors shall:
      (1)   Include the local community and stakeholders;
      (2)   Consider the function of the roadway;
      (3)   Consider transit-way alignment and station areas; and
      (4)   Assess the current and future needs of the corridor users.
(Prior Code § 97.019) (Ord. 11-134, passed 7-12-2011; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-
10-2015)
§ 51.020 PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (A)   The City Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals shall serve as a
resource on active transportation and complete streets. The Planning and Zoning
Board of Appeals shall indicate opportunities to advance the provisions of this
subchapter by providing recommendations to the City Council. The Planning and
Zoning Board of Appeals may consider the testimony of local non-profits and
civic groups, organizations and city committees.
   (B)   Adjoining land use and context will be prioritized by the Planning and
Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the city’s Complete Streets Map,
attached to the ordinance codified herein. This map may be periodically updated
and amended by the City Council following the recommendations of the Planning
and Zoning Board of Appeals, with consideration of the priorities and goals of
the city and its comprehensive plan.
(Prior Code § 97.020) (Ord. 11-134, passed 7-12-2011; Ord. 2021-024, passed 7-
13-2021)
§ 51.021 GRADES; SUCCESS OF POLICY.
   (A)   Bicycle level of service (BLOS), pedestrian level of service (PLOS)
and bicycle compatibility index (BCI) grades shall be used as a measure of
success of this subchapter. The Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals shall
adopt an official calculator to be used for a minimum of four years. The BLOS,
PLOS and BCI calculators developed by the League of Illinois Bicyclists may be
used to evaluate these measures. Projects that score a grade of “B” or better
shall be considered a successful implementation of this subchapter.
   (B)   The Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals shall report annually to the
City Council the success of the city’s Complete Streets Policy. This report
shall include BLOS/BCI grades before and after Planning and Zoning Board of
Appeals review, additional measures noted above when applicable, and any
exceptions granted to the Complete Streets Policy.
   (C)   The Public Works Department and the Urban Forestry Board shall partner
with the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals to report annually on the
installation of new facilities, including but not limited to:
      (1)   Total miles of on-street bicycle routes defined by streets with
clearly marked or signed bicycle accommodations;
      (2)   Linear feet of new pedestrian accommodations;
      (3)   Number of curb ramps installed along city streets; and
      (4)   Number of new street trees provided in the public right-of-way.
(Prior Code § 97.021) (Ord. 11-134, passed 7-12-2011; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-
10-2015; Ord. 2021-024, passed 7-13-2021)
§ 51.022 IMPLEMENTATION RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Implementation of this subchapter shall be the responsibility of all
elected and appointed officials and city departments. Training on complete
streets, active transportation policies and non-motorized transportation
options will be the responsibility of each city department, as guided by the
Community Development Department.
   (B)   For all proposed improvements to the public right-of-way, the Mayor’s
Office shall notify department heads from the city’s Public Works, Engineering,
Building and Zoning, Community Development, Police, Fire and Finance
Departments of a required pre-planning meeting with the appropriate agents or
jurisdictions. Each department may choose to attend or send a representative to
provide input.
   (C)   The City Public Works shall have the authority to implement any
improvement to the public right-of-way that conforms to this Complete Streets
Policy.
   (D)   (1)   Improvements to corridors, routes and sites prioritized by the
Complete Streets Map shall be subject to review by the Planning and Zoning
Board of Appeals to ensure that all users are accommodated.
      (2)   Following its review, the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals
shall make a recommendation to the City Council, which shall have final
authority to implement this subchapter.
(Prior Code § 97.022) (Ord. 11-134, passed 7-12-2011; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-
10-2015; Ord. 2021-024, passed 7-13-2021)
STREET EXCAVATIONS
§ 51.035 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person, firm or corporation shall make an opening or excavation in any
street or alley of the city, including the parkway and sidewalk portion
thereof, if any, or tunnel thereunder, for any purpose whatsoever, without
first having applied for and received a permit so to do from the Building
Department.
(Prior Code, § 97.035) (Ord. 2333, passed 4-27-1976; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-
10-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.036 PERMITS; VALIDATION BY DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   Permits shall be issued only to employees of the city, to public utility
companies, to plumbers, when such plumbers are licensed and bonded as required
by state law, and to others, when such others are bonded as is required for
plumbers, and to them only after their compliance with the provisions as
hereinafter set forth. No work shall be commenced under a permit until it has
been presented to and validated by the Department of Municipal Services.
(Prior Code, § 97.036) (Ord. 1782, passed 4-22-1957; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-
10-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.037 APPLICATION; DEPOSIT AND INSPECTION FEE; BACKFILLING.
   (A)   Those proposing to make street openings shall make application to do
so, in writing, to the Building Department. The applicant shall state the
location and size of the proposed opening, the material of which the street or
alley, including the parkway and sidewalk portion thereof, if any, is composed,
and such other information as may be required by the Building Department.
Before granting a permit, the Building Department shall require, except in case
of authorized city employees and in case of public utilities, a deposit in the
form of cash or certified check and an inspection fee as established by the
city’s fee and fine schedule.
   (B)   All dirt, other than sand or gravel, taken from a street opening shall
be removed from the location and the opening back-filled with sand or gravel
tamped or flushed before the paving is replaced. Unless permission is given by
the Department of Municipal Services, no opening shall be made within four and
one-half feet of any city water pipe while the ground is frozen to a depth of
12 or more inches or the ground is subject to a freeze or this severity before
refill.
   (C)   The application required by this section shall also show that the
applicant has contacted all operators of gas, electric, telephone, water, sewer
or any other public utility service in the area to receive from them
information concerning the existence and location of any underground
facilities, so that the proper precautions can be taken to avoid accidents
through damage to the underground structures.
(Prior Code, § 97.037) (Ord. 1782, passed 4-22-1957; Ord. 2333, passed 4-27-
1976; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.038 DISPOSITION OF DEPOSIT.
   (A)   The deposit provided in §
51.037 shall be held by the City Clerk for a period of 60 days after the
restoration. If after 60 days, and after inspection by the Department of
Municipal Services, the street or alley is in a condition acceptable to the
city, the deposit shall be returned to the depositor.
   (B)   (1)   If the Department of Municipal Services deems that further work
is necessary to restore the street or alley, and upon refusal or failure of the
depositor to make the required corrections, the city may do the necessary work
with the costs thereof being deducted from the deposit.
      (2)   The balance of the deposit, if any, shall be returned to the
depositor, if the costs of proper restoration exceed the deposit, then the
depositor shall pay to the city the amount of the excess.
(Prior Code, § 97.038) (Ord. 1782, passed 4-22-1957; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-
10-2015)
§ 51.039 BARRICADES; WARNING LIGHTS.
   (A)   At all times, from the commencement of the work until the completion
thereof and the restoration of the street or alley to its original condition,
the person making the opening shall erect and maintain suitable barricades
around the work to prevent pedestrians and other persons and vehicles from
entering the area immediately adjacent to and surrounding the opening.
   (B)   (1)   If entrance to the area is allowed, the opening shall be covered
to protect persons and vehicles from injury or damage and shall, at all times,
during the hours of darkness, have suitable warning lights.
      (2)   The barricades and warning lights shall be of such type and
character and shall be so located as to reasonably protect persons and property
from injury or damage as a result of the existence of the opening and shall be
placed and maintained in a manner reasonably acceptable to the Department of
Municipal Services.
(Prior Code, § 97.039) (Ord. 1782, passed 4-22-1957; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-
10-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR
OF SIDEWALKS
§ 51.050 LAND OWNER TO CONSTRUCT SIDEWALK.
   (A)   Except where sidewalks are to be laid, in accordance with the
provisions of special assessment or taxation ordinances, it shall be the duty
of each owner of a lot or plot of ground abutting upon any street or streets in
the city, to construct a sidewalk, if non-existent, and to maintain it in good
repair, if existent, as hereinafter specified, along the border or borders of
the lot or plot which abuts the owner’s property.
   (B)   This provision may be waived at the discretion of the City Council for
locations where the Council deems sidewalks unnecessary. No person shall
construct, reconstruct or repair any sidewalk in the city without having
obtained a permit from the Building Department. No permit fee will be charged.
The permit shall be validated by the Department of Municipal Services before
work is begun.
   (C)   No sidewalk shall be constructed, reconstructed or repaired other than
in conformity with the specifications and regulations as set forth in this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 97.050) (Ord. 1781, passed 4-22-1957; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-
10-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.051 SIDEWALKS REQUIRED AT NEW OR ALTERED BUILDINGS; DEPOSIT.
   (A)   Persons proposing to erect, alter or repair any building which is
situated on a lot or plot of ground, which abuts upon any street within the
city bordering which there is no sidewalk or sidewalks, shall construct a
concrete sidewalk five feet in width, conforming to specifications, along the
border or borders of that portion or portions of the lot or plot of ground
which abut upon any city street or streets.
   (B)   (1)   No building permit shall be issued for the erection, alteration
or repair of such building until and unless the sidewalk or sidewalks are first
constructed or, in lieu thereof, the applicant for the building permit has
deposited with the City Clerk a sum of money in the amount of $3.50 per lineal
foot of five feet wide sidewalk, to be constructed as in §
51.052(B) and (C) of this chapter. That sum of money shall be held by the City
Clerk until the sidewalk has been constructed and completed in accordance with
the requirements above.
      (2)   When the sidewalk has been constructed and completed, the
Department of Municipal Services shall make an inspection. If the
Superintendent finds that the sidewalk has been properly constructed, the
Superintendent shall inform the City Clerk, in writing, to that effect and the
City Clerk shall return to the person the deposit.
   (C)   (1)   In the event the sidewalk is not satisfactorily completed within
one year from the date of making the deposit, the Department of Municipal
Services may, but shall not be required to, cause the sidewalk to be
constructed or to be satisfactorily completed if the sidewalk has been
commenced, but not completed, and the amount of the deposit, or as much of the
deposit as necessary for that purpose, shall be applied toward the payment of
the cost of the construction or completion.
      (2)   The balance, if any, shall be returned to the person who made the
deposit. A surety bond with sureties to be approved by the City Clerk, in
double the amount that would be required for a cash deposit, may be posted in
lieu of the cash deposit.
(Prior Code, § 97.051) (Ord. 1781, passed 4-22-1957; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-
10-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.052 SPECIFICATIONS AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Specifications and regulations for sidewalks are established to
safeguard the public welfare, to ensure the maximum life of sidewalks, to
provide uniformity in appearance and to provide for varying conditions and
changing practices.
   (B)   Sidewalks shall be five feet wide and constructed of concrete. In
commercial districts, defined in the zoning code, they shall be of sufficient
width to extend from property line to curb line and shall be five inches thick
of aggregate, as follows, or as may be from time to time specified by the
Department of Municipal Services, one part dry portland cement or equal, two
parts clean torpedo sand, four parts stone or of approved size, properly mixed
dry and with water as per accepted concrete practice.
   (C)   The sidewalk shall be one foot from and parallel to the left line
except as hereinabove otherwise provided in commercial districts. The sidewalk
finished grade shall be as established by the city or conform to established
grades of existing adjoining sidewalks, or as established by the Department of
Municipal Services, normally coinciding uniformly with the grade of the curb at
an elevation above the top of the curb of one-forth inch per foot distance from
curb to lot line. From and to those points the sidewalk of above concrete
aggregate shall be laid as follows:
      (1)   Upon sound and compacted cutout or filled subgrade foundation as
approved by the Department of Municipal Services, subject to the contour of the
sidewalk space and to the nature of the existing soil;
      (2)   The wet concrete to be thoroughly compacted and trowelled or
floated to a smooth but unslippery finished surface, properly drain pitched to
street;
      (3)   With acceptable expansion joints at approximately 40-foot
intervals; and
      (4)   With such other specifications in harmony with the regulation
herein established as the Department of Municipal Services may from time to
time direct.
(Prior Code, § 97.052) (Ord. 1781, passed 4-22-1957; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-
10-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.053 WALKWAYS AS ACCESS TO VEHICLES.
   Concrete walkways not to exceed two feet in width may be constructed from
main sidewalk to curb for access to vehicles without further regard to this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 97.053) (Ord. 1781, passed 4-22-1957; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-
10-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.054 CONSTRUCTION FOR PRIVATE USE PROHIBITED.
   No part of any sidewalk or sidewalk space shall be so constructed or used,
except as in §
51.053 of this chapter herein, for private purposes, with raising or lowering
thereof, with steps up or down, or in any other manner interfering with the
public use thereof, provided, vault openings with proper covers may be allowed
at business establishments with the consent of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 97.054) (Ord. 1781, passed 4-22-1987; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-
10-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.055 BARRICADES; WARNING LIGHTS.
   (A)   During the construction, reconstruction, repair or removal of any
sidewalk, those doing so shall erect and maintain suitable barricades at all
times, with warning lights during darkness hours, in such manner as to prevent
and warn pedestrians and others from ordinarily entering the area to avoid
personal injury, damage to property and damage to unset concrete or to other
parts of the sidewalk.
   (B)   No person shall willfully enter an area and damage a sidewalk under
construction when such area is properly barricaded and with warnings and no
unauthorized person shall tear down or otherwise displace any part of the
barricade of warning.
(Prior Code, § 97.055) (Ord. 1781, passed 4-22-1957; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-
10-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
DRIVEWAYS
§ 51.070 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person owning, leasing, operating or maintaining any industrial or
commercial establishment in the city shall hereafter construct, build,
establish or maintain driveways over, across, or upon public sidewalks without
first securing an order so to do from the City Council and a permit so to do.
(Prior Code, § 97.070) (Ord. 1699, passed 12-28-1953; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-
10-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.071 DRIVEWAY INSTALLATION APPLICATION; BOND.
   (A)   (1)   Application for a permit shall be made to the Building
Department and shall contain the name and address of the person, firm or
corporation making application and the proposed location and dimensions of such
driveway.
      (2)   Plans and specifications of the driveway shall be filed with the
Building Department, which plans and specifications shall be accompanied by a
good and sufficient bond executed by the applicant in favor of the city in the
penal sum of $5,000 for each such driveway.
   (B)   The bond shall have, as security thereon, one surety company qualified
to do business in the state and acceptable to the Building Department.
   (C)   (1)   The bond shall be continued upon the faithful observance of each
and all the conditions and provisions of such permit and conditioned further to
indemnify, keep and save harmless the city against all liabilities, judgments,
costs, damages and expenses which may in any wise come against the city in
consequence of the granting of the permit or which may accrue against, be
charged to or recovered from the city by reason of or on account of any act or
thing done by the applicant by virtue of the authority given in the permit.
      (2)   Provided, however, that, in lieu of such surety bond the applicant
may file with the Building Department and keep in force a good and sufficient
policy of insurance issued by an insurance company qualified to do business in
the state and acceptable to the Building Department (or a properly executed
certificate showing that such a policy of insurance has been issued) and
written so as to name the city as one of the insureds in an amount of not less
than $5,000 and conditioned to protect the city in the same manner as required
by the surety bond.
   (D)   Any person, firm or business entity who installs a driveway, or
portions thereof, over or through a parkway without first obtaining a permit,
in addition to being subject to fines pursuant to the city’s fee and fine
schedule, shall be responsible to remove the driveway upon request by the
Department of Municipal Services or Building Department.
(Prior Code, § 97.071) (Ord. 1699, passed 12-28-1953; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-
10-2015)
§ 51.072 GRADING; OBSTRUCTION.
   (A)   No driveway for which a permit is granted shall be so constructed as
to prevent free and unobstructed passage on, over or across the same or in any
such manner as to interfere with the proper drainage and safe grading of the
streets.
   (B)   (1)   Gradual approaches to the regular sidewalk grade shall be made
from the grade of the driveway.
      (2)   The slope of any driveway and the approaches thereto shall exceed
one inch vertical to one foot horizontal in any direction.
   (C)   The location, construction and maintenance of the driveways shall be
under the direction and supervision of the Department of Municipal Services and
the location and construction of same shall be in accordance with the plans and
specifications which shall first be approved by the Department of Municipal
Services, a copy of which plans and specifications shall at all times be kept
on file in the office of the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 97.072) (Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.073 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   All permits granted under the provisions of this subchapter may be
revoked by the City Council at any time without the consent of the holder of
the permit.
   (B)   Upon the termination, by revocation or otherwise of the authority,
rights and provisions herein granted, the driveway herein authorized shall be
removed and the sidewalk space where the same was located shall be restored to
its proper condition to the satisfaction of the Department of Municipal
Services.
   (C)   The restoration shall be at the sole expense of the holder of the
permit without cost or expense of any kind whatsoever to the city.
(Prior Code, § 97.073) (Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 51.074 BOND REQUIRED BEFORE PERMIT ISSUED.
   No permit shall be issued under the provisions of this subchapter until
application therefor has been made and the bond or the insurance policy above
required has been filed as herein required.
(Prior Code, § 97.074) (Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015)
STREET OBSTRUCTIONS
§ 51.085 WIDTH OF STREETS.
   (A)   No plat of land shall be approved by the City Council unless the
streets dedicated thereby shall have a width of at least 50 feet, providing a
strip of land bordering on the plat of land is being dedicated by the plat for
a street, the strip shall be at least 23 feet in width.
   (B)   Nothing in this section contained shall be so construed as to preclude
the City Council from making other requirements as to width of streets as it
may deem advisable for the best interests of the public.
(Prior Code, § 97.085) (Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 51.086 PERMIT REQUIRED TO OBSTRUCT STREETS.
   Whenever any person or corporation obstructs any portion of any public
street or alley in connection with the erection, repair or alteration of any
building, a permit for the obstruction shall be obtained from the City Clerk at
the time when a permit for the erection, repair or alteration of the building
is granted.
(Prior Code, § 97.086) (Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 51.087 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; DEPOSIT.
   Such permit to obstruct or occupy any portion of any public street or alley
shall be issued by the City Clerk, only upon the deposit with the Clerk of a
sum of money equal to 1% of the amount set forth as the cost in the permit for
the erection, repair or alteration of the building; provided that, no deposit
shall be less than $10.
(Prior Code, § 97.087) (Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 51.088 REMOVAL OF OBSTRUCTION.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the person to whom such permit for the
erection, repair or alteration of the building is issued within seven days
after such erection, repair or alteration is completed to remove all
obstructions from the public street or alley and to restore the public street
or alley to as good condition as it was before it was obstructed.
   (B)   In case the obstruction is not removed, and in case the street is not
restored to as good condition as it was previous to the obstruction, the
obstruction shall be removed and the street restored to its former condition by
the Department of Municipal Services and the expense therefor shall be deducted
from the deposit and, upon written authorization of the Department of Municipal
Services, the balance of the deposit shall be returned to the depositor.
(Prior Code, § 97.088) (Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 51.089 REFUND OF DEPOSIT.
   In case the obstruction is removed and such street restored to its former
condition within the time set forth above and to the satisfaction of the
Department of Municipal Services, the depositing shall, upon written
authorization of the Department of Municipal Services, be refunded to the
depositor.
(Prior Code, § 97.089) (Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 51.090 SIGNS AND OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   No person shall erect, permit, maintain or cause to be erected or
maintained, any sign, billboard, post or structure of any kind, upon any
portion of any public street or alley, including those portions of the street
commonly known as the parkway or sidewalk, within the city; provided, however,
that, this prohibition shall not apply to any overhead sign, canopy marquee or
similar device, the lowest portion of which shall be not less than nine feet
above the surface of the street, sidewalk or parkway, as the case may be; and,
provided further that, this prohibition shall not apply to any poles or other
equipment owned or operated by any public utility or to traffic-control devices
or signs erected by the order of the state, the county or the city.
(Prior Code, § 97.090) (Ord, 1604, passed 7-12-1948; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-
10-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.091 POLITICAL SIGNS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association to
erect or install candidate posters, or political or any other signs on any
posts, trees, utility poles or any other structures which are located within
parkways, sidewalks, public easements or other public property or rights-of-way
belonging to the city.
(Prior Code, § 97.091) (Ord. 2343, passed 6-24-1974; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-
10-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE
§ 51.105 REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE REQUIRED.
   Every owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or other persons having charge of any
building in the city abutting upon any street, avenue or public place shall
remove the snow and ice from the sidewalk in front of the building or lot of
ground.
(Prior Code, § 97.105) (Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.106 WIDTH OF SIDEWALK TO BE CLEARED.
   If the sidewalk is of greater width than five feet, it shall not be
necessary for the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or other person having charge
of any building or lot of ground in the city to remove snow and ice from the
sidewalk for a space wider than five feet.
(Prior Code, § 97.106) (Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.107 TIME LIMITS FOR REMOVAL.
   Snow which falls or accumulates during the day, except on Sunday, before 4:
00 p.m., shall be removed from such sidewalks within three hours after it has
fallen or accumulated. Snow which falls or accumulates on Sunday, and after 4:
00 p.m. on other days, shall be removed from such sidewalks before 10:00 a.m.
the following morning.
(Prior Code, § 97.107) (Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.108 REMOVAL OF ICE ON SIDEWALK; TEMPORARY MEASURES.
   If snow and ice on the sidewalk is frozen so hard that it cannot be removed
without injury to the pavement, the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or other
person having charge of any building or lot of ground shall, within the time
specified in §
51.107 of this chapter, strew the abutting sidewalk with ashes, sand, sawdust
or some similar suitable material and shall, as soon thereafter as the weather
shall permit, thoroughly clean the sidewalk.
(Prior Code, § 97.108) (Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.109 OCCUPANT COMPLIANCE.
   In construing the provisions of these sections, where the premises are
occupied, the occupant or person in charge of the premises shall be deemed the
proper person whose duty it shall be to comply with the provisions.
(Prior Code, § 97.109) (Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 52: WATER AND SEWERS
Section
Water and Sewers Generally
   
52.001   Administration; definitions
   
52.002   Quantity and quality; allocation; liability
   
52.003   All water to be metered; meter vaults
   
52.004   Damaging water system
   
52.005   Tapping city water services
   
52.006   Persons authorized to do plumbing
   
52.007   Opening, excavating in street, parkway or alley
   
52.008   Ownership and maintenance of water system components
   
52.009   Separate water and sewer connections to properties
   
52.010   Service pipe; leaks and breakage
   
52.011   Installation of water meters
   
52.012   Sprinkling and irrigation
   
52.013   Water supplied for air-conditioning and/or refrigeration
   
52.014   Backflow prevention devices
   
52.015   Application for water users outside city limits
   
52.016   Special water and sewer installation within the city
   
52.017   Private source of water; reuse of city water
   
52.018   Application by owner for water service
   
52.019   Deposit and fees for use of city water hydrant
   
52.020   Reading of water meters
   
52.021   Meter testing; changes; charges
   
52.022   Monthly billing; meter water rates
   
52.023   Payment and delinquency of water bills; notice of lien
   
52.024   Sewer maintenance charge
Wells
   
52.035   Findings and determinations
   
52.036   Use, installation and drilling; regulations
   
52.037   Effective date
Cross-Connection Control
   
52.050   Connection method approval
   
52.051   Surveys and investigations; authority
   
52.052   Discontinuance of water service; disconnection
   
52.053   Consumer responsibility; costs
   
52.054   Effective date
Sewers and Drains
   
52.065   General requirements
   
52.066   Separate sewer connections
   
52.067   House drains
   
52.068   Drains in commercial garages
   
52.069   Basement drains
   
52.070   Surfaced area drainage
   
52.071   Rain water drain
   
52.072   Overhead sewers
 
   
52.999   Penalty
WATER AND SEWERS GENERALLY
§ 52.001 ADMINISTRATION; DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The administration of the Water and Sewer Department of the city shall
be with the Department of Municipal Services and also subject to the Mayor and
City Council of said city and their authorized officers and committees. Work in
connection with or affecting the water system proper, and the reading of water
meters, shall be under the subordinate supervision of the Department of
Municipal Services. Work affecting streets or alleys due to causes pertaining
to the water system shall be under the supervision of the Department of
Municipal Services. The Building and Zoning Department shall issue all required
permits, receive fees and deposits and keep records thereof.
   (B)   All details of a plumbing installation as to materials, workmanship,
methods, supervision, inspection and other regulations pertaining to any and
all appurtenances connected to the water system of the city, shall be in
compliance with this subchapter and with
Ch. 151 of this code of ordinances and with any other ordinance or ordinances
now or hereafter in effect relating to plumbers or plumbing within this city.
   (C)   The City Clerk shall supervise the issuance and records of water
bills, such bills being prepared from meter readings delivered to the Clerk’s
office by the Department of Municipal Services. The City Clerk shall keep a
record of all such notices of lien as may be filed pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter. Upon the full payment of any delinquent sewer maintenance
account in connection with which any notice of lien has been filed, the City
Clerk or designee shall execute a release evidencing the satisfaction and
discharge of such lien and deliver the same to the person so paying such
delinquent account.
   (D)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CATCH BASIN. A receptacle which separates and removes greases, dirt,
gravel and the like to prevent their entrance into the house sewer. The liquid
waste entering the CATCH BASIN shall not contain fecal matter.
      CITY WATER MAIN and CITY MAIN SEWER. The main lines of the city in the
street which, in the case of water, furnish water supply to properties, and in
the case of sewer, collects sewage and drain from properties.
      FIXTURE. A fixed plumbing appurtenances, usually within the building in
or through which water is used, and which usually is connected to both water
and sewer systems.
      HOUSE DRAIN. The pipe within a building which receives the total
discharge from all fixtures, and which conducts the same to the house sewer;
      HOUSE SEWER. The tile or cast iron sewer which begins outside the wall of
a building and connects the house drain with the city sewer main in the street.
      STOP COCK, VALVE or SHUT OFF. Controls of water or other matter in a pipe
line, used principally herein in connection with service pipe.
      TRAP. A fitting or device so constructed as to prevent the passage of air
or gas through a pipe or fixture by means of a water seal.
      WASTE PIPE. Any pipe receiving the discharge from any fixture or fixtures
other than toilets:
      WATER METER. A device for registering, in gallons or cubic feet, the flow
and consumption of water to a premises.
      WATER SERVICE PIPE. The pipe connected to the city water main and
extended to the water meter at the premises, through which a property is served
with water supply.
(Prior Code, § 52.01) (Ord. 2344, passed 6-22-1976; Ord. 2558, passed 7-28-
1981; Ord. 06-007, passed 1-24-2006; Ord. 2014-007, passed 2-11-2014; Ord.
2015-033, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 52.002 QUANTITY AND QUALITY; ALLOCATION; LIABILITY.
   (A)   The quantity, quality and pressure of water delivered by the city to
the premises of consumers hereunder at any given time shall be only such as is
within the ability of the city to provide at that time, subject to the
limitations and conditions of the water supply furnished to the city, to the
operation of the distribution system of the city, to any other physical reason
and to Acts of God.
   (B)   During, and for the reason of, an emergency in which it may, in the
opinion of the Department of Municipal Services, be inadvisable or impossible
to supply water to users hereunder in sufficient quantities as might be desired
by all users for all purposes, such Supervisor of Water and Sewer shall have
the right to curtail and to allocate the use of water from the system to all
users for all purposes, or to curtail or prohibit entirely the use of water
from its system for specific purposes, such action to be reported promptly to
the City Council, and the normal supply of water restored as soon as conditions
permit.
   (C)   It is herewith specified, and shall be understood by any and all
hereafter served with water, that such water service is subject to the express
conditions and provisions of this subchapter and that such persons, firms or
corporations take such water subject to the risks thereof, and that the city
shall in no manner be liable or responsible for any degree of loss or damage
whatsoever to any product or thing whatsoever, including life and health, which
may at any time be claimed to have been incurred by the act of the city serving
water hereunder and/or by the exercise by said city of the provisions of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 52.02) (Ord. 06-007, passed 1-24-2006; Ord. 2014-007, passed 2-
11-2014; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 52.003 ALL WATER TO BE METERED; METER VAULTS.
   (A)   All water taken from the water mains of the city shall be metered
through meters furnished and approved by the city, as hereinafter provided,
including water taken from a public fire hydrant, and then only as authorized
by an officer of the City Fire or Water and Departments.
   (B)   (1)   Where meter vaults are permitted by the Water Department, such
vaults shall be maintained by the owner.
      (2)   Where water meter of two inches and over in size is installed in
outside meter vault, such vault shall be not less than five feet by seven feet
in area, of water-tight construction, and provided with bottom drain.
(Prior Code, § 52.03) (Ord. 06-007, passed 1-24-2006; Ord. 2014-007, passed 2-
11-2014; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 52.004 DAMAGING WATER SYSTEM.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall willfully or carelessly break, injure, mar,
deface, interfere with or disturb any apparatus, attachment or appurtenance of
the City Water and Sewer Department and water distribution system or commit any
act tending to obstruct or impair the intended use of such equipment.
      (2)   The perpetrators of such act or acts, whether done willfully,
carelessly or accidentally, shall be liable to the city for the costs and
results thereof.
(Prior Code, § 52.04)
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or damage
any part of the water or sewer system of the city.
      (2)   Any person who so interferes with the city’s water or sewer system
shall be subject to the penal provisions of this chapter and shall also be
liable for damages including reasonable attorney fees for any such conduct.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to discharge
or permit or cause to be discharged any sanitary or industrial wastewater into
any storm sewers constructed as set out by the City Council from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 51.01) (Ord. 06-007, passed 1-24-2006; Ord. 2014-007, passed 2-
11-2014; Ord. 2413, passed 8-8-1978; Ord. 2452, passed 4-10-1979; Ord. 2531,
passed 11-11-1980; Ord. 93-204, passed 1-26-1993; Ord. 96-408, passed 9-10-
1996; Ord. 98-218, passed 9-8-1998; Ord. 99-239, passed 1-26-1999; Ord. 03-455,
passed 10-14-2003; Ord. 07- 074, passed 4-24-2007; Ord. 12-162, passed 2-28-
2012; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.005 TAPPING CITY WATER SERVICES.
   (A)   All water services shall be tapped by a licensed plumber responsible
for the installation.
   (B)   All details of a plumbing installation as to materials, workmanship,
methods, supervision, inspection and other regulations pertaining to any and
all appurtenances connected to the water system of the city, shall be in
compliance with state law, this code of ordinances and with any other ordinance
or ordinances now or hereafter in effect relating to plumbers or plumbing
within this city.
   (C)   Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
subject to §
10.99 of the code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 52.05) (Ord. 06-007, passed 1-24-2006; Ord. 2014-007, passed 2-
11-2014; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015; Ord. 2023-022, passed 3-30-2023)
§ 52.006 PERSONS AUTHORIZED TO DO PLUMBING.
   No person, except a plumber licensed and bonded pursuant to state law, or
authorized city or state employees, shall do plumbing work within the city in
connection with or connected to the water system of the city.
(Prior Code, § 52.06) (Ord. 06-007, passed 1-24-2006; Ord. 2014-007, passed 2-
11-2014; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 52.007 OPENING, EXCAVATING IN STREET, PARKWAY OR ALLEY.
   (A)   An opening or excavation in any street, parkway or alley of the city
for any purpose whatsoever related to the water system of the city shall only
be performed by authorized city employees and plumbers licensed and bonded as
required by the city.
   (B)   Any such opening or excavation shall also be subject to and performed
in accordance with the provisions of this code of ordinances and to the
provisions of any other ordinance or ordinances now or hereafter in effect
relating to street, parkway or alley openings.
(Prior Code, § 52.07) (Ord. 06-007, passed 1-24-2006; Ord. 2014-007, passed 2-
11-2014; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.008 OWNERSHIP AND MAINTENANCE OF WATER SYSTEM COMPONENTS.
   (A)   (1)   All water pipes and fittings connected with the water system of
the city which are placed under any highway, street or alley of the city, are
the property of the city, although the cost of same may have been paid for by
others.
      (2)   The normal maintenance of the water pipes and fittings connected to
the water system and located between the city main and the roundway in the
parkway shall be provided and paid for by the city. The maintenance of water
pipes, fittings and any other fixtures and appurtenances between the roundway
and the water meter shall be provided and paid for by the owner of the property
to which water is supplied.
      (3)   Maintenance, repair or replacement of a house water service at any
point between the stop-cock and the building shall be by the owner. The
maintenance, repair or replacement of a house sewer at any point between the
city’s sewer main and a building shall be by the owner.
   (B)   All water meters shall be furnished by the city and will remain its
property.
   (C)   The city will furnish and maintain all meters “one inch” and smaller
in diameter. These meters will be paid for by the user and may be installed by
licensed plumbers. If this type and size of meter is damaged by neglect or
otherwise, the cost of repairs to the meter shall be paid for by the user.
   (D)   The user of any meter which is more than “one inch” in diameter will
pay the city for the cost of the meter. The user of a meter of this size shall
also be responsible to maintain the meter in proper working order and pay for
the costs of any repairs to the meter to keep it in proper working order. This
responsibility of maintenance of meters of this size shall include, but not be
limited to, calibration of the meter every five years to assure the accuracy of
the meter. This calibration shall be performed by a duly licensed meter
company. The company performing the calibration shall submit a certified report
of its findings to the City Department of Municipal Services within seven
working days of the date of the calibration. The cost and expense of all
maintenance and repairs to a meter of this size including, but not limited to,
the cost and expense of the calibration shall be paid for by the user of the
meter.
   (E)   If the City Department of Municipal Services determines, after its own
inspection or receipt of a report from a licensed meter company, that the meter
is not functioning accurately, is not properly calibrated or is otherwise not
in proper working order, it shall submit written notice to the user of the
meter of this determination. The user of the meter shall make all necessary
repairs, perform all necessary maintenance or perform the required calibration
to the meter to bring it into proper working order within seven working days
after receipt of this notice. If the user of the meter fails or refuses to make
said repairs, perform necessary maintenance or perform the required calibration
within said seven-day period, the city may order the repairs, maintenance and/
or calibration to be performed by its own water department or a licensed
company and charge the user for all costs and expenses for the repair,
maintenance and/or calibration on the user’s next water bill or in any other
appropriate manner. If access is not given to repair or replace the meter,
water service will be terminated until repairs to meter have been completed.
(Prior Code, § 52.08) (Ord. 06-007, passed 1-24-2006; Ord. 2014-007, passed 2-
11-2014; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 52.009 SEPARATE WATER AND SEWER CONNECTIONS TO PROPERTIES.
   (A)   From and after passage of this subchapter, each distinct main building
to which water is supplied shall be so supplied through a separate and
independent water service pipe, with separate tap to the water main, and with
separate meter to each such main building. Each separate service pipe shall be
equipped with a roundway or valve in the supply line just ahead of meter,
controlled from within the building or in the meter vault.
   (B)   Each distinct main building shall have a separate and independent
house sewer extending from the building to the main sewer. Such house sewer
shall be of tile or cast iron and shall be not less than six inches internal
diameter.
(Prior Code, § 52.09) (Ord. 06-007, passed 1-24-2006; Ord. 2014-007, passed 2-
11-2014; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 52.010 SERVICE PIPE; LEAKS AND BREAKAGE.
   (A)   (1)   The water service pipe shall run in as direct a line as possible
between water main to parkway roundway to meter, and shall be approximately
five feet below ground level, with no branch service installed between main and
meter. The service pipe shall extend above the basement floor if the meter is
in a basement, above the building floor if the meter is in a building or above
the vault floor if the meter is in an outside vault. Such service pipe must be
no less than one-inch internal diameter in size and shall consist of the
materials and be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the City of
Blue Island Plumbing Code (hereinafter Plumbing Code) as amended from time to
time. It shall be equipped with a shut off both at the parkway and at the meter
as aforesaid.
      (2)   Water service pipe shall extend above the basement floor if meter
is in basement, above the building floor if meter is in building, or above
vault floor if meter is in outside vault. Such water service pipe, if two
inches or less internal diameter, shall be copper pipe, type K, with flared
joints.
      (3)   Water service pipes over two inches internal diameter shall be of
ductile iron pipe, asphaltum coated exterior with joints of mechanical or push
type fitted to withstand hydrostatic pressure of 100 pounds per square inch.
      (4)   All such water service pipe shall be laid and be of such surplus
length as to prevent breakage and rupture by settlement.
      (5)   Between the water main and the stop-cock in the parkway, such
service pipe must be laid on a shelf cut in the sewer ditch or in a separate
ditch for same, as no service pipe will be permitted to be laid on top of
sewer. Where there is an existing stub in the parkway, with a lead service pipe
terminating at the round way, and with the round way for shut-off valve) having
a threaded end for connection, such connection shall be made with a brass
solder nipple (for lead) or with a suitable fitting for a flared copper
service. No repairs shall be made to an existing water service pipe of material
other than lead or type K copper pipe in a size of two inch internal diameter
or less, and any such water service pipe requiring repairs shall instead be
replaced in its entirely from the water main to the meter with a water service
pipe of material conforming to the materials and construction as hereinbefore
specified in this section.
   (B)   In the event a leak or break occurs in a water or sewer service line,
the following procedure shall be followed.
      (1)   All such leaks shall be properly repaired by such water owner.
      (2)   A permit shall be required for such repair work. In the event the
owner fails to properly repair such break or leak, a registered letter shall be
sent to such owner at his or her last known address advising such owner to
repair such situation immediately. A copy of the same shall be delivered to the
premises and posted on the premises in a conspicuous place.
      (3)   If within five days of mailing such letter the owner shall not have
made the repair necessary to secure the system, the city shall make such repair
and charge such repair to the owner.
      (4)   Any charges, including reasonable attorney fees, shall become and
constitute a lien against the real estate.
(Prior Code, § 52.10) (Ord. 06-007, passed 1-24-2006; Ord. 2014-007, passed 2-
11-2014; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 52.011 INSTALLATION OF WATER METERS.
   (A)   All water meters shall be furnished by the city, but with installation
charge to be paid by the plumber as provided in the Plumbing Code, and shall be
of such type, size and construction as the city may specify, and shall at all
times remain the property of the city; provided, however, that, additional or
auxiliary meter or meters desired by the owner or consumer being supplied for
the purposes of subdividing the total water used, shall be at the entire
expense of such owner or consumer, and shall be his, her or their property. The
reading of such additional meters and the maintenance thereof shall be by the
owner or users.
   (B)   All meters shall be installed as close as possible to the entry point
of the service pipe. The location shall be in accordance with the directions
and requirements of the City Public Works Department. No person, other than
licensed and bonded plumbers or employees of the City Public Works Department,
shall be permitted to install, remove or change the location of any meter.
Meters must be at all times readily accessible for reading and examination by
the designated employees or designees of the City Public Works Department.
Meters must not be exposed to danger of damage by frost or freezing. If the
meter becomes damaged by frost or freezing, by hot water or in any other manner
due to the carelessness or neglect of the owner or occupant of the premises, or
their agent, such owner or occupant must pay for such damage.
   (C)   Meters shall be installed by a licensed and bonded plumber and shall
be so installed and operating before completion of the installation and before
water is first supplied to the premises; provided, the plumber may use a
temporary water connection without meter for testing purposes only.
   (D)   When the water distribution system pipes in any building or structure
are used as the ground for the electric system serving said building or
structure, a jumper wire being a minimum size #6 wire conductor shall be
connected to the pipe on each side of the water meter so as to form a by-pass
and continuous circuit around said water meter.
   (E)   Remote meters shall be installed in all residences served by the
city’s waterworks system. Installation of the remote meters shall be performed
by the City Public Works Department, or a thhird party ccontracted by the
city.. Only meters approved by the Public Works Department shall be installed.
The cost of installation for these meters, and the cost of installation of
additional equipment, including but not limited to interior shurt off valves
near the water meter, expended in order to comply with the Illinois Plumbing
Code, shall be included on the billing statement issued to the owner of the
residence after installation of the meter and/or other necessary equipment.
Owners have one month from the date of notification by the city to install a
remote meter. If compliance is not met during that period of time, water
service will be turned off and not turned on until the remote meter has been
installed.
(Prior Code, § 52.11) (Ord. 06-007, passed 1-24-2006; Ord. 2014-007, passed 2-
11-2014; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015; Ord. 2023-037, passed 8-22-2023)
§ 52.012 SPRINKLING AND IRRIGATION.
   (A)   Unrestricted lawn sprinkling shall not be allowed from May 15 through
September 15 of each year. During such timeframe, lawn sprinkling shall not
occur on consecutive days. Sprinkling and watering of lawns during the hours of
12:00 noon through and including 6:00 p.m. shall be completely prohibited
during the period of time beginning on May 15 of each year and continuing
through September 15 of each year. During this period beginning May 15 of each
year, lawn sprinkling shall only be permitted at other hours of the day, unless
it is determined by the Department of Municipal Services that storage
requirements or other water system demands require additional restrictions and
preclude sprinkling even during these times.
   (B)   Sprinkling and watering of lawns by residents for periods of time in
excess of two hours during the period beginning May 15 through and including
September 15 of each year is completely prohibited.
   (C)   Sprinkling and watering of lawns by residents for periods of time in
excess of three hours during the period of the year from September 16 of each
year through and including May 15 of each succeeding year is completely
prohibited.
   (D)   The Department of Municipal Services is authorized to impose and
implement such other restrictions on non-essential outside water uses as may be
necessary in the event of an emergency water shortage or when storage
requirements and other system demands preclude sprinkling and other non-
essential outside water uses. These restrictions may include a complete
temporary ban on all outside water uses in the event of an emergency water
shortage or a further restriction on the hours of the day when lawn sprinkling
and other non-essential outside water usage may be conducted. Prior to imposing
and implementing these restrictions the Department will notify the Mayor and,
at a minimum, the City Council members who serve on the Municipal Services
Committee of the City Council and shall provide them with reasons for
implementing and imposing additional restrictions on non-essential outside
water usage and lawn sprinkling.
   (E)   Residents of the city are expressly encouraged to restrict lawn
sprinkling to the hours of the day between 3:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. during the
period of each year beginning on May 15 through and including September 15, and
at all other times of the year if possible.
   (F)   New lawns less than three months old are exempted from the sprinkling
provisions set forth in this section.
(Prior Code, § 52.12) (Ord. 06-007, passed 1-24-2006; Ord. 2014-007, passed 2-
11-2014; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.013 WATER SUPPLIED FOR AIR- CONDITIONING AND/OR REFRIGERATION.
   From and after passage of this subchapter, water will be supplied to air-
conditioning and/or refrigeration systems subject to the following provisions.
   (A)   The terms AIR-CONDITIONING SYSTEM and REFRIGERATION SYSTEM, for the
purposes hereof, shall mean those systems using water from the city water mains
for the dissipation of the heat of compression and for condensation of
refrigerant, as differentiated from those systems using air as a cooling medium
for those purposes.
   (B)   A WATER CONSERVING DEVICE shall mean a water cooling tower, spray
pond, evaporative condenser or other equipment, by which city water after use
is cooled through contact with the air and by evaporation, and is recirculated
and re-used, thereby limiting the use of fresh water from the water mains to
replace that water lost by evaporation and windage.
   (C)   (1)   All water cooled air-conditioning and/or refrigeration systems,
regardless of horsepower size, and whether in single or multiple units, using
the city water supply, shall be equipped with and have in operation a water
conserving device.
      (2)   The city water to be supplied to each such system shall not exceed
two-tenths gallons per minute per compressor horsepower of the system.
      (3)   If an incident of short duration occurs when the condensing
pressure in the system becomes sufficiently high as to endanger life or
property, additional water may be used for the duration of the incident upon
receipt of permission to so do from the Department of Municipal Services.
      (4)   During the off-peak season of the demand upon the city’s water
system, between November 1 and May 1 of the succeeding year, a greater volume
of water than that specified herein may be used in air-conditioning or
refrigeration systems provided the city in the exercise of discretion by the
Department of Municipal Services, grants permission for the use of the greater
volume of water.
   (D)   The taking of city water as a prime cooling medium for any space,
product or similar use, or through a mechanical system as described in
divisions (A) through (C) above without installation of a water conserving
device which recirculates and reuses the water used is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 52.13) (Ord. 06-007, passed 1-24-2006; Ord. 2014-007, passed 2-
11-2014; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.014 BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
   If, in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code, an approved backflow
prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water supply
system, the Department of Municipal Services will give notice to the water
customer to install such an approved device immediately. The water customer
shall, at his or her own expense, install such an approved device at a location
and in a manner in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code, and shall have
inspections and tests made of such approved devices upon installation and as
required by the Illinois Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 2015-040, passed 12-8-2015)
§ 52.015 APPLICATION FOR WATER USERS OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.
   (A)   When any person, firm or corporation outside the city limits desires
to receive a water supply from the water mains of the city, he or she shall
make application to the City Council utilizing the form as provided by the city
and as may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   Said application shall be referred by the City Council to the
Municipal Services Committee of said Council, who shall consider same and make
recommendation thereon to the City Council. No connection for water service
outside the city shall be made unless and until the application is approved by
the City Council.
   (C)   The making of such water connection and the furnishing of water by the
city to every user outside the city, shall be subject to the following
conditions.
      (1)   Said water connection and furnishing of water shall conform in its
entirety with the provisions of this subchapter and the Plumbing Code of the
city, as either or both may now exist or hereafter be amended.
      (2)   The furnishing of such water by the city, and the use hereof by the
consumer, shall at all times be subject to all rules and regulations affecting
water users within the city, unless otherwise specified, and shall be subject
to any special regulations governing water users outside the city.
      (3)   In case any territory is annexed to the city in which territory any
water pipes are laid in accordance with these provisions, all such pipes which
are placed in or under any highway, street or alley shall, upon annexation,
become the property of the city.
      (4)   In the event of the annexation to the city of territory which shall
include the premises of the owners, the said owners agree that they will not
hinder by legal or other means any local improvements for which they may in the
future be assessed or which may be levied against said premises, and further
agree that they will not sign any petition opposing the annexation to the city
of the territory in which said premises are located.
      (5)   The location of the water meter shall be at the discretion of the
city.
      (6)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property outside
the city to which water is furnished by the city to keep in good repair all
water pipes and fittings between the city main and the meter, and to promptly
report leaks therein or damage thereto.
      (7)   A connection fee shall be paid to the city before the connection is
made for any connection. For larger connections, the fee shall be such amount
as the City Council shall fix at the time it approves the making of such
connection.
      (8)   No additional connection for the furnishing of a water supply to
any other building or place than that specified in the application shall be
made or permitted unless and until a new application therefore in the form set
forth by the Council is made and approved in the manner required in this
section and the connection fee paid.
(Prior Code, § 52.16) (Ord. 06-007, passed 1-24-2006; Ord. 2014-007, passed 2-
11-2014; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 52.016 SPECIAL WATER AND SEWER INSTALLATION WITHIN THE CITY.
   (A)   A SPECIAL PRIVATE SEWER OR WATER INSTALLATION within the city to be
served by water from the city water mains is defined as that installation
connection to and extending from a water main of the city, or facilities of the
city, to a location within the city where such extension would not ordinarily
be made, and/or for reason of city water mains not being laid in the street or
alley bounding such premises, the connections being made at the special request
of the property owner and at his or her entire expense.
   (B)   Application for a special sewer or water permit shall be made to the
Department of Municipal Services. Fees and deposits required to be made for
such special installation permits shall be as provided in the city’s fee and
fine schedule.
   (C)   If the application for special installation is approved and permission
is granted, the following provisions, and other regulations pertaining to such
installation which may now or hereafter be in effect, shall apply.
      (1)   Said water and/or sewer connection and the furnishing of water or
the use of the sewer shall conform in its entirety with the provisions of this
chapter and all other applicable ordinances.
      (2)   The furnishing of water to such special installations, and the use
thereof of such water, shall at all times be subject to any special regulations
governing outside the city water users, if such special private installation is
located outside of the city limits.
      (3)   Whether or not such special sewer and/or water installation is
located within or without city limits, all such pipe which are placed in or
under any street, parkway or alley of the city shall become the property of the
city.
      (4)   If such special installation is located outside the city limits, in
case any territory is annexed to this city in which territory any water or
sewer pipes are laid in accordance with these provisions, all such pipe which
are placed in or under any highway, street, alley or parkway shall upon
annexation become the property of the city.
      (5)   The applicant will maintain all such special sewer and water pipe
connection with the city mains to the premises, and the he or she will promptly
report and repair any damage thereto or leaks therein.
(Prior Code, § 52.17) (Ord. 06-007, passed 1-24-2006; Ord. 2014-007, passed 2-
11-2014; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 52.017 PRIVATE SOURCE OF WATER; REUSE OF CITY WATER.
   (A)   Water used in or about any private premises or public place, including
use for fire protection, from a source such as wells, cisterns, rivers or from
any other source, except the city water supply system, shall be kept entirely
separate from and with no direct or indirect connections to the city water
supply system.
   (B)   No water from the supply mains of the city, which water has been once
used for any purpose, shall be piped or conveyed in any manner into the city
water supply system so as to become mixed with or form a part thereof; nor
shall any such once used water from the city mains, or water from any private
source, be used in any processing of foods or other things for human or animal
consumption.
(Prior Code, § 52.18) (Ord. 06-007, passed 1-24-2006; Ord. 2014-007, passed 2-
11-2014; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.018 APPLICATION BY OWNER FOR WATER SERVICE.
   In all cases where water is to be supplied to any premises for use by a
tenant, an application shall first be made therefore in writing by the fee
title holder of the premises or the beneficiary of a land trust having power of
direction, if title to the premises is held in a land trust. The application
shall be made upon forms to be supplied by the Water Department. The applicant
shall, by the terms of the application, agree to pay any charges for the water
supplied to the premises for use by any occupant or tenant and shall be liable
to pay for all water supplied to the premises for use by any occupant or
tenant. The payment of water billing is the responsibility of the property
owner.
(Ord. 2014-007, passed 2-11-2014; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 52.019 DEPOSIT AND FEES FOR USE OF CITY WATER HYDRANT.
   (A)   Use of a city water hydrant to obtain water for any purpose must first
be approved in writing by the Department of Municipal Services. Prior to using
a city water hydrant for any purpose the user must make a written application
describing the proposed use. The user must also make a deposit in the amount
set forth in the city’s fee and fine schedule and provide a certificate of
insurance insuring the city for any damage caused to the water hydrant, water
main, water meter or any other component of the city’s water system. Water used
shall not be wasted and shall be used only for the purpose specified in the
application, and such use may be suspended or terminated at any time when in
the discretion of the Superintendent of Water the best interests of the city
require suspension or termination.
   (B)   After the use of the water hydrant is completed, the Department of
Municipal Services will inspect the hydrant, meter and water system for
damages. If the water hydrant is found undamaged, the deposit shall be returned
to the depositor after payment in full is made for water usage. If the hydrant
is found damaged, the deposit shall be applied to the costs of necessary
repairs or replacement. If the cost of necessary repairs or replacement exceeds
the amount of the deposit, then the user shall pay the city the amount of the
excess cost.
   (C)   The user shall also be responsible to pay the city the cost of the
water used in accordance with the rates for minimum usage for a three-inch
meter plus the then prevailing per 1,000 gallon or fraction thereof cost for
all water used in excess of the minimum usage.
(Ord. 2014-007, passed 2-11-2014; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 52.020 READING OF WATER METERS.
   (A)   The supply of city water through each separate service pipe must be
recorded by one meter, for which only one account will be rendered by the City
Collector.
   (B)   Meters of all residential consumers shall be read every other month
and billing will be monthly. Commercial accounts will be read monthly and
billed monthly.
   (C)   Any decision of the Superintendent of Water made under the provisions
of this section concerning billing and charges for water services may be
appealed to the City Administrator’s office by submitting an appeal form
provided by the city.
(Ord. 2014-007, passed 2-11-2014; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015; Ord. 2022-
046, passed 8-23-2022)
§ 52.021 METER TESTING; CHANGES; CHARGES.
   (A)   In case of breakage, stoppage or any other irregularity in the meter,
the owner or consumer is to notify the Department of Municipal Services
immediately and all necessary repairs will be made by the city, except as
provided in §
52.008(D).
   (B)   Upon the written request of the owner or consumer, the proper official
will test the meter servicing the premises. A deposit of money in an amount
which is equal to the current rate charged to the city to calibrate the water
meter, as such amount is determined by the Department of Municipal Services or
his or her designee from time to time, will be required before the meter is
tested. The deposit will be returned after the meter is tested if it is found
to be registering incorrectly, that is greater than 2% of accurate, such
condition being to the disadvantage of the consumer. Otherwise, the deposit
shall be retained by the city to cover the costs of the test. The owner or
consumer may be present at the time of the test, and the results of the test
shall be reported to the owner or consumer as the case may be. If the testing
of a meter indicates that it was registering incorrectly, the charge to the
consumer for water used shall be on the basis of the consumption for the
corresponding period of the previous year. If the meter had not been in service
for a year, or in the corresponding period of the previous year, or if for any
other reason the charge for the corresponding period cannot be properly
determined, the charge shall be equitably adjusted by the Municipal Services
Committee. The minimum metered rate as hereinafter specified will be charged
for as long as the meter remains on the service.
   (C)   In response to the written request of the owner or the owner’s
authorized agent asking that the water be shut off and the meter removed, the
city will proceed to comply with such request, and the minimum rate as
hereinafter specified will cease on the date when the meter is removed. No
charge will be made for the removal of a meter, but a charge as set forth in
the city’s fee and fine schedule will be imposed for reinstallation of a meter.
After the water supply has been shut off for any reason except for repairs, the
service will not be reestablished unless a written order is given to the
Department of Municipal Services by the owner or authorized agent and any
arrearage in payments are paid in full.
   (D)   Where a meter reading must be estimated because of inaccessibility of
the meter, the charge to the consumer will be a weighted average of previous
use. The consumer shall pay all additional charges when the meter is read and
shall not be entitled to a cash refund should the charge be higher than the
reading, unless authorized by theCity Administrator or designee after appeal
thereto. A consumer shall always be charged at least a minimum charge as
provided for in §
52.022, even if a gallonage credit exists. A card returned by the consumer
showing an actual reading of the meter shall not be considered an estimate.
(Prior Code, § 52.23) (Ord. 2014-007, passed 2-11-2014; Ord. 2015-033, passed
11-10-2015; Ord. 2022-046, passed 8-23-2022)  Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.022 MONTHLY BILLING; METER WATER RATES.
   (A)   Generally. All city water supplied to consumers shall be metered and
all such water shall be charged at the regular classified rates in effect at
the same time that the water is consumed with no allowance being made for
excessive consumption due to leaks or waste. The charge for water supplied
through meters shall be as provided for in the city’s fee and fine schedule.
      (1)   For every building, structure, establishment or institution served
by the city, a percentage of the net water bill for every dwelling or building
unit shall be charged as set forth in the city’s fee and fine schedule. Sewer
maintenance charges shall be contained in said monthly bill as provided for in
this code.
      (2)   All city water supplied to consumers shall be metered and all such
water shall be charged at the regular classified rates in effect at the same
time the water is consumed with no allowance being made for excessive
consumption due to leaks or waste. The charge for water supplied through meters
shall be as provided for in the city’s fee and fine schedule.
      (3)   When water is supplied through one meter to one building which
contains more than one dwelling unit, commercial or store unit, office unit or
any combination thereof, the consumer in whose name the water account is
registered shall be charged an additional amount per month, or fraction of a
month, for each additional unit supplied through such meter as established by
the city’s fee and fine schedule. Such charges shall be in addition to the
rates charged for water usage.
      (4)   Minimum usage and billing for fire service lines.
         (a)   The minimum bills for water supplied through a meter for fire
service lines shall be as established by the city’s fee and fine schedule.
         (b)   The minimum bills for water supplied through a meter for fire
service lines shall be as established by the city’s fee and fine schedule.
      (5)   Rates for trailer parks.
         (a)   Where water is supplied through one meter to a trailer park,
whether located within or outside the corporate limits of the city, the person,
firm or corporation in whose name the water account is registered shall be
charged an additional amount per month or fraction of a month for each trailer,
or other person, firm or corporation supplied through such meter as set forth
in the city’s fee and fine schedule. The charges set forth in this division (A)
(5) shall be in addition to the rates charged for water usage.
         (b)   Each owner or operator of a trailer park as hereinabove set
forth shall at the end of each month furnish the Department of Municipal
Services a list showing the number of trailers located in such park at the end
of the month. The Superintendent may require that the list be sworn to under
oath by the owner or operator.
   (B)   Rate for users located wholly or partly outside of corporate limits.
      (1)   When water is supplied through one meter to more than one person,
firm or corporation, whether it be for residential, commercial or industrial
uses or otherwise, the consumer in whose name the water account is registered
shall be charged an additional amount per month or fraction of a month for each
person, firm or corporation supplied through such meter as set forth in the
city’s fee and fine schedule. The charges set forth in this division (B)(1)
shall be in addition to the rates charged for water usage.
      (2)   All persons, firms or corporations located wholly or partly outside
of the corporate limits of the city in whose name the water account is
registered shall furnish to the Department of Municipal Services of the city on
or before April 30 of each year, or sooner if requested by the Department of
Municipal Services, a list in writing showing the name, address, description
and character of use of property, indicating whether the use is residential,
commercial, industrial or otherwise. The list shall also identify every
additional user of water being served, if any. Such list shall be sworn under
oath if requested by the Department of Municipal Services.
   (C)   Chicago rate increase. If a change is made by the City of Chicago
increasing the rates charged for water it sells to the city, such change
increasing the rates shall be reflected immediately in the computation of water
rates charged by the city to all water consumers.
   (D)   Charges and rates. The charges and rates for all water supplied to
users by the city shall be evaluated annually by the City Council and are
subject to change. Any and all future such charges and rates, including, but
not limited to, those identified in this section, will be adopted and
established by the City Council. in an annual fee schedule.
   (E)   Senior reduced minimum charge.
      (1)   Qualified residents over 65 years of age may be eligible for a
reduced minimum charge for water if:
         (a)   The resident completes and submits an annual application for the
reduced minimum charge on forms supplied by the Water Department;
         (b)   The property address for which the
reduced minimum charge applies is the primary residence of the applicant; and
         (c)   The resident provides proof of residency and identification
showing age, including, but not limited to, driver license, state
identification card, property tax bill, Social Security card or other forms of
proof acceptable to the City Clerk.
      (2)   The senior may only submit one application per property and will
only be granted the reduced minimum charge for one property, regardless if the
senior owns multiple properties within the city. The reduced minimum charge
shall apply on the following bill subsequent to approval of the application and
shall not apply retroactively.
      (3)   The reduced minimum charge shall not apply to multi-family
dwellings.
      (4)   Any person receiving the reduced minimum charge that does not meet
the requirements set forth herein shall be deemed to have violated this section
and shall be subject to fines and penalties provided for violation of local
ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 52.24) (Ord. 2014-007, passed 2-11-2014; Ord. 2015-033, passed
11-10-2015)
§ 52.023 PAYMENT AND DELINQUENCY OF WATER BILLS; NOTICE OF LIEN.
   (A)   Payment of water bills. Water accounts are due when bills are
rendered. Each and every bill rendered shall be plainly marked with a date
after which a penalty as set forth in the city’s fee and fine schedule shall be
added, and each bill shall be mailed or otherwise rendered to the consumer not
less than ten days prior to such penalty date. If such bill has been not paid
on or prior to such penalty date, said penalty shall be added and, thereafter,
such bill shall not be considered paid unless and until the original amount
plus the penalty is fully paid.
   (B)   Delinquency of water bills. When the water bill for any premises
remains unpaid for ten days after the due date, such water account shall be
deemed delinquent.
   (C)   Notice of delinquency. When a delinquency occurs, the city shall give
written notice to the person, firm or corporation in whose name the account is
registered in the records of the City Department of Municipal Services, and
like notice shall be given by the city to the owner of the premises in
connection with which such water was used, if such owner is other than the user
and if his or her name and address is registered in the city’s records in the
Department of Municipal Services. No notice to the owner is required if the
owner’s name and address is not registered in the city’s records in the
Department of Municipal Services.
   (D)   Form of notice of delinquency. The form of notice of delinquency as
aforesaid shall be in such form as the Department of Municipal Services may
from time to time prescribe and shall inform the person notified of the amount
of the delinquency, and shall also inform such person that the water service
shall be discontinued if the delinquency continues to exist at the end of five
days from the date of mailing of said notice.
   (E)   Right of appeal.
      (1)   Any water consumer whose account is delinquent as aforesaid, or any
tenant whose water service is to be discontinued because of the delinquency of
the owner of the premises wherein such tenant resides, may appeal the question
of delinquency or make a request for independent service to theCity
Administrator.
      (2)   TheCity Administrator or designee shall have the authority to make
such decisions and to enter such orders as may be appropriate to resolve the
appeal or request for independent service.
   (F)   Water to be shut off.
      (1)   In each case where delinquent water bills are not paid within the
period established above and theCity Administrator or designee has not entered
an order to the contrary, the water being furnished to such premises shall be
shut off by the city and shall not thereafter be restored until such time as
the delinquent bill is fully paid or a payment plan is executed by the party
responsible for payment of the bill and is accompanied by a down payment to be
determined by the City Administrator or designee, and a turn-on-fee as set
forth in the city’s fee and fine schedule is paid in accordance with the
payment plan agreed to by the parties.
      (2)   The payment plan shall require minimum monthly payments in an
amount to be determined by the City Administrator or designee and applied to
reduce the delinquency, plus an agreement to pay all future billings on a
current basis. The payment plan shall also provide for immediate shut off and
disconnection of water services to the premises without notice if the
responsible party fails to comply with its term and provisions.
      (3)   If a default by the responsible party in performing pursuant to the
terms of the payment plan occurs, water service will be terminated and shall
not be restored until all outstanding amounts for water service are paid in
full, the turn-on fee is paid as established by the city’s fee and fine
schedule and an acceptable security deposit in an amount determined by the City
Administrator or designee is made.
      (4)   The City Administrator or designee is authorized to establish
guidelines for implementing the terms of this section.
(Prior Code, § 52.25) (Ord. 06-007, passed 1-24-2006; Ord. 2014-007, passed 2-
11-2014; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015; Ord. 2022-046, passed 8-23-2022)
§ 52.024 SEWER MAINTENANCE CHARGE.
   (A)   Establishment. There shall be, and there is, hereby established,
charges and rates for the purpose of improving, caring for and protecting the
city’s sewerage system. The sewer maintenance charge shall be based upon the
amount of water consumed by each water user as shown by water meters as
follows.
   (B)   Monthly billing.
      (1)   Beginning on June 1, 2022, an annual amount equal to 35% of the
total amount billed for water usage shall be charged and billed monthly to
every consumer billed for water by the city as a sewer maintenance charge.
      (2)   Beginning on June 1, 2023, an annual amount equal to 50% of the
total amount billed for water usage shall be charged and billed monthly to
every consumer billed for water by the city as a sewer maintenance charge.
   (C)   Payment and delinquency of sewer maintenance charge; notice of lien.
      (1)   Payment of sewer maintenance charge. The sewer maintenance charge
shall be billed as a separate charge on every water user’s water bill. The
sewer maintenance charge is due when water bills are rendered and no discounts
shall be allowed. Each and every bill rendered shall be plainly marked with a
date after which a penalty as set forth in the city’s fee and
fine schedule shall be added, and each bill shall be mailed or otherwise
rendered to the consumer not less than ten days prior to such penalty date. If
such bill is not paid on or prior to such penalty date, such penalty shall be
added and, thereafter, such bill shall not be considered paid unless and until
the original amount, plus the penalty is fully paid.
      (2)   Delinquency of sewer maintenance charge. When the sewer maintenance
bill for any premises remains unpaid for ten days after the due date, the
account shall be delinquent.
      (3)   Notice of delinquency. When a delinquency occurs, the city shall
give written notice to the person, firm or corporation in whose name the
account is registered in the records of the City Department of Municipal
Services, and like notice shall be given by the city to the owner of the
premises in connection with which water is used, if such owner is other than
the user and if his or her name and address is registered in the city’s records
in the Department of Municipal Services. No notice to the owner is required if
the owner’s name and address is not registered in the city’s records in the
Department of Municipal Services.
      (4)   Form of notice of delinquency. The form of notice of delinquency as
aforesaid shall be in such form as the Department of Municipal Services may
from time to time prescribe and shall inform the person notified of the amount
of the delinquency, and shall also inform such person that water service to the
premises shall be discontinued if the delinquency continues to exist at the end
of five days from the date of mailing of said notice.
      (5)   Right of appeal. Any water consumer whose account is delinquent as
aforesaid, or any tenant whose water service is to be discontinued because of
the delinquency of the owner of the premises wherein such tenant resides, may
appeal the question of delinquency or make a request for independent service to
the Municipal Services Committee. The Municipal Services Committee shall have
the authority to make such decisions and to enter such orders as may be
appropriate to resolve the appeal or request for independent service.
      (6)   Disconnection. In each case where delinquent sewer maintenance bids
are not paid within the five-day period above established and the Municipal
Services Committee has not entered an order to the contrary, the water being
furnished to such premises shall be shut off by the city. Service shall not
thereafter be restored until such time as the delinquent bill is fully paid,
and a deposit in an amount equal to two and one-half times the average monthly
or quarterly bill, as the case may be, is deposited with the City Collector,
and the turn on fee set forth in the city’s fee and fine schedule is paid.
      (7)   Imposition of lien. Further, in each case where a delinquent sewer
maintenance account shall not have been paid within the five- day period
established and the Municipal Service Committee has not entered an order to the
contrary, the Superintendent of Public Works shall cause a notice of lien to be
prepared and filed in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of the county. Such
notice of lien shall comply with applicable state law.
(Prior Code, § 52.26) (Ord. 06-007, passed 1-24-2006; Ord. 2014-007, passed 2-
11-2014; Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015; Ord. 2022-034, passed 5-10-2022;
Ord. 2022-047, passed 9-13-2022)
WELLS
§ 52.035 FINDINGS AND DETERMINATIONS.
   (A)   Well water in the city has also been used over a period of time for
commercial and industrial purposes.
   (B)   The city desires to further limit the threat to human health from
ground water contamination to the city waterworks system because of the
installation of wells to supply ground water for commercial, industrial,
agricultural, residential and other purposes.
   (C)   The attempt to install or drill wells to supply ground water for
commercial, industrial, agricultural, residential and other purposes within the
corporate limits of the city may have a deleterious effect on the city water
supply due to the potential for backsiphonage into the city waterworks system
and contamination of the city water supply.
   (D)   The potential risk of backsiphonage and contamination of the city
waterworks system and the ramifications of this to the public health, safety
and welfare far outweighs the benefit of allowing the use of wells to supply
ground water for commercial, industrial, agricultural, residential and other
purposes.
(Prior Code, § 52.35) (Ord. 2000-295, passed 2-8-2000; Ord. 2015-033, passed
11-10-2015)
§ 52.036 USE, INSTALLATION AND DRILLING; REGULATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, limited liability
company, corporation or other entity of any kind to use, continue to use,
install, drill or attempt to install or drill a well to supply ground water for
commercial, industrial, agricultural, residential or any other purpose or use
within the corporate limits of the city. All persons, firms, partnerships,
limited liability companies, corporations or any other entities presently using
a well to supply ground water for commercial, industrial, agricultural,
residential or any other purpose shall immediately cease and desist from
continuing to do so and shall also immediately cap the well to prevent further
use.
(Prior Code, § 52.36) (Ord. 2000-295, passed 2-8-2000; Ord. 2015-033, passed
11-10-2015) Penalty, see §
52.999
§ 52.037 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage, approval and publication as provided by law. A full, true and complete
copy of this subchapter shall be published in pamphlet form, by authority of
the City Council as corporate authorities.
(Prior Code, § 52.37) (Ord. 2000-295, passed 2-8-2000; Ord. 2015-033, passed
11-10-2015)
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
§ 52.050 CONNECTION METHOD APPROVAL.
   No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be established
or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a private,
auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply
of the city may enter the supply or distribution system of said municipality,
unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of
connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the Department of
Municipal Services and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
(Prior Code, § 52.51) (Ord. 95-366, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 2015-033, passed
11-10-2015) Penalty, see § 52.99
§ 52.051 SURVEYS AND INVESTIGATIONS; AUTHORITY.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Department of Municipal Services to cause
surveys and investigations to be made of commercial, residential and other
properties served by the public water supply to determine whether actual or
potential hazards to the public water supply may exist. Such surveys and
investigations shall be made a matter of public record and shall be repeated at
least every two years, or as often as the Department of Municipal Services
shall deem necessary. Records of such surveys shall be maintained and available
for review for a period of at least five years.
   (B)   The approved cross-connection control device inspector shall have the
right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to
the public water supply or distribution system of the city for the purpose of
verifying the presence or absence of cross-connection. The Department of
Municipal Services or his or her authorized agent shall also have the right to
enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public
water supply or distribution system of the city for the purpose of verifying
information submitted by the customer regarding the required cross-connection
control inspection. On demand, the owner, lessees or occupants of any property
so served shall furnish to the Department of Municipal Services any information
which he or she may request regarding the piping system or systems or water use
on such property. The refusal of such information, when demanded, shall, within
the discretion of the Department of Municipal Services, be deemed evidence of
the presence of improper connections as provided in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 52.52) (Ord. 95-366, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 2015-033, passed
11-10-2015)
§ 52.052 DISCONTINUANCE OF WATER SERVICE; DISCONNECTION.
   The Department of Municipal Services of the city is hereby authorized and
directed to discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the
water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of the
provisions of this subchapter is known to exist, and to take such other
precautionary measures as he or she may deem necessary to eliminate any danger
of contamination of the public water supply distribution mains. Water service
to property shall not be restored until such conditions have been eliminated or
corrected in compliance with the provisions of this subchapter, and until a
reconnection fee as set forth in the city’s fee and fine schedule is paid to
the city. Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be effected when the
Department of Municipal Services is assured that imminent danger of harmful
contamination of the public water supply system exists. Such action shall be
followed by written notification of the cause of disconnection. Immediate
disconnection without notice to any party can be effected to prevent actual or
anticipated contamination or pollution of the public water supply; provided
that, in the reasonable opinion of the Department of Municipal Services or the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, such action is required to prevent
actual or potential contamination or pollution of the public water supply.
Neither the city, the Department of Municipal Services, nor its agents or
assigns shall be liable to any customer for any injury, damages or lost
revenues which may result from termination of said customers water supply in
accordance with the terms of this ordinance, whether or not said termination
was with or without notice.
(Prior Code, § 52.53) (Ord. 95-366, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 2015-033, passed
11-10-2015)
§ 52.053 CONSUMER RESPONSIBILITY; COSTS.
   The consumer responsible for backsiphoned or back pressured material or
contamination through backflow, must bear the cost of cleanup of the potable
water supply system if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs
through an illegal cross-connection, an improperly installed, maintained or
repaired device or a device which has been bypassed.
(Prior Code, § 52.54) (Ord. 95-366, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 2015-033, passed
11-10-2015)
§ 52.054 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage, approval and publication in pamphlet form as provided by law. A full,
true and complete copy of this subchapter shall be published in pamphlet form,
by authority of the City Council as corporate authorities.
(Prior Code, § 52.56) (Ord. 95-366, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 2015-033, passed
11-10-2015)
SEWERS AND DRAINS
§ 52.065 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   No permit shall be issued for the construction of any building wherein
plumbing fixtures are to be installed for either residential commercial or
industrial purposes or use, nor shall any plumbing permit be issued unless the
plans and specifications comply with the following sewer and drain
specifications in addition to such other specifications as is provided by
ordinance or by the statutes in such cases made and provided.
(Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 52.066 SEPARATE SEWER CONNECTIONS.
   Every building shall be independently and separately connected by a house
sewer service pipe extending from the building to the main sewer. Such pipe
shall be constructed of vitrified clay tile with joints meeting the requirement
of the Metropolitan Sanitary District of Greater Chicago Specification Number
C-425, or shall be constructed of cast iron. The internal diameter of such pope
shall not be less than six inches.
(Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 52.067 HOUSE DRAINS.
   Only cast iron house drain service pipe shall be used. Said pipes shall not
be less than four inches in diameter and shall extend for a distance not less
than 18 inches beyond the outside of the building wall. House drain service
pipe shall run in as direct a line as possible, with not less than one-fourth
inch pitch per foot. A clean out shall be constructed at the end of each branch
off, at each 90 degree bend, and at every 40 feet of such pipe.
(Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 52.068 DRAINS IN COMMERCIAL GARAGES.
   Drains in commercial garages where motor vehicles are serviced and cleaned
must be constructed so as to drain into three cast iron in line basins, called
garage basins, before entering into the house sewer service pipe, ad shall be
vented by a two-inch pipe through the roof.
(Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 52.069 BASEMENT DRAINS.
   Basement drains shall be kept free of ground and surface water, and where
the same is too low to be normally drained into the sewer, the water therefrom
must be pumped or otherwise removed to the sewer.
(Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 52.070 SURFACED AREA DRAINAGE.
   Any surfaced unenclosed area, including without limitation, parking lots,
used car lots or other sales lots which is improved by paving or other
impervious material shall be graded and drained so that no water will flow on
adjacent property.
(Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 52.071 RAIN WATER DRAIN.
   (A)   No rain water drain shall connect with a house drain, catch basin or
house sewer pipe which is used for the purpose of collecting, conducting or
carrying sewage from said building into a main sanitary sewer.
   (B)   In the event a main storm sewer is located in a street adjoining a
building, the rain drains must be connected directly into the storm sewer by
means of cast iron pipe or C-425 sewage tile.
   (C)   Where no main storm sewer is located in a street adjoining said
premises, all water from the roof of a building shall be carried by means of
gutters and outside leaders to a splash block. The ground shall be graded and
drained so as to accommodate as much seepage as possible and to prevent
drainage upon adjacent property.
   (D)   Inside rain water leaders are prohibited except where a rain water
drain in connected to a main storm sewer. Inside rain water leaders shall be
constructed of extra heavy cast iron, galvanized wrought iron, galvanized
steel, copper or plastic Schedule 40 P.V.C.
   (E)   Outside rain water leaders shall be constructed of metal including
galvanized steel or aluminum.
(Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 52.072 OVERHEAD SEWERS.
   All buildings with basement rooms, or occupancy areas below ground level and
served by the public or private sewer systems shall have overhead plumbing. No
building or plumbing permit application will be accepted nor any building or
plumbing permit shall be issued for construction of any such structure unless
an overhead plumbing system as herein provided for is to be installed.
(Ord. 2015-033, passed 11-10-2015)
§ 52.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Each day that a violation of §§
52.035 and
52.036 continues after due notice has been served in writing by the City Water
Department to cease and desist drilling, installation or use of a well to
supply ground water shall be deemed a separate offense.
      (2)   In case any violation of §§
52.035 and
52.036 of this chapter, if said violation is not corrected within three days
after notice has been served to cease and desist drilling, installation or use
of the well, the jurisdiction’s legal representative may institute an
appropriate action or proceeding at law to exact the penalty provided in
division (B)(1) above and, in addition thereto, may proceed at law or in equity
against the party responsible for the violation for the purpose of ordering the
person or entity:
         (a)   To restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain from any
further use of the well;
         (b)   To restrain or correct the installation, drilling or use of the
well;
         (c)   To require the removal of the well; or
         (d)   To prevent the occupation or use of the premises where the well
has been installed or drilled.
(Prior Code, § 52.99) (Ord. 95-366, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 2000-295, passed 2-
8-2000; Ord. 06-007, passed 1-24-2006; Ord. 2014-007, passed 2-11-2014; Ord.
2015-033, passed 11-10-2015)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
73.   VEHICLE LICENSING
      
74.   BICYCLES
      
75.   OVERWEIGHT AND OVERSIZED VEHICLES
      
76.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
77.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.001   Administrative adjudication
   
70.002   Registration plates; display
   
70.003   General definitions
   
70.004   Obedience to police required
   
70.005   Obedience to signs required
   
70.006   Unauthorized signs prohibited
   
70.007   Interference with signs prohibited
   
70.008   Exemptions from title
   
70.009   Proof of violation
   
70.010   Reportable offenses
Vehicle Immobilization Program
   
70.025   Registered owner liability
   
70.026   Hearing
   
70.027   Release of vehicle; fines, penalties and the like
   
70.028   Effective date
Seizure and Impoundment of Motor Vehicles
   
70.040   Seizure and impoundment of motor vehicles
   
70.041   Impoundment hearings
   
70.042   Hearing officer
Automated Traffic Law Enforcement Systems
   
70.060   Findings
   
70.061   Definitions
   
70.062   Locations
   
70.063   Agreement
   
70.064   Traffic-Control Administrator; duties
   
70.065   Violation notices; citations
   
70.066   Hearings; defenses
   
70.067   Final determination; determination notice
   
70.068   Petitions
   
70.069   Suspension notices
   
70.070   Non-residents
   
70.071   Effective date
Towing of Vehicles
   
70.085   Authorization for towing; abandonment prohibited
   
70.086   Notification required generally; pre- tow notification
   
70.087   Removal and hauling of vehicles
   
70.088   Police tows; reports, release of vehicles, payment
   
70.089   Record searches
   
70.090   Identifying and tracing of vehicle ownership
   
70.091   Disposal of hazardous dilapidated motor vehicles
   
70.092   Police reports after vehicle is reclaimed or disposed of
   
70.093   Disposition of proceeds of sale of unclaimed vehicles
   
70.094   Failure to pay fines, charges and costs
   
70.095   Pre-tow and post-tow hearing procedures
 
   
70.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.001 ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION.
   (A)   Adoption by reference. The provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code
(625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.) governing non-moving violations and non-reportable
offenses, as now existing or hereafter amended, are hereby adopted by reference
and made a part of this section, with the same force and effect as if set forth
at length herein, including, but not limited to, the following:
3-112(b)              Failure to transfer title within 20 days
3-401(a)              No valid registration; no verified application for
                      registration
3-404                 No bill of lading or manifest/dispatch record
3-411(a)              Failure to carry registration card or reciprocity permit-
                      second division vehicle
3-413(a)              Improper display of license or registration plates:
                      affixed to front and back
3-413(b)              Improper display of license or registration plates:
                      securely fastened with registration sticker attached
3-413(f)              Operation of vehicle with expired registration plate or
                      sticker
3-416                 Failure to notify the Secretary of State of name/address
                      change
3-417(a)              Failure to immediately apply for replacement registration
                      card, plate or sticker
11-1427               Illegal operation of all-terrain vehicle or off-highway
                      motorcycle
11-1419.01            Failure to display Illinois Motor Fuel Tax Identification
                      Card
11-1419.02            Failure to display external Illinois Motor Fuel Tax
                      Identification device
11-1507(a)            Operation of bicycle without lamp and reflector
11-1507.1             Operation of moped without lamp and red rear reflector
12-101(a)             Operation of vehicle with unsafe equipment or missing
                      parts
12-201(a)             Operation of motorcycle without lighted headlamp
12-201(b)             Driving vehicles other than motorcycles without two
                      lighted headlamps and tail lamps when required
12-201(c)             No white rear registration light
12-202(a, b)          Insufficient clearance, identification or side marker
                      lamps and reflectors-second division vehicle
12-203(a)             Failure to use parking lights while vehicle is standing
                      on highway
12-204                Improper lamp or flag on projecting load
12-205                Improper use of lamps on towing and towed vehicles
12-207(a)             Improper use of more than one spot lamp
12-207(b)             Improper use of more than three auxiliary driving lamps
12-208(a)             No stop signal lamp or device
12-209(c)             Defective backup lights
12-210(a)             Failure to dim headlights/auxiliary driving lamps within
                      500 feet on approach of vehicle from opposite direction
12-210(b)             Failure to dim headlights/auxiliary driving lamps within
                      300 feet of vehicle in same direction
12-211(a)             Improper lighting on vehicles other than motorcycles:
                      only one headlamp
12-211(b)             Improper use of more than four lighted headlights/
                      auxiliary driving lamps
12-212(a)             Improper use of red light visible from front of vehicle
12-212(b)             Unlawful use of flashing lights
12-215                Unlawful use of oscillating, rotating or flashing lights
12-301                Use of defective brakes
12-401                Unlawful use of metal studded tire
12-405(d)             Use of unsafe tire
12-501(a)             Operation of vehicle without windshield
12-502                Operation of vehicle without rear view mirror
12-503(a)             Obstructed view of windshield or side windows adjacent to
                      driver
                      Unlawful application of tinted film to windshield or
12-503(b)             window(s) adjacent to driver on any vehicles manufactured
                      after 12-31-1981
12-503(c)             Obstructed view of any window by stationary or suspended
                      object(s)
                      Operation of vehicle without windshield cleaning device;
12-503(d)             operation of vehicle with view obstructed by snow, ice or
                      moisture
12-503(e)             Obstructed view due to defective condition or repair of
                      any window
12-601(a)             Operation of vehicle with defective horn
12-601(b)             Unlawful possession or use of siren, whistle or bell
12-602                Operation of vehicle with defective or modified exhaust
                      or muffler system; excessive or unusual noises prohibited
12-603(b)             Operation of vehicle without two front seat safety belts
                      on vehicles of 1961 or later model years
12-603.1              Failure of driver or passenger to wear properly adjusted
                      and fastened seat belt
                      Operation of vehicle with television receiver, monitor or
12-604.1              video device positioned in any location or manner other
                      than behind the driver or otherwise not visible to driver
12-606(a)             Operation of tow truck without identifying sign attached
                      on each side
12-606(b)             Operation of tow truck without required equipment-one
                      broom, shovel, trash can and fire extinguisher
12-606(c)             Operation of tow truck without removing roadway debris
                      and spreading dirt or sand on oil grease deposits
12-606(d)             Operation of tow truck without insurance policy in cab
                      Operation of vehicle with unlawfully altered vehicle
12-607(a)             suspension system; body lifted in excess of three inches
                      from chassis
12-607.1(a)           Operation of first division vehicle with frame in excess
                      of 22 inches above ground
12-607.1(b)           Operation of second division vehicle with frame in excess
                      of specified limits above ground
                      Operation of vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating
12-608(a)             (GVWR) of 9,000 pounds or less or a recreational vehicle
                      without two bumpers
12-608(a)             Operation of vehicle with unlawful bumper height
                      Operation of vehicle while wearing headset receiver,
12-610(a)             except intercom helmet or cellular telephone earpiece or
                      headset
12-702(a)             Operation of second division vehicle without carrying
                      flares/warning devices
12-702(c, d, e, f, g) Failure to use flares/warning devices when second
                      division vehicle is disabled
12-707                Overloaded school bus, commuter van or motor vehicle used
                      for hire
12-711                Operation of garbage truck, roll-off hoist or roll-on
                      container without audible backing warning system
12-806                Failure to cover school bus sign when not being used by
                      school or religious organization who owns bus
12-808                Operating school bus without fire extinguisher
12-809                Operating school bus without first aid kit
12-810                Transporting handicapped passenger(s) without restraining
                      device
13-111                Operation without certificate of valid safety test
                      attached to windshield on second division vehicle
                      Projecting loads on passenger vehicle in any excess
15-105                beyond left fenders or six inches beyond right fenders of
                      first division vehicle
15-106                Failure to fasten protruding component of vehicle
15-108                Failure to plank edge of pavement for any vehicle in
                      excess of 8,000 pounds
15-109(a)             Spilling load on highway
15-109(b)             Operating loading vehicle without securely fastened
                      covering
15-109.1              Operating second division vehicle with load falling,
                      blowing or dropping to highway
15-114                Unlawful pushing or disabled vehicle other than to remove
                      from roadway or remove from immediate hazard
18c-4104              Operation of intrastate or interstate motor carrier
                      without license or registration
18c-4604              Operation without current cab card and Illinois
                      identifier
                      Operating without trade name, license and registration
18c-4701(l)           number of carrier painted or affixed to both doors of
                      power unit
 
   (B)   Issuance and form of notice. Citations for violations of any of the
provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code adopted by reference herein may be
issued by authorized personnel of the city using the appropriate Illinois
Vehicle Code section which shall, by the effect of this section, represent
identically and specially numbered sections of this section. Reference to § 1.1
of the ordinance codified herein shall substantially comply with the following
format: City of Blue Island Ord. 2014-003, § 1.1, followed by the applicable
Illinois Vehicle Code section number (e.g., “No. 2014-003, § 1.1/IVC 11-501
(a)”).
   (C)   Administrative adjudication of violations. It shall be unlawful for
the owner or operator of any vehicle to violate any section of this section,
and by reference any section of the Illinois Vehicle Code and any such violator
shall be subject to administrative adjudication.
   (D)   Effective date. This section shall be in full force and effect from
and after its passage, approval and publication as required by law. A full,
true and complete copy of this section shall be published in pamphlet form, by
authority of the City Council, as corporate authorities.
(Prior Code, § 70.001) (Ord. 2014-003, passed 1-14-2014; Ord. 2016-001, passed
1-12-2016) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.002 REGISTRATION PLATES; DISPLAY.
   (A)   Whenever the term MOTOR VEHICLE is used in this section, it shall mean
a self-propelled vehicle, including, but not limited to, automobiles,
motorcycles, motor bicycles, motor scooters, motor trucks, truck tractors, all
vehicles powered by electrical or mechanical power, but excluding motorized
wheelchairs for the disabled.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to own or operate any motor vehicle within the
limits of the city without being in compliance with Ch. 3 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 3/100 et seq.), especially as pertains to the purchase
and proper display of current registration plates.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to own or operate any motor vehicle within the
limits of the city unless the appropriate registration plates are attached, and
in the appropriate number and manner pursuant to Ch. 3 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code (625 ILCS 3/100 et seq.).
   (D)   It shall be unlawful to own or operate any motor vehicle within the
limits of the city unless it is in compliance with Ch. 3 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 3/100 et seq.) regarding weights and dimensions.
   (E)   This section shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage, approval and publication in pamphlet form as provided by law. A full,
true and complete copy of this section shall be published in pamphlet form, by
authority of the City Council as corporate authorities.
(Prior Code, § 70.002) (Ord. 91-284, passed 9-10-1991; Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-
12-2016)
§ 70.003 GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this traffic code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. A vehicle parked or otherwise located on a public-right-
of way or parking lot in such state of disrepair that it is incapable of being
driven, and appears to have been abandoned; or a vehicle that has been unmoved
for a period of at least 24 hours and has no license plates or valid
registration, and appears to have been abandoned by its owner; or vehicles
parked on private property without consent of the lot owner, proprietor or
agent of the property, which person has requested that the vehicle be towed.
   ALLEY. A narrow street between two property lines, one or both of which
property lines are ordinarily at the rear of properties fronting on streets
having a greater width.
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Vehicles of the Fire Department (fire patrol),
police vehicles and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of municipal
departments as are designated or authorized by the City Council, and emergency
vehicles of other governmental units.
   BICYCLE. A light, two-wheel device, having wheels 20 inches or greater in
diameter with tires, propelled by human power.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway when
50% or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of 300 feet or more is
occupied by buildings in use for business.
   CROSSWALK.
      (1)   The portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the
prolongation or connection of the lateral lines of sidewalks at intersections.
      (2)   Any portion of a roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrian
crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
   DRIVER. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
   HAZARDOUS VEHICLE. A vehicle that has been involved in an accident and is
disabled or cannot be immediately moved by the owner or operator of the
vehicle; or a vehicle that presents an immediate danger to the health or
welfare of the members of the public; or a vehicle abandoned or disable on a
public street or public way, that is impeding the orderly flow of traffic or
poses a potential danger to pedestrians and other operators of vehicles; or a
vehicle impeding municipal snow removal from a public street, alley, way or
parking lot.
   INTERSECTION. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways
of two highways which join one another at or approximately at right angles, or
the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any
other angle may come in conflict.
   LOADING ZONE. The space in the roadway adjacent to the curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or
materials.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which
is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not
operated upon rails.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings and devices
placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having
jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS. Any device, whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to
proceed.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNS. Any device, marker, signal or sign warning or
regulating traffic, indicating crosswalks, safety zones, traffic lanes,
regulating or restricting turns, indicating methods of turns, zones of quiet,
play streets, loading zones, carrier stands, parking limitations, stop signs,
speed regulatory signs, placed or erected by authority of the City Council, or
by an official of the city, who has jurisdiction, is hereby declared to be an
official traffic sign.
   PARK. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than
temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading.
   PARKWAY. The part of a street or highway, on each side of the pavement or
roadway thereof, lying between the outer edge of the pavement or roadway and
the property lines bounding the street.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer of the City Police Department or any officer
authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of
traffic regulations.
   PRIVATE ROAD or DRIVEWAY. Every way or place in private ownership and used
for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than street
cars, operated upon stationary rails.
   RAILROAD TRAINS. A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without
cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except street cars.
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway not
comprising a business district when the property on such highway for a distance
of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with residence or residences and
buildings not in use for business.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
   ROADWAY. That portion of a street, improved, designed or ordinarily set for
vehicular travel.
   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a SAFETY ZONE.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of
pedestrians.
   STANDING. Any stopping of a vehicle, whether occupied or not.
   STOP or STOPPING. When required, means complete cessation of movement. When
prohibited, means any stopping of a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police
officer or traffic-control sign or signal.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between property lines of every way or
place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public, as a matter of right, for purposes of
vehicular traffic.
   THROUGH STREET. Any specially designated street at which all traffic, except
authorized emergency vehicles, is required to stop before entering or crossing.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, street cars and
other conveyances either singly or together while using any street for purposes
of travel.
   UNLAWFUL VEHICLE. A vehicle that has been reported stolen or is the subject
of a search and seizure by the Police Department; or a vehicle parked in
violation of state statutes, local ordinances or other applicable laws which
prohibit parking at the location in question or for the period of time for
which the vehicle has been parked, and where either the statute or ordinance
authorize the vehicle to be towed, and the signs posted at the general location
not that fact.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices which are moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Prior Code, § 70.003) (Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 70.004 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE REQUIRED.
   Members of the Police Department are authorized to direct all traffic in
accordance with the provisions of this traffic code, or in emergencies as
public safety or convenience may require, and it shall be unlawful for any
person to fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction
of a police officer, except in case of emergency. It shall be unlawful for any
person not authorized by the Chief of Police to direct or attempt to direct
traffic.
(Prior Code, § 70.004) (Ord. 1524, passed 9-29-1942; Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-
12-2016) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.005 OBEDIENCE TO SIGNS REQUIRED.
   No driver of any vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any traffic sign
placed in view by authority of this traffic code or in accordance with the laws
of the state.
(Prior Code, § 70.005) (Ord. 1524, passed 9-29-1942; Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-
12-2016) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.006 UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall place, maintain or display any device, other than an
official warning or direction sign or signal authorized by statute or
ordinance, upon or in view of any street, if such device purports to be, or is
in imitation of, an official warning or direction sign or signal, or directs or
purports to direct the movement of traffic. Any such unauthorized device is
declared to be a nuisance and shall be removed by any police officer.
(Prior Code, § 70.006) (Ord. 1524, passed 9-29-1942; Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-
12-2016) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.007 INTERFERENCE WITH SIGNS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall deface, injure, move or interfere with any official traffic
sign or signal.
(Prior Code, § 70.007) (Ord. 1524, passed 9-29-1942; Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-
12-2016) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.008 EXEMPTIONS FROM TITLE.
   The provisions of this traffic code regulating the movement or parking of
vehicles shall not apply to emergency vehicles while the driver thereof is
engaged in the performance of emergency duties. Nor shall such provisions apply
to persons actually engaged in repairing or otherwise improving the streets
under authority of the City Council or the state.
(Prior Code, § 70.008) (Ord. 1524, passed 9-29-1942; Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-
12-2016)
§ 70.009 PROOF OF VIOLATION.
   The fact that an automobile or motor vehicle which is illegally operated or
parked is registered with the Secretary of State in the name of the alleged
violator; or, in the alternative, the fact that a vehicle sticker issued by a
municipality has been issued in the name of and to the alleged violator, shall
be considered prima facie proof that such alleged violator was in control of or
was the operator of the automobile or motor vehicle at the time of the alleged
violation.
(Prior Code, § 70.013) (Ord. 2013, passed 10-10-1966; Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-
12-2016)
§ 70.010 REPORTABLE OFFENSES.
   (A)   Adoption of Illinois Vehicle Code. The provisions of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq., as amended, governing moving violations
and reportable offenses and such other Illinois Vehicle Code offenses not
previously adopted in §
70.001(A) as now existing, or hereafter amended, are hereby adopted by
reference to be applied within the corporate limits of the city to the extent
permitted by law and to the extent that its subject matter is not otherwise
regulated by this code or inconsistent with any lawful provision of this code.
   (B)   Citations. Ordinance citations issued for violations of division (A)
above shall be issued in the name of the city. The offense shall be cited on
the ordinance citation as division (A) above followed by the section of the
Illinois Vehicle Code violated, e.g., § 70.015; 6-303. Ordinance citations
shall not be issued for felony violations of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
   (C)   Burden of proof. The burden of proof for any offense classified as a
petty offense or business offense in the Illinois Vehicle Code shall be by
preponderance of the evidence. Offenses classified as misdemeanor offenses in
the Illinois Vehicle Code shall be proven beyond a reasonable doubt.
   (D)   Prosecution. Violations of this section may be prosecuted in the
Circuit Court of Cook County but not through the city’s Administrative
Adjudication of Code Violations, Title I, Chapter 11.
   (E)   Violations, penalties. Any person who violates this section may be
fined the maximum allowed by this code, $750, or the maximum allowed by the
Illinois Vehicle Code, whichever is greater and not inconsistent with state law
and the violation reported to the Illinois Secretary of State by the Circuit
Court of Cook County.
   (F)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the ordinance violations set
forth in division (A) above from being prosecuted as a violation of the
Illinois Vehicle Code rather than as an ordinance violation.
(Ord. 2018-013, passed 2-27-2018)
VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION PROGRAM
§ 70.025 REGISTERED OWNER LIABILITY.
   Any and all motor vehicles that are registered to an owner who has been
determined to be liable for five or more unpaid final determinations of
vehicular standing, parking, compliance or automated traffic law enforcement
violations may be immobilized, towed and impounded, regardless of whether the
immobilized or impounded, vehicle was the vehicle used in the violation,
provided a pre-immobilization/tow notice has been sent to the vehicle’s
registered owner and the owner has not requested a hearing concerning the
notice as set forth below.
   (A)   (1)   The pre-immobilization/tow notice shall include the following
information:
         (a)   A final determination has been made on five or more vehicular
standing or parking regulation violations, the fines and penalties for which
remain unpaid;
         (b)   The violation notice numbers, dates of issuance and total amount
of each unpaid violation; and
         (c)   Notification that any motor vehicle owned by the person found
liable is subject to immobilization, towing and impoundment if the fines and
penalties are not paid within 14 days of the date of the notice.
      (2)   The person determined liable may contest the validity of the notice
by disproving liability for the unpaid final determinations of parking,
standing, compliance or automated traffic law violations listed on the notice.
      (3)   A hearing to contest the notice’s validity can be requested by
submitting a request for hearing to the Traffic Compliance Administrator within
14 days of the date of the notice. The request for hearing shall be deemed
filed upon receipt by the Traffic Compliance Administrator.
   (B)   Upon receipt of a pre-immobilization/tow hearing request, the Traffic
Compliance Administrator shall schedule a hearing to allow the registered owner
to contest the notice validity. The hearing shall be at least seven days after
receipt of the hearing request. Notice of the hearing shall be sent by first
class mail, postage paid, to the address as set forth on the hearing request.
Service of the notice shall be complete on the date it is placed in the United
States mail.
   (C)   If, after the hearing, the Traffic Compliance Administrator determines
that the registered owner is not liable for one or more of the unpaid final
determinations cited in the notice and this finding results in reducing the
number of unpaid final determinations below five, the vehicle in question shall
not be immobilized, towed and impounded based upon the violations stated in the
notice. If, however, the Traffic Compliance Administrator determines that the
registered owner is liable for five or more of the unpaid final determinations
cited in the notice, the vehicle in question shall be subject to
immobilization, towing and impoundment.
(Prior Code, § 70.025) (Ord. 2013-238, passed 7-23-2013; Ord. 2016-001, passed
1-12-2016)
§ 70.026 HEARING.
   (A)   The registered owner of a vehicle immobilized, towed or impounded
under this subchapter shall have the right to a prompt hearing without the
requirement of payment of outstanding fines and penalties for which final
determinations have been made.
   (B)   (1)   When the vehicle is immobilized, the Police Department shall
place a notice on the vehicle advising the owner of his or her right to a
hearing to contest the validity of the immobilization. If the vehicle is
subsequently towed or impounded, the Traffic Compliance Administrator shall
mail a post-immobilization/tow notice to the vehicle’s registered owner which
includes the following information:
         (a)   Date of immobilization, towing and/or impoundment;
         (b)   Location of vehicle; and
         (c)   The vehicle was immobilized under this section for five or more
unpaid final determinations of vehicular standing, parking, compliance or
automated traffic law enforcement violations.
      (2)   The registered owner may contest the validity of the
immobilization/tow by disproving liability for the unpaid final determinations
of parking, standing, compliance or automated traffic law violations listed on
the notice.
      (3)   A hearing to contest the validity of the vehicle immobilization/tow
can be requested by submitting a written request for hearing to the Traffic
Compliance Administrator within 14 days of the vehicle immobilization or
impoundment, whichever is later. The request for hearing shall be deemed filed
upon receipt by the Traffic Compliance Administrator.
   (C)   Upon receipt of a post-immobilization/tow hearing request, the Traffic
Compliance Administrator shall schedule a hearing no later than the next
regularly scheduled monthly administrative adjudication or parking/compliance
hearing date. Notice of the hearing shall be sent by first class mail, postage
paid, to the address as set forth on the hearing request. Service of the notice
shall be complete on the date it is placed in the United States mail.
   (D)   If, after the hearing, the Traffic Compliance Administrator determines
that the registered owner is not liable for five or more of the unpaid final
determinations that provided the basis for the immobilization/tow, the vehicle
in question shall be released to the owner and no immobilization, towing or
storage fees shall be due. If, however, the Traffic Compliance Administrator
determines that the registered owner is liable for five or more of the unpaid
final determinations cited in the notice, the vehicle in question shall not be
released until all fines, penalties, immobilization, towing and storage charges
are paid.
   (E)   An order entered after the hearing to contest the validity of the
immobilization, tow or impoundment is a final administrative decision within
the meaning of § 3-101 of the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS 5/3-
101).
(Prior Code, § 70.026) (Ord. 2013-238, passed 7-23-2013; Ord. 2016-001, passed
1-12-2016)
§ 70.027 RELEASE OF VEHICLE; FINES, PENALTIES AND THE LIKE.
   If no post-impound/tow hearing is requested, the vehicle in question shall
be released to the registered owner only after all fines, penalties,
immobilization, towing and storage charges are paid.
(Prior Code, § 70.027) (Ord. 2013-238, passed 7-23-2013; Ord. 2016-001, passed
1-12-2016)
§ 70.028 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage, approval and publication in pamphlet form as provided by law. A full,
true and complete copy of this subchapter shall be published in pamphlet form,
by authority of the City Council as corporate authorities.
(Prior Code, § 70.028) (Ord. 2013-238, passed 7-23-2013; Ord. 2016-001, passed
1-12-2016)
SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT
OF MOTOR VEHICLES
§ 70.040 SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a motor
vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment under Illinois law, such vehicle
shall be subject to seizure and impoundment under this subchapter, and the
officer may authorize the towing of the vehicle to a facility authorized by the
City of Blue Island.
   (B)   Offenses subject to administrative and processing fees. Any motor
vehicle which is used in connection with an offense listed at 625 ILCS 5/11-
208.7(b) or an ordinance substantially similar to such offense shall be subject
to an administrative fee prior to the release of the properly impounded
vehicle, including:
      (1)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized and
forfeited pursuant to Section 36-1 of the Criminal Code of 2012;
      (2)   Driving under the influence of alcohol, another drug or drugs, an
intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof, in violation of
Section 11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code;
      (3)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, a felony or in violation of the Cannabis Control Act;
      (4)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act:
      (5)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of Section 24-1, 24-1.6, or 24-3.1
of the Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012;
      (6)   Driving while a driver's license, permit, or privilege to operate a
motor vehicle is suspended or revoked pursuant to Section 6-303 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code;
      (7)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting, possessing,
or attempting to solicit or possess cannabis or a controlled substance, as
defined by the Cannabis Control Act or the Illinois Controlled Substances Act;
      (8)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle with an expired driver's
license, in violation of Section 6-101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, if the
period of expiration is greater than one year;
      (9)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle without ever having been issued
a driver's license or permit, in violation of Section 6-101 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, or operating a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a
driver's license or permit due to a person's age;
      (10)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a
warrant has been issued by a circuit clerk in Illinois for failing to answer
charges that the driver violated Section 6-101, 6-303, or 11-501 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code:
      (11)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in
the attempt to commit, an offense in violation of Article 16 or 16A of the
Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012;
      (12)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in
the attempt to commit, any other misdemeanor or felony offense in violation of
the Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012; or
      (13)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in violation of Section 11-503
of the Illinois Vehicle Code:
         (a)   While the vehicle is part of a funeral procession; or
         (b)   In a manner that interferes with a funeral procession.
   (C)   Administrative and processing fees. The following shall apply to the
administrative and processing fees imposed under this subchapter:
      (1)   All fees and towing and storage charges shall be imposed on the
registered owner of the motor vehicle or the owner's agent(s).
      (2)   The fees shall be in addition to any other penalties that may be
assessed by a court of law for the underlying violations and any towing and
storage fees charged by the towing company.
      (3)   The fees shall be uniform for all similarly situated vehicles.
      (4)   The administrative and processing fees shall be collected by and
paid to the City of Blue Island.
      (5)   The towing or storage charges shall be collected by and paid to the
person, firm, or entity that tows and stores the impounded vehicle.
      (6)   The administrative and processing fee shall be waived by the city
upon verifiable proof from the owner of record or lessee that the vehicle was
stolen or hijacked at the time it was impounded. To demonstrate that the motor
vehicle was hijacked or stolen at the time it was impounded, the owner or
lessee must submit proof that a report concerning the motor vehicle was filed
with a law enforcement agency in a timely manner.
      (7)   The amount of the administrative and processing fee shall be as
follows:
 
Offense                                   Amount
625 ILCS 5/11-204 and 625 ILCS 5/11-204.1 $1,500
625 ILCS 5/11-501;                        $1,000
720 ILCS 5/24-1 through 720 ILCS 5/24-3.9
Any other offense referenced in §        $500.00
70.040(B)
 
   (D)   Notwithstanding any provision of this subchapter, the arresting
officer may, in their sole discretion, release the vehicle prior to having it
towed if the arrestee does not own or lease the vehicle, and the registered
owner or lessee arrives at the scene and displays proof of a valid driver's
license, vehicle registration, and liability insurance. Notwithstanding any
provision of this subchapter, a motor vehicle impounded pursuant to this
subchapter shall not be released if it is being held as evidence in connection
with a criminal investigation or proceeding, is subject to a lawful court
order, or is otherwise required by law to remain impounded.
(Ord. 2025-063, passed 11-25-2025; Ord. 2025-076, passed 12-16-2025)
§ 70.041 IMPOUNDMENT HEARINGS.
   (A)   Procedure. After a motor vehicle has been impounded pursuant to this
subchapter, the vehicle shall be released if the owner, lessee, or lienholder
of record executes a waiver of hearing, pays any administrative and processing
fees as provided herein, and pays for all towing and storage charges. If the
owner, lessee, or lienholder of record does not execute a waiver of hearing,
the vehicle shall remain impounded pending the completion of the hearings
provided herein, unless the owner, lessee, or lienholder posts with the City of
Blue Island a bond equal to the administrative and processing fees as provided
herein and pays for all towing and storage charges.
   (B)   Preliminary hearing. A preliminary hearing shall be held only if the
owner of record or lessee of a vehicle seized files a written request for a
preliminary hearing at the City of Blue Island Police Department during normal
business hours within 48 hours of the seizure of the motor vehicle. If a
request for a preliminary hearing is timely filed, the Chief of Police or his/
her designee shall conduct such hearing within 72 hours after the request,
excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays. The preliminary hearing shall be
informal, not subject to the rules of evidence, and may be conducted via phone
or other digital communication software such as Microsoft Teams or Zoom. The
Chief of Police or designee will determine whether there was probable cause to
believe the vehicle was subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this
subchapter. In those cases where probable cause does not exist, the Chief of
Police or designee shall order the immediate release of the vehicle.
   (C)   Notice of impoundment. The city shall notify (or make a reasonable
attempt to notify) the registered owner, lessee, or person identifying himself
or herself as the owner or lessee of the vehicle, or any person who is found to
be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged offense, of the fact of
the seizure, and of the vehicle owner's or lessee's right to an administrative
hearing. The notice shall include a description of the preliminary hearing and
hearing procedures set forth in divisions (A) and (B) above.
   (D)   Notice of administrative hearing. If no waiver of hearing is executed,
the registered owner, lessee, and any lienholder of record shall be provided
with notice of the administrative hearing. The notice shall be served by either
personal service or first-class mail to the interested party's address as
registered with the Secretary of State within ten days after the vehicle is
impounded and must contain the date, time, and location of the administrative
hearing. An initial administrative hearing must be scheduled and convened no
later than 45 davs after the date of mailing of the notice of hearing.
   (E)   Administrative hearing. At any time prior to the hearing date, the
hearing officer may administer oaths, subpoena witnesses to appear and give
testimony, and order the production of relevant documents at the hearing. The
hearing shall be recorded. The parties may be represented by counsel and shall
be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the hearing. The formal rules
of evidence shall not apply at the hearing. The hearing officer shall determine
whether there was probable cause to believe the vehicle was subject to seizure
and impoundment. If the hearing officer determines that the vehicle was subject
to seizure and impoundment, the hearing officer shall enter an order finding
the owner of record of the vehicle or their agent civilly liable to the city
for an administrative and processing fee as provided in this subchapter. If the
owner of record and lessee fail to appear at the hearing, the hearing officer
shall enter a default order in favor of the city and impose an administrative
and processing fee as provided in this subchapter. If the hearing officer finds
that the vehicle was not subject to seizure and impoundment, the hearing
officer shall order the immediate release of the vehicle or posted cash bond.
Unless required by law, no owner, lessee, lienholder, or other person shall be
entitled to take possession of a vehicle impounded until the administrative and
processing fee has been paid.
   (F)   Any administrative and processing fee imposed shall constitute a debt
due and owing to the city. If a cash bond has been posted, the bond shall be
applied to the fee. The city may seek to obtain a judgment on the debt and
enforce such judgment against the vehicle's owner as provided by law, including
but not limited to collection of the debt by a collection agency as provided in
Section 1-2-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/1-2-1) and in division
(H) below. If the administrative and processing fee is not paid within 35 days
after the expiration of time for which administrative review of the hearing
officer's determination may be sought or within 30 days after an action seeking
administrative review has been resolved in favor of the city, whichever is
applicable, the vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be disposed of in
the manner provided by law for the disposition of unclaimed vehicles under
Section 4-208 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/4-208).
   (G)   For purposes of this section, the OWNER OF RECORD of a vehicle is the
record titleholder as registered with the Illinois Secretary of State.
   (H)   Collection fees and costs. If an administrative and processing fee is
assessed, a default in the payment of the fee or any installment may be
collected by any means authorized for the collection of monetary judgments,
including but not limited to collection by a collections agency, as provided in
Section 1-2-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/1-2-1) The City of Blue
Island may retain an attorney and/or private collection agents for the purpose
of collecting any default in payment of any fee or installment, and an
additional cost of 35% will be added to any fee referred to a collections
agency.
(Ord. 2025-063, passed 11-25-2025)
§ 70.042 HEARING OFFICER.
   (A)   In addition to the requirements contained in subdivision (b)(4) of
Section 11-208.3 of the Illinois Vehicle Code relating to administrative
hearings (625 ILCS 5/1 l-208.3(b)(4)), the impoundment and release of vehicles
as set forth herein shall include the following requirements concerning
administrative hearings:
      (1)   (a)   Administrative hearings shall be conducted by a hearing
officer who is an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of Illinois
for a minimum of three years;
         (b)   The hearing officer shall consider as a defense to the vehicle
impoundment that the motor vehicle was stolen or hijacked at the time it was
impounded: to demonstrate that the motor vehicle was hijacked or stolen at the
time it was impounded, the owner or lessee must submit proof that a report
concerning the motor vehicle was filed with a law enforcement agency in a
timely manner;
      (2)   At the conclusion of the administrative hearing, the hearing
officer shall issue a written decision either sustaining or overruling the
vehicle impoundment;
      (3)   If the vehicle impoundment is sustained by the administrative
hearing officer, any cash bond posted to secure the release of the vehicle
shall be forfeited to the City of Blue Island:
      (4)   All final decisions of the administrative hearing officer shall be
subject to review under the provisions of the Administrative Review Law;
      (5)   Unless the administrative hearing officer overrules the vehicle
impoundment, no vehicle shall be released to the owner, lessee, or lien holder
of record until all administrative and processing fees and towing and storage
charges are paid;
      (6)   If the administrative hearing officer finds that the City of Blue
Island Police Department exceeded its authority under this subchapter, the City
of Blue Island shall be liable to the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle
for the cost of towing and storage charges and reasonable attorney's fees; and
      (7)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, if the
administrative hearing officer finds that the city impounded a motor vehicle
that was stolen or hijacked at the time it was impounded, the city shall refund
any administrative and processing fees already paid by the registered owner or
lessee of the vehicle.
(Ord. 2025-063, passed 11-25-2025)
AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW
ENFORCEMENT SYSTEMS
§ 70.060 FINDINGS.
   (A)   Pursuant to the Illinois Vehicle Code, as amended by Public Act 94-
0795, municipalities in the counties of Cook, DuPage, Kane, Lake, Madison,
McHenry, St. Clair and Will are authorized to provide by ordinance for
automated traffic law enforcement systems, as that term is defined in § 11-
208.6 of the Vehicle Code, being 65 ILCS 11-208.6.
   (B)   Establishing automated traffic law enforcement systems at specified
intersections in the city at which traffic is controlled by signals exhibiting
different colored lights or color lighted arrows will benefit the public
health, safety and welfare by deterring drivers from entering those
intersections in violation of red light signals, thereby decreasing the
potential for personal injury and property damage due to vehicle collisions
caused by red light violations.
   (C)   It is therefore in the best interests of the city to establish
automated traffic law enforcement systems and to provide for administrative
adjudication of automated traffic law violations as specified in this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 70.060) (Ord. 07-060, passed 2-27-2007; Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-
12-2016)
§ 70.061 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The city’s Traffic-Control Administrator.
   AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW VIOLATION. A violation described in § 11-208.6 of the
Code.
   AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM. A device with one or more motor
vehicle sensors working in conjunction with a red light signal to produce
recorded images of motor vehicles entering an intersection against a red light
signal in violation of § 11-306 of the Code or a similar provision of a city
ordinance.
   CERTIFIED REPORT. A report concerning five or more unpaid fines or penalties
for automated traffic law violations made by the city to the Secretary in
accordance with § 6-306.5 of the Code.
   CITY. The City of Blue Island, Cook County, Illinois.
   CODE. The Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.
   DETERMINATION NOTICE. A notice of final determination of automated traffic
law violation liability issued pursuant to § 11-208.3 of the Code and pursuant
to the provisions of this subchapter.
   DISREGARDING TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE. Failure to stop and remain stopped
before an intersection that is controlled by a red signal as provided for in §
11-306 of the Code.
   NO TURN ON RED. Where the motor vehicle comes to a complete stop and does
not enter the intersection as defined by § 1-132 of the Code, during the cycle
of the red signal indication unless one or more pedestrians are present, even
if the motor vehicle stops at a point past a stop line or crosswalk where a
driver is required to stop, as specified in § 11-306(c) of the Code or this
subchapter.
   RECORDED IMAGES. Images produced by the automated traffic law enforcement
system, showing the time, date and location of an automated traffic law
violation, and which consist of either two or more photographs; two or more
microphotographs; two or more electronic images; or, a video recording showing
the motor vehicle and, on at least one image or portion of the recording,
clearly identifying the registration plate number of the motor vehicle.
   SECRETARY. The Illinois Secretary of State.
   SUSPENSION NOTICE. A notice of impending driver license suspension issued
pursuant to § 11-208.3 of the Code and pursuant to the provisions of this
subchapter.
   SYSTEM. Individually, an automated traffic law enforcement system or,
collectively, automated traffic law enforcement systems established in the city
pursuant to this subchapter.
   VIOLATION. Any violation of the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code or any local
ordinance including but not limited to disregard a traffic, control device or
turn on red in violation of § 11-306 of the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code.
   VIOLATION NOTICE. An automated traffic law violation notice issued pursuant
to §§ 11-208.3 and 31-208.6 of the Code and pursuant to the provisions of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 70.061) (Ord. 07-060, passed 2-27-2007; Ord. 2014-052, passed
11-11-2014; Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 70.062 LOCATIONS.
   The city hereby determines to establish systems at the following
intersections located within the corporate limits of the city providing the
traffic studies are completed and warrant establishment of the system.
119th Street and Vincennes Avenue
119th Street and Western Avenue
123rd Street and Western Avenue
127th Street and Gregory Street
127th Street and Kedzie Avenue
127th Street and Maple Avenue
127th Street and Vincennes Avenue
127th Street and Western Avenue
127th Street and Wood Street
Vermont Street and Ashland Avenue
Vermont Street and Western Avenue
Vermont Street and Francisco Avenue
 
(Prior Code, § 70.062) (Ord. 07-060, passed 2-27-2007; Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-
12-2016)
§ 70.063 AGREEMENT.
   The city shall, at the recommendation of the Mayor or designee, identify and
contract with an appropriate agency for the design, implementation, and
provision of services related to the automated traffic law enforcement system
utilized by the city. Such agreement shall be approved by City Council.
(Prior Code, § 70.063) (Ord. 2014-052, passed 11-11-2014; Ord. 2016-001, passed
1-12-2016)
§ 70.064 TRAFFIC-CONTROL ADMINISTRATOR; DUTIES.
   The Traffic-Control Administrator, or his or her designee who shall be a law
enforcement officer or retired officer employed or retained by the city, shall
be authorized to adopt, distribute and process violation notices and other
notices required by § 11-208.3 of the Code, collect money paid as fines and
penalties for automated traffic law violations and operate an administrative
adjudication system for automated traffic law violations. The Administrator is
also authorized to make a certified report to the Secretary pursuant to § 6-
306.5 of the Code, and any such certified report shall contain the information
required under § 6-306.5(c) of the Code.
(Prior Code, § 70.064) (Ord. 07-060, passed 2-27-2007; Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-
12-2016)
§ 70.065 VIOLATION NOTICES; CITATIONS.
   (A)   When the automated traffic law enforcement system records a motor
vehicle entering an intersection in violation of 625 ILCS 5/11-1426.1, the city
shall issue a written notice of violation to the registered owner or lessee of
the vehicle, which shall be delivered by U.S. mail within 30 days after the
Illinois Secretary of State notifies the city of the identity of the registered
owner or lessee of the vehicle, and in no event later than 90 days following
the violation. The city shall only be required to notify a lessee if the
leasing company/lessor provides the lessee’s name by an affidavit and a copy of
the lease within 60 days of the notice’s issuance. If the driver information is
not provided within 60 days, the leasing company/lessor may be found liable. If
any notice to an address is returned as undeliverable, a second notice shall be
sent to the last known address recorded in a United States Post Office approved
database of the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle. The second notice shall
be made by first class mail postage prepaid.
   (B)   (1)   A notice of violation associated with an automated traffic law
violation shall require a review of the associated recorded image by the
Traffic- Control Administrator, who shall inspect the image and determine
whether the motor vehicle was being operated in violation of 625 ILCS 5/11-
1426.1, or whether one of the defenses enumerated in 625 ILCS 5/11-1426.2 is
visibly applicable upon inspection. Upon determination that the recorded image
captures a violation and that no defense applies, the notice of violation shall
be served upon the registered vehicle owner in the manner provided for above.
The Traffic-Control Administrator shall retain a copy of all violation notices,
recorded images and other correspondence mailed to the owner of the vehicle.
Each notice of violation shall constitute evidence of the facts contained in
the notice and is admissible in any proceeding alleging a violation of the
above-noted statutory and local provisions and shall be prima facie evidence of
a violation, subject to rebuttal on the basis of the defenses established in
this subchapter.
      (2)   The notice of violation shall include the following information:
         (a)   The name and address of the registered owner or lessee of the
vehicle, as indicated by the records of the Secretary of State, or, if such
information is outdated or unattainable, then the last known address recorded
in a United States Post Office approved database;
         (b)   The make (only if discernable) and registration number of the
motor vehicle involved in the violation;
         (c)   The violation charged;
         (d)   The location where the violation occurred;
         (e)   The date and time of the violation;
         (f)   A copy of the recorded images;
         (g)   The amount of the civil penalty and the date by which the
penalty should be paid (14 days from the date of issuance), if a hearing is not
requested, and a statement that the payment of the fine shall operate as a
final disposition of the violation;
         (h)   A statement that a failure to pay the civil penalty by the date
noted may result in an additional late fee being assessed against the owner or
lessee;
         (i)   The amount of the late fee;
         (j)   A statement that the failure to pay by the date specified will
result in a final determination of liability and may result in the suspension
of driving privileges for the registered owner of the vehicle;
         (k)   A statement that the recorded images constitute prima facie
evidence of a violation:
         (l)   A statement that the person may elect to proceed by paying the
fine or challenging the charge in court, by mail or by administrative hearing;
and
         (m)   A statement of how an administrative hearing may be requested.
   (D)   It shall be a violation of this subchapter for a vehicle to disregard
a traffic-control device or turn on red in violation of § 11-306 of the Code.
   (E)   (1)   A determination of automated traffic law violation liability
shall occur following failure to pay the fine or penalty, or to contest the
alleged violation within 14 days of the notice of violation.
      (2)   Where a person fails to appear at a hearing to contest the alleged
violation in the time and manner specified in a prior mailed notice, the
Hearing Officer will enter findings, decision and order’s determination of
automated traffic law violation liability which shall become final:
         (a)   Upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that
determination; or
         (b)   Upon expiration of the period for filing such a petition without
a filing having been made.
      (3)   If a person appears at a hearing and is found liable or contests
the Violation by mail and is found liable, the Hearing Officer will enter
findings, decision and order, which is a final determination of automated
traffic law violation liability that is a final, appealable order.
(Prior Code, § 70.065) (Ord. 2014-052, passed 11-11-2014; Ord. 2015-022, passed
7-28-2015; Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 70.066 HEARINGS; DEFENSES.
   (A)   (1)   The owner of a vehicle being operated in violation of 625 ILCS
5/11-1426.1 may request a hearing by the respond-by date on the notice of
violation (14 days from the date of issuance), to challenge the evidence or set
forth an applicable defense. The notice of violation shall constitute evidence
of the facts contained in the notice and is admissible in any proceeding
alleging a violation of 625 ILCS 5/11-1426.1. The notice of violation shall be
prima facie evidence of a violation, subject to rebuttal on the basis of the
defenses established in 625 ILCS 5/11-1426.1.
      (2)   The owner’s failure to appear at the hearing will result in a
finding of liability. In the event of a failure to appear, a findings, decision
and order letter will be sent to the owner. The owner’s failure to pay the
amount by the date specified in that letter will result in a final
determination.
   (B)   The following may be considered defenses by the Hearing Officer for a
violation as defined herein:
      (1)   That the motor vehicle or registration plates of the motor vehicle
were stolen before the violation occurred, and not under the control of or in
the possession of the owner at the time of the violation (to demonstrate that
the motor vehicle or the registration plates were stolen before the violation
occurred and were not under the control or possession of the owner at the time
of the violation, the owner must submit proof that a report concerning the
stolen motor vehicle or registration plates was filed with a law enforcement
agency in a timely manner); and
      (2)   That the driver of the vehicle passed through the intersection when
the light was red either:
         (a)   In order to yield the right-of-way to an emergency vehicle; or
         (b)   As part of a funeral procession.
(Prior Code, § 70.066) (Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 70.067 FINAL DETERMINATION; DETERMINATION NOTICE.
   (A)   A final determination of an automated traffic law violation(s)
liability shall occur:
      (1)   Following the failure to pay the total assessed fine or penalty
after the Hearing Officer’s determination of vehicular standing, parking,
compliance regulation or automated traffic law violation(s) liability within
the required 25 days and, the exhaustion of or the failure to exhaust any
administrative review procedures hereinafter set forth; or
      (2)   Where a person fails to appear at a prior requested administrative
hearing provided to contest the alleged standing, parking or compliance
regulation violation(s) on the date and at the time and place specified, in a
prior served or mailed notice, or fails to appear at the hearing for an
automated traffic law violation on the date and at the time and place specified
in a prior mailed notice. The Hearing Officer’s determination of vehicular
standing, parking, compliance regulation or automated traffic law violation(s)
liability shall become final upon the exhaustion of or the failure to exhaust
any administrative or judicial review procedures hereinafter set forth:
         (a)   Upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that
determination; or
         (b)   Upon the expiration of the period for filing a petition without
a filing having been made.
   (B)   (1)   A determination of automated traffic law violation liability
shall occur following failure to pay the fine or penalty, or to contest the
alleged violation within 14 days of the notice of violation. Where a person
fails to appear at a hearing to contest the alleged violation in the time and
manner specified in a prior mailed notice, the Hearing Officer will enter
findings.
      (2)   Decision and order’s determination of automated traffic law
violation liability which shall become final:
         (a)   Upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that
determination; or
         (b)   Upon expiration of the period for filing such a petition without
a filing having been made.
      (3)   If a person appears at a hearing and is found liable or contests
the violation by mail and is found liable, the Hearing Officer will enter
findings, decision and order, which is a final determination of automated
traffic law violation liability that is a final, appealable order.
   (C)   A notice of final determination shall be sent following the final
determination of automated traffic law violation liability and the conclusion
of judicial review. Service of said notice shall be deemed complete upon
deposit in the United States mail. The notice of final determination shall
include the following information:
      (1)   A statement that the unpaid fine is a debt due and owing to the
city; and
      (2)   A warning that a failure to pay any fine due and owing to the city
within 14 days may result in a petition to the Circuit Court of Cook County to
have the unpaid fine rendered as a judgment or may result in the suspension of
the person’s driver’s license for failure to pay fines or penalties for five or
more violation under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 70.067) (Ord. 2014-052, passed 11-11-2014; Ord. 2016-001, passed
1-12-2016)
§ 70.068 PETITIONS.
   (A)   A person owing an unpaid fine or penalty for automated traffic law
violation penalty may file a petition to set aside a final determination of
such liability within 14 days after service by the city of a determination of
liability notice.
   (B) The grounds for such a petition shall be limited to:
      (1)   The person not having been the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle
on the date the violation notice was issued;
      (2)   The person having already paid the fine or penalty for the
violation in question; and
      (3)   Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing.
   (C)   Upon receipt of a timely petition to set aside the determination of
liability, the Hearing Officer shall review the petition to determine if cause
has been shown to set aside the determination. If cause has been shown, the
city shall forward the petitioner a new hearing date on which the petitioner
must appear to present his or her case. The city shall notify the petitioner of
the Hearing Officer’s decision to grant a hearing or deny the petition within
14 days of the city’s receipt.
(Prior Code, § 70.068) (Ord. 07-060, passed 2-27-2007; Ord. 2014-052, passed
11-11-2014; Ord. 2015-022, passed 7-28-2015; Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 70.069 SUSPENSION NOTICES.
   (A)   (1)   A notice of impending driver’s license suspension shall be sent
to the person liable for any fine or penalty that remains due and owing on five
or more violations of this subchapter. The notice of impending driver’s license
suspension shall state the following information:
         (a)   The failure to pay the fine owing within 45 days of the notice’s
date will result in the city notifying the Secretary of State that the person
is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings under § 6-306.5 of the
Code;
         (b)   A statement that the person may obtain a copy of the original
ticket imposing a fine by sending a self-addressed, stamped envelope to the
city along with a request for the copy.
      (2)   The Traffic-Control Administrator, by certified report, shall
request that the Secretary of State suspend the driving privileges of an owner
of a registered vehicle who has failed to pay any fine or penalty due and owing
as a result of five automated traffic violations. The report shall be certified
and contain the following:
         (a)   The name, last known address as recorded with the Secretary of
State, as provided by the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of lease, or
as recorded in a United States Post Office approved database if any notice sent
under this subchapter is returned as undeliverable, and driver license number
of the person who failed to pay the fine or penalty and the registration number
of any vehicle known to be registered to such person in a state;
         (b)   The name of the municipality making the report pursuant to this
section: and
         (c)   A statement that a notice of impending driver license suspension
has been sent to the person named in the report at the address recorded with
the Secretary of State or at the last address known to the lessor of the cited
vehicle at the time of the lease or, if any notice sent under this subchapter
is returned as undeliverable at the last known address recorded at a United
States Post Office approved database; the date on which such notice was sent;
and address to which such notice was sent.
      (3)   The Traffic-Control Administrator shall notify the Secretary of
State whenever a person named in the certified report has paid the previously
recorded fine or penalty or whenever the municipality determines that the
original report was in error. A certified copy of such notification shall also
be given upon request and at no additional charge to the person named therein.
   (B)   (1)   If the Administrator provides a suspension notice to a vehicle
owner and subsequently makes a certified report to the Secretary, the subject
vehicle owner may challenge the accuracy of the certified report in writing. To
do so, the vehicle owner must submit to the Administrator a written statement
under oath, together with any supporting documentation, establishing one of the
following grounds for challenging the accuracy of the certified report:
         (a)   The person was not the owner or lessee of the subject vehicle or
vehicles receiving five or more automated traffic law violations on the date or
dates such violation notices were issued; or
         (b)   The person already paid the fines or penalties for the five or
more automated traffic law violations indicated on the certified report.
      (2)   Such statement and supporting documentation must be sent to the
Administrator by certified mail, return receipt requested, or hand- delivered
to the Administrator within five days after the person receives notice from the
Secretary that the person’s driver license will be suspended at the end of a
specified period of time unless the Secretary is presented with a notice from
the city certifying that the fines or penalties due and owing have been paid or
that the inclusion of the person’s name on the certified report was i n error.
(Prior Code, § 70.069) (Ord. 07-060, passed 2-27-2007; Ord. 2014-052, passed
11-11-2014; Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 70.070 NON-RESIDENTS.
   Non-residents of the city who receive violation notices may contest the
merits of the alleged automated traffic law violation without attending a
hearing by sending a signed statement, under oath, together with any supporting
documentation, to the Administrator via certified mail, return receipt
requested, within 14 days after service of the violation notice. Such a
statement shall set forth the reasons why a finding of liability should not be
entered.
(Prior Code, § 70.070) (Ord. 07-060, passed 2-27-2007; Ord. 2014-052, passed
11-11-2014; Ord. 2015-022, passed 7-28-2015; Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 70.071 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of
its passage, approval and publication as provided by law. If any portion of
this subchapter is held to be invalid, then that portion shall be stricken from
this subchapter and the remaining portions of this subchapter shall continue in
full force and effect to the extent possible.
(Prior Code, § 70.071) (Ord. 07-060, passed 2-27-2007; Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-
12-2016)
TOWING OF VEHICLES
§ 70.085 AUTHORIZATION FOR TOWING; ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The towing of vehicles by the city, or by its approved towing service
operators on behalf of the city, shall be authorized only by the Police
Department and under circumstances provide by ordinance. Hazardous or unlawful
vehicles may be towed without prior notice except that when an unlawful vehicle
is one that has been reported as stolen and is not towable for some other
specific reason, the owner should be notified by telephone or other means when
practicable and given the opportunity to claim or move the vehicle if he or she
wishes to avoid incurring the expenses of a police ordered tow. Abandoned
vehicles may be towed with prior notice as provided for in this section.
   (B)   The abandonment of a vehicle or any part thereof on private or public
property, other than a highway, in view of the general public, within city
limits is unlawful except on property of the owner or bailee of such abandoned
vehicle. A vehicle or any part thereof so abandoned on private property shall
be authorized for removal by the Police Department after a waiting period of
seven days or more, or may be removed immediately if determined to be a
hazardous dilapidated motor vehicle under § 11-40-3.1 of the Illinois Municipal
Code, being 65 ILCS 5/11-40-3.1.
(Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 70.086 NOTIFICATION REQUIRED GENERALLY; PRE-TOW NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   When an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed vehicle comes into the
temporary possession or custody of a person not the owner of the vehicle, such
person shall immediately notify the Police Department when the vehicle is
within the city limits. Upon receipt of such notification, the Police
Department will authorize a towing service to remove and take possession of the
abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed vehicle. The towing service will safely
keep the towed vehicle and its contents, maintain a record of the tow as
required by § 4-204 of the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code, being 625 ILCS 5/4-204,
until the vehicle is claimed by the owner or any other person legally entitled
to possession thereof or until it is disposed of.
   (B)   (1)   Except as set forth in this section, an abandoned vehicle which
is to be removed shall be towed only after notice has been given to the
registered owner or to the person entitled to possession of the motor vehicle
indicated in the most current registration list of the Secretary of State, if
the names and mailing addresses can be ascertained in the exercise of
reasonable diligence, notice shall be given by certified first class mail,
return receipt requested. If such names and addresses cannot be ascertained,
notice shall be given by affixing on the windshield or some other conspicuous
place on the vehicle a notice indicating that the vehicle will be removed, by
the city on or after a specific date. This date will be no sooner than seven
days alter the notice is mailed or affixed to the vehicle, unless the vehicle
is removed by the owner or legal possessor prior to that time.
      (2)   The notice required by division (B)(1) above shall state that the
vehicle will be removed seven days after the postmarked date or affixation of
the notice unless removed prior to that time and shall provide information on
the availability of the appeal process.
      (3)   The requirement that notice be given prior to the removal of an
abandoned vehicle may, as determined by the Police Department, be omitted in
those circumstances where there is a special need for prompt action to
eliminate traffic obstructions or to otherwise maintain and protect the public
safety and welfare. This includes, but is not limited to, situations that
include vehicles blocking or obstructing ingress or egress to businesses and
residences, vehicles parked in such a location or manner as to pose a traffic
hazard, and vehicles causing damage to public or private property. Such
findings shall be documented in written form by the Police Department.
(Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 70.087 REMOVAL AND HAULING OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   When a vehicle is abandoned on a highway in the city for ten hours or
more, its removal by a towing service shall be authorized by Police Department.
   (B)   When an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burned or partially dismantled
vehicle is creating a traffic hazard because of its position in relation to the
highway or its physical appearance is causing the impeding of traffic, its
immediate removal from the highway or private property adjacent to the highway
by a towing service may be authorized by Police Department.
   (C)   Whenever a police officer reasonably believes that a person under
arrest for driving under the influence in violation of § 11-501 of Illinois
Vehicle Code, being 625 ILCS 5/11-501, is likely, upon release, to commit a
subsequent violation of § 11-501, the arresting officer shall have the vehicle
which the person was operating at the time of the arrest impounded for a period
of not more than 12 hours after the time of arrest. However, such vehicle may
be released prior to the end of the impoundment period if:
      (1)   The vehicle was not owned by the person under arrest, and the
lawful owner requesting such release possesses a valid operator’s license,
proof of ownership, and would not, as determined by the arresting officer,
indicate a lack of ability to operate a motor vehicle in a safe manner, or who
would otherwise, by operating such motor vehicle, be in violation of Illinois
Motor Vehicle Code: or
      (2)   The vehicle is owned by the person under arrest, and the person
under arrest gives permission to another person to operate such vehicle,
provided however, that the other person possesses a valid operator’s license
and would not, as determined by the arresting officer, indicate a lack of
ability to operate a motor vehicle in a safe manner or who would otherwise, by
operating such motor vehicle, be in violation of Illinois Motor Vehicle Code.
   (D)   (1)   Whenever a registered owner of a vehicle is taken into custody
for operating the vehicle, either under the influence in violation of § 11-501
of Illinois Vehicle Code, being 625 ILCS 5/11-501, or while the owner’s
license, permit or privilege is suspended or revoked in violation of § 6-303 of
Illinois Vehicle Code, being 625 ILCS 5/6-303, the Police Department may have
the vehicle immediately impounded for a period not less than:
         (a)   Twenty-four hours for a second violation of § 11-501 of Illinois
Vehicle Code, being 625 ILCS 5/11-501, or § 6-303 of Illinois Vehicle Code,
being 625 ILCS 5/6-303, or a combination of these offenses; or
         (b)   Forty-eight hours for a third violation of § 11-501 of Illinois
Vehicle Code, being 625 ILCS 5/11-501, or § 6-303 of Illinois Vehicle Code,
being 625 ILCS 5/6-303, or a combination of these offenses.
      (2)   The vehicle may be released sooner if the vehicle is owned by the
person under arrest and the person under arrest gives permission to another
person to operate the vehicle and that other person possesses a valid
operator’s license and would not, as determined by the arresting officer,
indicate a lack of ability to operate a motor vehicle in a safe manner or would
otherwise, by operating the motor vehicle, be in violation of Illinois Motor
Vehicle Code.
   (E)   Except as provided in Chapter 18a of Illinois Vehicle Code, being 625
ILCS 5/18a, the Police Department in the case of publicly owned real property
may cause any motor vehicle abandoned or left unattended upon such property
without permission to be removed by a towing service without liability for the
costs of removal transportation or storage or damage caused by such removal,
transportation or storage. The towing or removal of any vehicle from private
property without the consent of the registered owner or other legally
authorized person in control of the vehicle is subject to compliance with the
following conditions and restrictions.
      (1)   Any towed or removed vehicle must be stored at the site of the
towing service’s place of business. The site must be open during business
hours, and for the purpose of redemption of vehicles, during the time that the
person or firm towing such vehicle is open for towing purposes.
      (2)   The towing service shall within 30 minutes of completion of such
towing or removal, notify the Police Department of such towing or removal, and
the make, model, color and license plate number of the vehicle, and shall
obtain and record the name of the person at the Police Department to whom such
information was reported.
      (3)   If the registered owner or legally authorized person entitled to
possession of the vehicle shall arrive at the scene prior to actual removal or
towing of the vehicle, the vehicle shall be disconnected from the tow truck,
and that person shall be allowed to remove the vehicle without interference,
upon the payment of a reasonable service fee of not more than one-half the rate
of the towing service for which a receipt shall be given.
      (4)   Except for property appurtenant to and obviously a part of a
single-family residence, and except for instances where notice is personally
given to the owner or other legally authorized person in control of the vehicle
that the area in which that vehicle is parked is reserved or otherwise
unavailable to unauthorized vehicles and they are subject to being removed at
the owner or operator’s expense, any property owner or lessor, prior to towing
or removing any vehicle from private property without the consent of the owner
or other legally authorized person in control of that vehicle, must post a
notice meeting the following requirements.
         (a)   The notice for a parking lot contained within property used
solely for a two- family, three-family or four-family residence may be
prominently placed at the perimeter of the parking lot, in a position where the
notice is visible to the occupants of vehicles entering the lot.
         (b)   The notice must indicate clearly, in not less than two-inch high
light-reflective letters on a contrasting background, that unauthorized
vehicles will be towed away at the owner’s expense.
         (c)   The notice must also provide the name and current telephone
number of the towing service towing or removing the vehicle.
         (d)   The sign structure containing the required notices must be
permanently installed with the bottom of the sign not less than four feet above
ground level, and must be continuously maintained on the property for not less
than 24 hours prior to the towing or removing of any vehicle.
      (5)   Any towing service that tows or removes vehicles and proposes to
require the owner, operator or person in control of the vehicle to pay the
costs of towing and storage prior to redemption of the vehicle must file and
keep on record with the Police Department a complete copy of the current rates
to be charged for such services, and post at the storage site an identical rate
schedule and any written contracts with property owners, lessors or persons in
control of property which authorize them to remove vehicles as provided in this
section. The towing and storage charges, however, shall not exceed the maximum
allowed by the Illinois Commerce Commission under 625 ILCS 5/18a-200.
      (6)   No person shall engage in the removal of vehicles from private
property without filing a notice of intent with the Police Department at least
seven days before commencing such towing.
      (7)   No removal of a vehicle from private property shall be done except
upon express written instructions of the owners or persons in charge of the
private property upon which, the vehicle is said to be trespassing.
      (8)   Vehicle entry for the purpose of removal shall be allowed with
reasonable care on the pail of the person or firm towing the vehicle.
      (9)   Except as authorized by the Police Department, no towing service
shall engage in the removal of a commercial motor vehicle that requires a
commercial driver’s license to operate by operating the vehicle under its own
power on a highway.
      (10)   When a vehicle has been towed or removed, it must be released to
its owner or custodian within one half hour after requested, if such request is
made during business hours. Any vehicle owner or custodian or agent shall have
the right to inspect the vehicle before accepting its return, and no release or
waiver of any kind which would release the towing service from liability for
damages incurred during the towing and storage may be required from any vehicle
owner or other legally authorized person as a condition of release of the
vehicle. A detailed, signed receipt showing the legal name of the towing
service must be given to the person paying towing or storage charges at the
time of payment, whether requested or not.
   (F)   (1)   When a vehicle is determined to be a hazardous dilapidated motor
vehicle pursuant to § 11-40-3.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code, being 65 ILCS
5/11-40-3.1, its removal and impoundment by a towing service shall be
authorized by the Police Department.
      (2)   When a vehicle removal from either public or private property is
authorized by the Police Department, the owner of the vehicle shall be
responsible for all towing and storage charges.
      (3)   Vehicles removed from public or private property and stored by a
commercial vehicle relocator or any other towing service authorized by the
Police Department in compliance with this section and §§ 4-201 and 4-202 of
Illinois Vehicle Code, being 625 ILCS 5/4-201 and 5/4-202, respectively, or at
the request of the vehicle owner or operator, shall be subject to a possessor
lien for services pursuant to the Labor and Storage Lien (Small Amount) Act,
being 770 ILCS 50/.
   (G)   Whenever an officer issues a citation to a driver for a violation of §
11-506(a) of Illinois Vehicle Code, being 625 ILCS 5/11-506(a), the arresting
officer may have the vehicle which the person was operating at the time of the
arrest impounded for a period of five days after the time of arrest. Said
vehicle shall release a motor vehicle impounded under this section to the
registered owner of the vehicle under any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   If the vehicle is a stolen vehicle;
      (2)   If the person ticketed for a violation of
subsection (a) of § 11-506 of Illinois Vehicle Code, being 625 ILCS 5/11-506,
was not authorized by the registered owner of the vehicle to operate the
vehicle at the time of the violation;
      (3)   If the registered owner of the vehicle was neither the driver nor a
passenger in the vehicle at the time of the violation or was unaware that the
driver was using the vehicle to engage in street racing;
      (4)   If the legal owner or registered owner of the vehicle is a rental
car agency; or
      (5)   If prior to the expiration of the impoundment period specified
above, the citation is dismissed or the defendant is found not guilty of the
offense.
   (H)   Except for vehicles exempted under § 7-601(b) of Illinois Vehicle
Code, being 625 ILCS 5/7-601(b), whenever a police officer issues a citation to
a driver for operating an uninsured vehicle in violation of § 3-707 of Illinois
Vehicle Code, being 625 ILCS 5/3-707, and the driver has a prior conviction for
a violation of § 3-707 in the past 12 months, the arresting officer shall
authorize the removal and impoundment of the vehicle by a towing service.
(Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 70.088 POLICE TOWS; REPORTS, RELEASE OF VEHICLES, PAYMENT.
   When a vehicle is authorized to be towed away as provided herein the
following shall apply.
   (A)   The authorization, any hold order, and any release shall be in
writing, or confirmed in writing, with a copy given to the towing service.
   (B)   The Police Department shall keep and maintain a record of the vehicle
towed, listing the color, year of manufacture, manufacturer’s trade name,
manufacturer’s series name, body style. Vehicle identification number, license
plate year and number and registration sticker year and number displayed on the
vehicle. The record shall also include the date and hour of tow, location towed
from, location towed to, reason for towing and the name of the officer
authorizing the tow.
   (C)   The owner, operator or other legally entitled person shall be
responsible to the towing service for payment of applicable removal, towing,
storage and processing charges and collection costs associated with a vehicle
towed or held under order or authorization of the Police Department. If a
vehicle towed or held under order or authorization of the Police Department is
seized by the ordering or authorizing agency or any other law enforcement or
governmental agency and sold, any unpaid removal, towing, storage and
processing charges and collection costs shall be paid to the towing service
from the proceeds of the sale, and that payment shall not, however, exceed the
amount of proceeds from the sale, with the balance to be paid by the owner,
operator or other legally entitled person.
   (D)   Upon delivery of a written release order to the towing service, a
vehicle subject to a hold order shall be released to the owner, operator or
other legally entitled person upon proof of ownership or other entitlement and,
upon payment of applicable removal, towing, storage and processing charges and
collection costs.
(Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 70.089 RECORD SEARCHES.
   (A)   If the Police Department is unable to determine the identity of the
registered owner, lienholder or other legally entitled person, of an impounded
vehicle, the Police Department shall cause the vehicle registration records of
the state to be searched by the Secretary of State for the purpose of obtaining
the required ownership information.
   (B)   The Police Department will cause the stolen motor vehicle files of the
State Police to be searched by a directed communication to the State Police for
stolen or wanted information on the vehicle. The information determined from
these record searches will be used to send a notification by certified mail to
the registered owner, lienholder and other legally entitled persons advising
where the vehicle is held, requesting a disposition be made and setting forth
public sale information. Notification shall be sent no later than ten business
days after the date of impoundment, provided that if the Police Department is
unable to determine the identity of the registered owner, lienholder or other
person legally entitled to ownership of the impounded vehicle within a ten-
business day period after impoundment, then notification shall be sent no later
than two days after the date the identity of the registered owner, lienholder
or other person legally entitled to ownership of the impounded vehicle is
determined. Exceptions to a notification by certified mail to the registered
owner, lienholder and other legally entitled persons are set forth in § 4-209
of Illinois Vehicle Code, being 625 ILCS 5/4-209.
(Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 70.090 IDENTIFYING AND TRACING OF VEHICLE OWNERSHIP.
   When the registered owner, lienholder or other person legally entitled to
the possession of a vehicle cannot be identified from the registration files of
this state or from the registration files of a foreign state, if applicable,
the Police Department shall notify the State Police, for the purpose of
identifying the vehicle owner or other person legally entitled to the
possession of the vehicle.
(Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 70.091 DISPOSAL OF HAZARDOUS DILAPIDATED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   Any hazardous dilapidated motor vehicle impounded pursuant to the provisions
of this subchapter and § 11-40-3.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code, being 65
ILCS 5/11-40-3.1, whether impounded at a public facility or on the property of
a private towing service, shall be kept in custody for a period of ten days for
the purpose of determining the identity of the registered owner or lienholder
and contacting such owner or lienholder, if known, by regular U.S. Mail. At the
expiration of the ten-day period, without the benefit of disposition
information being received from the registered owner or lienholder, the Police
Department shall authorize the disposal of the vehicle as junk.
(Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 70.092 POLICE REPORTS AFTER VEHICLE IS RECLAIMED OR DISPOSED OF.
   When a vehicle is reclaimed by the registered owner, lienholder or other
legally entitled person, or when the vehicle is sold at public sale or
otherwise disposed of, a report of the transaction will be maintained by the
Police Department for a period of one year from the date of the sale or
disposal.
(Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 70.093 DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS OF SALE OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES.
   When a vehicle located within the corporate limits of a city, village or
town is authorized to be towed away by the Police Department and disposed of as
set forth herein, the proceeds of the public sale or disposition after the
deduction of towing, storage and processing charges shall be deposited in the
treasury of the city.
(Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 70.094 FAILURE TO PAY FINES, CHARGES AND COSTS.
   Whenever any Illinois resident fails to pay any fine, charge, or cost
imposed for a violation of §
70.085, the City Clerk shall notify the Secretary of State and make application
to prohibit the renewal, reissue or reinstatement of the resident’s driving
privileges until the fine, charge or cost has been paid in full. The City Clerk
shall provide notice to the owner, at the owner’s last known address as shown
on the court’s records stating that the action will be effective on the forty-
sixth day following the date of the above notice if payment is not received in
full by the court of venue.
(Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 70.095 PRE-TOW AND POST-TOW HEARING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   (1)   Opportunity for pre-tow hearing. The owner or person entitled to
possession of a vehicle to be towed as an abandoned vehicle shall have seven
days after the date of mailing or personal delivery of the notice to request,
in writing, a pre-tow hearing. Subsequent to this seven-day period, the vehicle
may be towed if the owner has not filed a written hearing request within the
seven-day period, and any hearing rights under the provisions of this
subchapter will be deemed waived.
      (2)   Scheduling of pre-tow hearings. The pre-tow hearing shall be
scheduled for a date within 14 days of the mailing or personal delivery of the
pre-tow notice. The city shall not be required to delay towing longer than such
14-day period.
      (3)   Request for pre-tow hearings. Requests
for a pre-tow hearing are to be made to the Police Department. Requests for
hearing by persons who reside more than 50 miles from the city may be made by
mail. Forms for such requests shall be made available at the Police Department.
At the time of making the request, the owner will be provided a hearing date
and time by mail or in person, as the circumstances require.
      (4)   Appointment of Hearing Officer. The Deputy Chief of Police or his
or her designee shall serve as the hearing officer. In no case shall that
Hearing Officer be an individual who was involved in the initial decision to
tow the vehicle. The Hearing Officer shall have the authority to require the
presence of the enforcement officer who initiated the proposed tow or any other
city personnel.
   (B)   (1)   Nature of hearing. The hearing shall be informal in nature, and
the rules of evidence shall not apply. The hearing wall not be determinative
of, or adjudicate, any citation relative to any vehicle. After receiving all
relevant evidence, the Hearing Officer shall make a written decision based upon
a preponderance of the evidence as to whether towing of the vehicle is
authorized by the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city, with a
specific statutory or ordinance section cited in the decision. The owner shall
be provided a copy of such pre-tow hearing decision.
      (2)   Decision to tow and rates to be charged. If the preponderance of
the evidence supports towing and compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter, the Hearing Officer shall direct that the vehicle be towed or, to
the extent required by law, then an appropriate court order for towing from
private property be obtained, with any towing and storage costs to then be
imposed upon the owner thereof. The owner of said vehicle having had such, a
hearing may avoid the towing by immediately removing the vehicle from the
improper location to a proper, lawful location and correcting any unlawful
condition of the vehicle.
      (3)   Decision not to tow. If the preponderance of the evidence fails to
support towing of the vehicle, the Hearing Officer shall direct that the
vehicle shall not be towed. The city shall furnish a copy of such decision to
the owner, who may place it inside the vehicle in a location plainly visible
from the outside, such as the dashboard or rear window. No vehicle about which
such a decision has been rendered shall be towed by the city unless the
circumstances under which the decision was rendered have changed. If at some
subsequent time the city should wish to tow the vehicle from the same location,
it shall follow the same procedures required for the towing of any other
similarly situated vehicle.
      (4)   Contesting or appealing decisions. The owner may contest the
decision of the Hearing Officer in any manner provided by law.
(Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 70.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   The operator of any vehicle violating or failing to comply with
the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code and §
70.001 of this chapter shall, upon a finding of the occurrence of said
violation, be fined no less than $50, and no more than $250, for each offense,
except for those violations and fine amounts enumerated in division (A)(2)
below and unless otherwise provided by the city’s comprehensive fee schedule.
      (2)   The Illinois Vehicle Code sets minimum and maximum fines for
certain violations and the following fines for the same are incorporated
herein.
   (B)   In the event that such penalty is not paid within 14 days after
service of a violation final determination of liability notice, the penalty
shall increase to $200.
   (C)   Unless the driver of the motor vehicle cited for an automated traffic
law violation received a uniform traffic citation from a police officer at the
time of the violation, the owner of the motor vehicle is subject to a penalty
of $100 per violation. In the event that such penalty is not paid within 14
days after service of a violation notice of final determination and liability,
the penalty shall increase to $200.
(Prior Code, § 70.999) (Ord. 2013, passed 10-10-1966; Ord. 91-284, passed 9-10-
1991; Ord. 07-060, passed 2-27-2007; Ord. 2014-003, passed 1-14-2014; Ord.
2015-022, passed 7-28-2015; Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
General Regulations
   
71.01   Speed restrictions
   
71.02   Special speed and weight restrictions
   
71.03   Stop required before entering through streets and stop intersections
   
71.04   Stop when traffic obstructed
   
71.05   One-way streets
   
71.06   Limitations on turning around
   
71.07   Limitations on backing
   
71.08   Emerging from alley or driveway
   
71.09   Vehicles not to be driven on closed streets
   
71.10   Method of approaching for left turn
   
71.11   Method of approaching for right turn
   
71.12   Signals required
   
71.13   Vehicles not to be driven on sidewalks or safety zones
   
71.14   Following fire apparatus prohibited
   
71.15   Traffic not to be obstructed
   
71.16   Weight limits restricted on certain streets
   
71.17   Vehicle size limits
   
71.18   Riders of animals or bicycles subject to traffic code provisions
   
71.19   Traffic schedules adopted by reference
   
71.20   Vehicles not to be driven in alleys
Pedestrians
   
71.30   Pedestrians subject to traffic-control signals
   
71.31   Right-of-way at crosswalks
   
71.32   School crossing signals and crosswalks
   
71.33   Crossing at other than crosswalks
   
71.34   Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalk
Cross-reference:
   Parking Regulations, see
Ch. 72
   Vehicle Licensing, see Ch. 73
   Vehicle Weight Restrictions, see Ch. 75
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 71.01 SPEED RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall drive or operate or cause to be driven or operated any
vehicle along, upon or over any street or alley within the limits of the city
at a speed in excess of 20 mph.
   (B)   No person shall drive or operate or cause to be driven or operated any
vehicle upon any street or alley in the city within a school zone nor drive or
operate a vehicle on a local, county, or state roadway on public school
property or upon anyy public thoroughfare where children pass going to and from
school within the limits of the city, at a speed in excess of 20 mph.
      (1)   For purposes of this section, SCHOOL means the following: a public
or private primary or secondary school; a primary or secondary school operated
by a religious institution: or a public, private or religious nursery school.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, a school day shall begin at 6:30 am
and conclude at 4:00 pm.
   (C)   Any person violating such speed restrictions shall be deemed to have
violated this section.
   (D)   Except as provided in subsection (D)(1) a person who violates the
school zone speed limits is guilty of a petty offense. Violations of this
section are punishable with a minimum fine of $150 for the first violation and
a minimum fine of $300 for the second or subsequent violation.
      (1)   A person committing a violation of this section is guilty of
aggravated special speed limit while passing schools when he or she drives a
motor vehicle at a speed that is:
         (a)   Twenty-six miles per hour or more but less than 35 miles per
hour in excess of the applicable special speed limit established under this
Section or a similar provision of a local ordinance and is guilty of a Class B
misdemeanor; or
         (b)   Thirty-five miles per hour or more in excess of the applicable
special speed limit established under this section or a similar provision of a
local ordinance and is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
   (E)   No person shall drive or operate or cause to be driven or operated any
vehicle upon any street or alley in the city within a park zone within the
limits of the city, at a speed in excess of 20 mph.
      (1)   For purposes of this section, PARK ZONE means the recreation
facilities and areas on any land owned or operated by a park district that are
used for recreational purposes, including but not limited to: parks;
playgrounds; swimming pools; hiking trails; bicycle paths; picnic areas; roads
and streets; and parking lots.
      (2)   PARK ZONE STREET means that portion of any state or local street or
intersection under the control of a local unit of government, adjacent to a
park zone, where the local unit of government has, by ordinance or resolution,
designated and approved the street or intersection as a park zone street.
   (F)   A first violation of the park zone speed limits is a petty offense
with a minimum fine of $250. A second or subsequent violation of the park zone
speed limit is a petty offense with a minimum fine of $500.
   (G)   All signs erected regarding park zone speed limits and school zone
speed limits will be comply with state statute.
(Prior Code, § 71.01) (Ord. 1583, passed 7-14-1947; Ord. 1635, passed 12-11-
1950; Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016; Ord. 2023-036, passed 8-22-2023)
§ 71.02 SPECIAL SPEED AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   No person shall operate any truck or bus over, along or upon any portion of
any street set out by the city in a speed greater than as regulated by the
city.
(Prior Code, § 71.02) (Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 71.03 STOP REQUIRED BEFORE ENTERING THROUGH STREETS AND STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   When stop signs are erected upon highways entering a through street at the
entrance thereto, or at the entrance to any intersection, every driver shall
stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in
the event there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but,
if none, then before entering the intersection and at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting highway, except when directed to proceed by a police officer or
traffic-control signal, and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles
which have entered the intersection or which are approaching so closely thereto
as to constitute an immediate hazard, and shall similarly yield the right-of-
way to pedestrians within or entering any crosswalk at the intersection.
(Prior Code, § 71.03) (Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/11-904
§ 71.04 STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED.
   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle or pedestrian, notwithstanding any traffic-control
signal indication to proceed.
(Prior Code, § 71.04) (Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 71.05 ONE-WAY STREETS.
   Upon those streets and parts of streets described by the city, vehicular
traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the
direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where
movement in the opposite direction is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 71.05) (Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 71.06 LIMITATIONS ON TURNING AROUND.
   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle to the left upon any
street in the business district for the purpose of proceeding in the opposite
direction or for the purpose of parking along a curb and shall not upon any
other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety and
without interfering with other traffic.
(Prior Code, § 71.06) (Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 71.07 LIMITATIONS ON BACKING.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same into an intersection or over
a crosswalk and shall not in any event or at any place back a vehicle unless
such movement can be made in safety.
(Prior Code, § 71.07) (Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 71.08 EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY.
   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall
stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into a
sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, and upon entering the roadway
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 71.08) (Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 71.09 VEHICLES NOT TO BE DRIVEN ON CLOSED STREETS.
   No driver of any vehicle, except an authorized emergency vehicle while
engaged in emergency duty, shall drive such vehicle upon any street or highway
which is officially closed to traffic and which is plainly indicated as such by
officially erected signs, barricades or other traffic-control devices.
(Prior Code, § 71.09) (Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 71.10 METHOD OF APPROACHING FOR LEFT TURN.
   The driver of any vehicle intending to turn left at any intersection or into
an alley or driveway shall approach the point of turning in the traffic lane
nearest to the right of the centerline of the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 71.10) (Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 71.11 METHOD OF APPROACHING FOR RIGHT TURN.
   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the right at any intersection
shall approach the point of turning in the traffic lane nearest the right-hand
edge or curb of the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 71.11) (Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 71.12 SIGNALS REQUIRED.
   (A)   No driver of a vehicle shall suddenly start, slow down, stop or
attempt to turn without first giving a suitable signal in such a manner as to
apprise others who might be affected by the driver’s action.
   (B)   The signals herein required shall be given either by means of the hand
and arm or by a signal lamp or other signal device, but when a vehicle is so
constructed or loaded that a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to
the front and rear of such vehicle, then such signals must be given by such a
lamp or device.
   (C)   All signals herein required which are given by hand and arm signal
shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner, and
such signals shall indicate as follows:
      (1)   Left turn: hand and arm extended horizontally;
      (2)   Right turn: hand and arm extended upward or moved with a sweeping
motion from the rear to the front; and
      (3)   Stop or decrease of speed: hand and arm extended downward.
(Prior Code, § 71.12) (Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 71.13 VEHICLES NOT TO BE DRIVEN ON SIDEWALKS OR SAFETY ZONES.
   (A)   No driver of a vehicle, motorized bicycle, motorized scooter or any
other gas powered or motor propelled thing used to transport people or goods,
shall drive within any sidewalk area, except at a permanent or temporary
driveway, nor at any time into or upon any portion of a roadway marked as a
safety zone.
   (B)   Motorized wheelchairs shall be exempt from this provision.
(Prior Code, § 71.13) (Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 71.14 FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS PROHIBITED.
   Upon the sounding of gongs or warning devices used upon fire apparatus or
fire patrol vehicles, drivers shall draw their vehicles as near to the right-
hand curb as is reasonably possible and shall remain standing until such fire
apparatus has passed. No driver of any vehicle, other than one on official
business, shall follow any fire apparatus in response to a fire alarm, closer
than one block, or park any vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has
stopped to answer a fire alarm.
(Prior Code, § 71.14) (Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 71.15 TRAFFIC NOT TO BE OBSTRUCTED.
   No vehicle, street car or train shall be operated or allowed to remain upon
any street in such a manner as to form an obstruction to traffic thereon.
(Prior Code, § 71.15) (Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 71.16 WEIGHT LIMITS RESTRICTED ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   No person shall operate a vehicle over, along and upon the certain streets
or thoroughfares or lands dedicated for street purposes, in violation of weight
limitations as are specified by the city.
(Prior Code, § 71.16) (Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 71.17 VEHICLE SIZE LIMITS.
   No person shall operate a vehicle over, along or upon the certain streets or
thoroughfares in violation of the size limits as are specified by the city.
(Prior Code, § 71.17) (Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 71.18 RIDERS OF ANIMALS OR BICYCLES SUBJECT TO TRAFFIC CODE PROVISIONS.
   Every person riding a bicycle or an animal or driving any animal drawing a
vehicle upon any street shall be subject to the provisions of this traffic code
applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except those provisions which can have
no application to one riding a bicycle or driving or riding an animal.
(Prior Code, § 71.18) (Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 71.19 TRAFFIC SCHEDULES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The city’s traffic schedules are hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as if set out in full. All traffic schedules are on file in
the office of the City Clerk and are available for public inspection.
(Prior Code, § 71.19) (Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 71.20 VEHICLES NOT TO BE DRIVEN IN ALLEYS.
   (A)   No driver of any vehicle for which a permit is required as set forth
in §
75.02(A) shall enter or drive on, through or within any alley.
   (B)   Appropriate signs shall be erected by the Superintendent of Public
Works, informing the public of the prohibitions enacted pursuant to this
section.
(Ord. 2024-015, passed 4-9-2024)
PEDESTRIANS
§ 71.30 PEDESTRIANS SUBJECT TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals at intersections as
provided in 625 ILCS 5/11-1001, but at all other places pedestrians shall be
accorded the privileges and shall be subject to the restrictions as hereinafter
stated.
(Prior Code, § 71.30) (Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 71.31 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   Where traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation,
the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping
if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, except as otherwise provided in this
subchapter.
   (B)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 71.31) (Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 625 ILCS 5/11-1002
§ 71.32 SCHOOL CROSSING SIGNALS AND CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   The portions of the public highways as designated by City Council
shall be known as school crossing crosswalks.
   (B)   School crossing signals shall be operated for an appropriate period of
time not exceeding 30 minutes duration immediately preceding the opening and
immediately following the closing of each school period both morning and
afternoon, of the public schools hereinabove in division (A) referred to, and
at such other time or times as in the judgment of the Mayor or the Chief of
Police, the operation of such signals may be necessary or desirable for the
protection of school pupils or other pedestrians en route to or from the public
schools, and all vehicular traffic passing along or upon the public highways
shall stop or proceed, as the case may be, in response to such signals at all
times while the same are in operation.
   (C)   All school pupils and other pedestrians using any of school crosswalks
at any time while such school crossing signals are in operation, shall cross
only when directed so to do by such school crossing signals.
(Prior Code, § 71.32) (Ord. 1735, passed 7-11-1955; Ord. 1761, passed 6-25-
1956; Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 71.33 CROSSING AT OTHER THAN CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within an
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles upon the roadway.
   (B)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way
to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (C)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in
operation pedestrians shall not cross at any place, except in a marked
crosswalk.
   (D)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, every driver of a
vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any
roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall
exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or
incapacitated person upon a roadway.
(Prior Code, § 71.33) (Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 71.34 PEDESTRIANS TO USE RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALK.
   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalk.
(Prior Code, § 71.34) (Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
72.01   Illegal parking
   
72.02   Parking at curb
   
72.03   Parking vehicles for sale prohibited
   
72.04   Unlawful to park in loading zone
   
72.05   Parking in alleys
   
72.06   Parking at bus stands prohibited
   
72.07   Consent of owner required to park on private property
   
72.08   Parking certain vehicles on city streets prohibited
   
72.09   Fire lane designations
   
72.10   Signs to be posted
   
72.11   Off-street parking to be provided for apartment buildings; maintenance
   
72.12   Street cleaning and snow routes
   
72.13   Parking for persons with disabilities; uniform regulations
   
72.14   Residential permit parking
   
72.15   Overnight parking
   
72.16   One-hour parking zones
   
72.17   Parking prohibited on Western and Olde Western between certain hours
   
72.18   Time restrictions
§ 72.01 ILLEGAL PARKING.
   No person shall permit any vehicle to stand in any of the following places,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the directions of a police officer or a traffic-control device:
   (A)   In any intersection;
   (B)   In a crosswalk;
   (C)   Upon any bridge or viaduct or the approach thereto;
   (D)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or
traffic-control signal on the approaching side of the highway or street;
   (E)   Within 20 feet of any intersection or crosswalk;
   (F)   At any place where the standing of a vehicle will reduce the usable
width of the highway or street for moving traffic to less than 18 feet;
   (G)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
   (H)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the
side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of
the entrance when properly sign-posted;
   (I)   On a sidewalk;
   (J)   In front of a public or private driveway;
   (K)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad grade crossing;
   (L)   On the roadway side of any vehicle parked at the edge or curb of a
street;
   (M)   At any place where official signs are posted prohibiting parking
pursuant to the provisions of any ordinance of the city;
   (N)   On the west side of the 129th block of Page Street adjacent to
Centennial Park;
   (O)   West side of Chatham Street between its intersection with Vermont
Street on the north and Fulton Street on the south;
   (P)   The west side of Highland Avenue between its intersection with Union
Street on the north and its intersection with York Street on the south between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.;
   (Q)   Beginning on the west side of Vincennes Avenue from its intersection
with 122nd Street and then proceeding in a general northerly direction along
the west side of Vincennes Avenue to the intersection of 119th Street and
Vincennes Avenue, thence westerly along the southside of 119th Street to its
intersection with Longwood Avenue; thence in a general southernly direction
along the west side of Longwood to its intersection with 122nd Street, thence
in a general easterly direction along the southside of 122nd Street to its
intersection with Vincennes Avenue. Also, on the north and south side of 122nd
Street from Longwood Drive to Irving Street;
   (R)   On Florence Street from its intersection with Irving Street on the
west to a point on the east where Florence Street intersects with the entrance
to the existing industrial park;
   (S)   On the public street within ten feet of any mailbox or receptacle for
accepting mail during the hours of 8:00 a.m. through 6:00 pm., Monday through
Saturday;
   (T)   On the north side of 123rd Street between Western Avenue and Artesian
Avenue; and
   (U)    On the south side of 123rd Street between Western Avenue and the
first alleyway immediately west of Western Avenue.
   (V)   In front of the pedestrian access to the stairs and parkway at 2250
Prairie Street.
(Prior Code, § 72.01) (Ord. 20-10, passed 10-10-1966; Ord. 2015-009, passed 2-
24-2015; Ord. 2019-023, passed - -; Ord. 2019-046, passed - -; Ord. 2020-003,
passed 1-28-2020; Ord. 2021- 020, passed 6-22-2021; Ord. 2021-030, passed 8-24-
2021; Ord. 2022-013, passed 2-22-2022; Ord. 2025-015, passed 3-11-2025)
Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 72.02 PARKING AT CURB.
   No vehicle shall be parked with the left side of such vehicle next to the
curb, except on one-way streets, and no person shall stand or park any vehicle
in or upon a highway or street other than parallel with the curb of the highway
or street and with the two right wheels of the vehicle on the roadway within 12
inches of the regularly established curb line. Vehicles parked on a one-way
street, with the two left wheels parallel to the curb line must also have the
wheels on the roadway within 12 inches of the established curb line. Parking
any portion of a vehicle on a parkway shall be prohibited. It shall not be
unlawful to park a vehicle on an established driveway between the curb line and
sidewalk, provided that no portion of the vehicle protrudes onto the roadway or
sidewalk.
(Prior Code, § 72.02) (Ord. 20-10, passed 10-10-1966) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 72.03 PARKING VEHICLES FOR SALE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall park any vehicle upon any street, public parkway or
private property for the purpose of displaying it for sale, unless the property
owner holds a valid business license or a used motor vehicle sale license from
the City of Blue Island, which authorizes the sale of vehicles.
   (B)    Definition. USED MOTOR VEHICLE SALES means any sale, or offer for
sale of any motor vehicle, by any person, firm or corporation, at a residence,
dwelling or other residential location situated in the city when the sale is
advertised in any manner as a used car sale, vehicle for sale, vehicle sale,
car sale and the owner or occupant of the residence, dwelling or other
residential location is not otherwise licensed to sell personal property from
said location.
   (C)   License required. No person, firm or corporation shall conduct a used
motor vehicle sale within the city unless a business license or used motor
vehicle sale license is issued permitting the sale. Each used motor vehicle
sale license will be valid for a period of not more than 60 consecutive days.
The used motor vehicle sale license shall be displayed in a prominent place on
the used motor vehicle so that it is visible from the exterior of the vehicle.
   (D)   Conditions of license issuance. No license required by §
72.03(C) shall be issued unless there is full compliance with the following
terms and conditions.
      (1)   The applicant for the license shall be the owner of the premises
where the sale is conducted;
      (2)   The applicant for the license shall have a current valid city
vehicle sticker;
      (3)   The applicant for the license shall have a current valid vehicle
registration with the State of Illinois;
      (4)   The sale of a used motor vehicle shall only involve motor vehicles
owned by the applicant or members of his or her household;
      (5)   The used motor vehicle for sale shall only be parked on an improved
surface;
      (6)   No items for sale shall be located. and no sales activities shall
be conducted on any public sidewalk, parkway area or other public property;
      (7)   All signs advertising the sale shall be located in a prominent
place on the used motor vehicle so that it is visible from the exterior of the
vehicle;
      (8)   The sale shall be conducted without the use of outdoor loudspeakers
or other amplification equipment;
      (9)   The sale shall be conducted in accordance with all other laws or
ordinances of the city;
      (10)   The license shall be valid only for the particular sale and
premises designated in the license and shall be clearly posted in a window of
the vehicle so as to be easily seen by the public. The license is
nontransferable: and
      (11)   No person, firm or corporation shall be eligible for a used motor
vehicle license to conduct the sale of a used motor vehicle more than once
during a 24-month period.
   (E)   License application; fee.
      (1)   Application for a used motor vehicle for sale license will be made
to the Building Department of the city. The fee for the license will be $10;
and
      (2)   No signs advertising the sale shall be affixed to any poles or
public property other than the vehicle licensed for sale.
   (F)   Penalties. Any person or entity who shall be guilty of a violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less
than $75 and not more than $750. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
for every day a violation continues. The provisions of this section shall not
limit any other remedies authorized by law.
(Prior Code, § 72.03) (Ord. 20-10, passed 10-10-1966; Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-
12-2016; Ord. 2023-033, passed 7-20-2023) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 72.04 UNLAWFUL TO PARK IN LOADING ZONE.
   Where a loading zone has been established and official signs are properly
posted, it shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stand or park a
passenger vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the loading
or unloading of passengers, not to exceed ten minutes, and for the driver of
any freight-carrying vehicle to stand or park that vehicle for a period of time
longer than is necessary to load, unload and deliver materials, not to exceed
one hour, or in any of the following designated places:
   (A)   At any place not to exceed 75 feet along the curb before the entrance
to any hospital; or
   (B)   Directly in front of the entrance to any theater at any time the
theater is open for business.
(Prior Code, § 72.04) (Ord. 20-10, passed 10-10-1966) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 72.05 PARKING IN ALLEYS.
   (A)   No person shall park a motor vehicle within an alley in a manner or
under such conditions which will leave less than 12 feet of available width of
the alley for the free movement of vehicular traffic.
   (B)   No person shall park-a motor vehicle within an alley in a position
which will block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.
   (C)   No person shall park a motor vehicle within 30 feet from the
intersection of two alleys commonly known as a “T” intersection alley.
(Prior Code, § 72.05) (Ord. 20-10, passed 10-10-1966; Ord. 2163, passed 11-22-
1971) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 72.06 PARKING AT BUS STANDS PROHIBITED.
   No vehicle other than a bus shall be parked in a place so designated as a
bus loading zone.
(Prior Code, § 72.06) (Ord. 20-10, passed 10-10-1966) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 72.07 CONSENT OF OWNER REQUIRED TO PARK ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No person shall park any motor vehicle on any private property without the
consent of the owner of the property.
(Prior Code, § 72.07) (Ord. 20-10, passed 10-10-1966) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 72.08 PARKING CERTAIN VEHICLES ON CITY STREETS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section TRUCKS, COMMERCIAL VEHICLES and
BUSSES shall have the same meaning as defined in 625 ILCS and the “class” of
these vehicles shall refer to the classes set out in 625 ILCS 5/3-815, as
presently in effect, and as amended from time to time.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to park any of the following vehicles on any
public street, alley, parkway and other public or private property in a
residential zoning district:
      (1)   Any bus or school bus;
      (2)   Any tow truck;
      (3)   Any truck with a snowplow attached;
      (4)   Any trailer, including house, boat or camping trailers which are
not self-propelled;
      (5)   Any commuter van designed for carrying more than ten persons;
      (6)   Any road tractor;
      (7)   Any semitrailer;
      (8)   Any special hauling vehicle (motorized or not);
      (9)   Any tank vehicle;
      (10)   Any truck tractor;
      (11)   Any medical transport vehicle including ambulances, medical
carriers and rescue vehicles;
      (12)   Any truck or second division vehicle with a license plate
registration higher than class B;
      (13)   Any recreational vehicle including camping, trailer, motor home,
mini motor home, travel trailer, truck camper or van camper (except that not
more than one such vehicle registered to an owner of the residence and
displaying a city vehicle sticker may be parked on a paved surface no closer
than three feet from the lot line of a private property or residence thereon);
      (14)   Any COMMERCIAL VEHICLE, which for purposes of this section means a
vehicle:
         (a)   Having a state license plate bearing one or more letters of the
alphabet, except “RV” or “CV” preceded by a number;
         (b)   Having a written advertisement on the vehicle indicating or
promoting a business enterprise for hire;
         (c)   Having ladder racks, ladders, brackets, tools or any other
paraphernalia in plain view making it obvious that the vehicle is being used
for a business enterprise; and/or
         (d)   Registered to any legal entity, i.e., a sole proprietorship, a
partnership or a corporation, (except that not more than one such vehicle
registered to an owner of the residence and containing a city vehicle
registration sticker may be parked at the residence or on the public street).
      (15)   Limousines.
   (C)   Exceptions for vehicles set out in 625ILCS 5/3-815.
      (1)   Those second division vehicles registered as pickup trucks and vans
and having a registered gross weight of 8,000 pounds or less and owned and
operated by the resident at the address where the vehicle is parked and not
leased by the resident to another person. The vehicle shall be parked no less
than 75 feet from any intersection in a residential area.
      (2)   Those second division vehicles owned by utility companies and used
as emergency vehicles and operated by the employee of the company residing at
the location where the vehicle is parked. These emergency vehicles shall be
designated by the employing company as emergency vehicles by keeping in the
emergency vehicle a notarized statement from the company to that effect. The
statement shall be produced upon demand of any law enforcement officer of the
city.
      (3)   Those recreational vehicles licensed for not more than 8,000 pounds
shall be parked no less than 75 feet from any intersection in a residential
area.
   (D)   Parking or storage of motor vehicles on private property. It shall be
unlawful for the record owner of real property:
      (1)   To park, store or permit, allow, or suffer the parking or storage
of, any inoperable motor vehicle on real property zoned for residential use.
         (a)   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE means any motor vehicle located on
private property and in public view for at least 14 days which cannot be driven
safely or legally due to the removal of the engine, wheels or other parts. An
inoperable motor vehicle shall not mean a vehicle that is temporarily
inoperable because repairs are under way provided that the repairs are
completed within 14 days.
         (b)   A motor vehicle that has not moved for 14 consecutive days that
is covered with a cover or tarp, or which does not possess a valid and current
motor vehicle license from the city, shall be presumed to be an inoperable
motor vehicle.
      (2)    To park, store or permit, allow or suffer the parking or storage
of, any motor vehicle on real property zoned for commercial use that is
actively being repaired; that is inoperable for 14 days or longer; that does
not have its own designated parking space in a parking lot on the commercial
property; that is double parked; that is covered with a cover or tarp for more
than 14 days, or that blocks any access to the property, including driveways or
garages; or
      (3)   To permit, allow or suffer any third-party to park or store any
motor vehicle on real property for consideration pursuant to a lease, license,
easement or other oral or written contractual relationship. Nothing herein
shall prevent the lawful operation of a public parking garage, public parking
lot or valet parking operation (excluding overnight parking) for consideration
when otherwise authorized as a principal or accessory use of real property
zoned for commercial use.
   (E)   Any person found in violation of any provision of this section shall
be fined not less than $100 not more than $750 for each offense for each
offense. Each day a violation occurs or is allowed to continue shall constitute
a separate and distinct offense. Violations of this section shall be
administered through administrative adjudication, of vehicular regulation
violations.
(Prior Code, § 72.08) (Ord. 2393, passed 3-14-1978; Ord. 2400, passed 5-9-1978;
Ord. 2015-013, passed 3-24-2015; Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016; Ord. 2021-
030, passed 8-24-2021; Ord. 2025-029, passed 6-24-2025)  Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 72.09 FIRE LANE DESIGNATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful to stop, stand or park any vehicle or to permit a
vehicle to remain parked in any area designated as a “fire lane”. Fire lanes
shall be as established by the Fire Chief and appropriate City Council
Committee. The Fire Chief shall maintain a list of designated fire lanes within
the city.
(Prior Code, § 72.09) (Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 72.10 SIGNS TO BE POSTED.
   The Department of Municipal Services shall cause appropriate signs
indicating limitations or prohibitions to be posted in all alleys where parking
is limited or prohibited under the terms of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 72.10) (Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 72.11 OFF-STREET PARKING TO BE PROVIDED FOR APARTMENT BUILDINGS; MAINTENANCE.
   It is the responsibility and duty of the owners of all apartment buildings
to maintain their off-street parking facilities and accesses free and clear of
all snow in excess of six inches, debris, garbage, garbage containers,
abandoned vehicles or any other foreign matter, or material so as to provide
the apartment tenants with a free and clear access and use of said off-street
parking facilities. No snow shall be plowed or shoveled onto public walkways or
streets.
(Prior Code, § 72.12) (Ord. 2436, passed 1-23-1979; Ord. 2442, passed 2-27-
1979) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 72.12 STREET CLEANING AND SNOW ROUTES.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      PARK. The standing of any vehicle, whether occupied or not.
   (B)   No parking during street cleaning.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any public street or
portion thereof within the city at any time when such street is being cleaned.
      (2)   Appropriate signs indicating that such street or portion thereof is
being cleaned shall be posted immediately before the cleaning of the street,
and shall be removed after the cleaning of the street is finished.
   (C)   Snow routes designated; snow removal.
      (1)   It shall be lawful to park any vehicle on any portion of the
streets set out by City Council, said streets being snow routes within the
city, at any time after snow has accumulated thereon in excess of two inches,
and such parking restriction shall continue during and until snow removal
operations on such streets have been completed.
      (2)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a street
in violation of the provisions of this section, such officer is hereby
authorized to remove such vehicle or require the driver or other person in
charge of the vehicle to remove the same from said street, or to cause said
vehicle to be towed from said street.
      (3)   No vehicle which is towed under the provisions of this section
shall be released to the owner or other person proving the right to possession
of said vehicle until all lawful towing and storage charges have been paid.
      (4)   Appropriate signs shall be erected on the designated snow routes
informing the public that parking thereon is prohibited as hereinabove
provided.
   (D)   Snow removal on non-major snow routes.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division (D), the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         PARK. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise
than when temporarily and actually engaged in loading or unloading of
merchandise, property or passengers, and except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or traffic-control signal or device.
      (2)   The provisions of this section shall apply to the parking of motor
vehicles and vehicles of any kind or nature parked upon streets of the city
which are not presently designated as major snow routes pursuant to the
provisions of division (C) above and any amendments thereto. Parking on those
streets designated as major snow routes shall be regulated in accordance with
the provisions of division (C) above and any amendments thereto.
      (3)   At any time after snow has accumulated in excess of two inches on
any streets which are not major snow routes, the following parking restrictions
shall be implemented and shall apply.
         (a)   On even-numbered days of the month, motor vehicles and vehicles
of any kind or nature shall be parked on the even-numbered side of the street
to facilitate snow removal on the odd numbered side of the street.
         (b)   On odd-numbered days of the month, motor vehicles and vehicles
of any kind or nature shall be parked on the odd-numbered side of the street to
facilitate snow removal on the even numbered side of the street.
      (4)   When snow has accumulated in excess of two inches between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. on any evening and before the hour of 8:00 a.m. on any morning,
then the even/odd parking restrictions shall begin at 8:00 a.m. and shall
continue in full force and effect during and until snow removal operations on
such streets have been completed.
      (5)   It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle or vehicle of any kind
or nature on the street in violation of these restrictions at times when snow
has accumulated in excess of two inches.
      (6)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle parked or standing upon
a street in violation of the provisions of this section, such officer is hereby
authorized to remove such vehicle or require the owner, driver, operator or
other person in charge of the vehicle to remove the same from the street, or to
cause said vehicle to be towed from said street.
      (7)   No vehicle which is towed pursuant to the provisions of this
section shall be released to the owner, driver, operator or other person
proving the right to possession of said vehicle until all lawful towing and
storage charges have been paid.
(Prior Code, § 72.13) (Ord. 2119, passed 2-9-1970; Ord. 2492, passed 11-27-
1979; Ord. 2683, passed 3-26-1985; Ord. 88-110, passed 1-26-1988) Penalty, see
§
70.999
§ 72.13 PARKING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES; UNIFORM REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The reservation of on street parking spaces for persons with
disabilities or disabled veterans as defined under state law shall be pursuant
to the provisions of this section and the applicable portions of the Illinois
Vehicle Code.
      (1)   Reserved permit parking shall be allowed curbside of a public
street within residentially zoned areas.
      (2)   The reserved space shall be marked by the posting of one sign,
erected by the Public Works Department in the form and manner prescribed under
§ 11-1301 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-1301), and shall not be
greater than 20 feet in length unless a greater length a reason for the greater
length is set forth in the application and approved by city staff and the
Public Works Department.
      (3)   The reserved permit parking space shall be located within the
limits of the individual’s residence and as close as possible to the frontage
of the residence where the disabled person resides.
      (4)   The on-street reserved permit parking space shall be placed
provided that all criteria in the application process have been met and the
application has been approved by city staff.
   (B)   The city shall accept all applications from residents with
disabilities as defined under § 1-159.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS
5/1-159.1) or from a member of the household having direct care of the disabled
person. Applicants requesting handicapped parking designations shall submit an
application to the City Clerk on the form provided. The following requirements
must be met and proven to submit an application:
      (1)   Applicants must be an owner of a motor vehicle for which the
Illinois handicapped or disabled veteran license plate or handicapped placard
has been issued and the plate or placard is valid at the time of the
application.
      (2)   The person who is disabled or a disabled veteran as defined under
state law is a lawful resident of the city at the address for which the
reserved permit parking space is requested. Written evidence of residency must
be provided to the City Clerk at the time the application is submitted.
      (3)   If the applicant is not the owner of the property at which the
disabled or disabled veteran resident resides, the applicant has obtained
written approval and a notarized letter from the owner or property manager of
the property for the installation of the reserved permit parking space sign,
and provided same at the time of application. If the property is transferred, a
new application, investigation process and approval letter from the new owner
shall be required.
      (4)   Upon submission of the application and required documentation to
the City Clerk, staff shall perform a site inspection of the location for the
requested parking and determine whether:
         (a)   There is a driveway or garage present at the location; and
         (b)   Whether there are existing parking restrictions or other reasons
why a handicap parking designation is not feasible including, but not limited
to, the presence of fire hydrants or traffic signs.
      (5)   If there is no driveway or garage, and there are no other reasons
prohibiting the parking designation, the application shall be forwarded to the
Alderman of the ward where said designation will be located and instructions
provided to the Public Works Department by staff to erect the sign.
      (6)   Once the sign is erected, the City Clerk must forward the
application to the Police Department so that the vehicle for which the
designated handicapped space was assigned can be logged into the Frontline
database for enforcement purposes.
   (C)   In the event requests for handicapped parking spaces are presented by
persons living in adjacent properties, the spaces shall, whenever practicable,
be located between the two properties so that each space has a length of 20
feet beginning from the adjoining lot line located between the two properties
and proceeding in opposite directions for lengths of 20 feet each.
   (D)   Intentional movement or relocation of a handicapped parking sign in
any manner from the place where it was initially installed by the Public Works
Department to a different location by any resident or occupant of the premises
for whose benefit the handicapped space has been designated shall result in
immediate revocation of the handicapped parking designation, removal of the
space as a handicapped parking space and revocation of any local municipal
permit issued for handicapped parking privileges. In the event a resident or
occupant of the premises considers that it is necessary to have a handicapped
sign moved or relocated, the resident or applicant shall make application to
the City Clerk to have the sign moved. Any such application must be approved in
the manner set forth in division (B) above.
   (E)   If staff determines that the location of the handicap parking
designation is not appropriate due to the presence of a garage or driveway or
other reasons, the application will be forwarded to the appropriate Alderman
for consideration of the individual circumstances at a Committee of the Whole
meeting.
   (F)   This section shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage, approval and publication in pamphlet form as provided by law. A full,
true and complete copy of this section shall be published in pamphlet form, by
authority of the City Council as corporate authorities.
   (G)   Upon notice of a change in circumstances necessitating removal of the
handicap parking designation, or death of the person for whom, the designation
was intended, the City Clerk shall make a recommendation to rescind said
handicap parking designation and instruct the Public Works Department to remove
the designated sign.
   (H)   There shall be parking by permit for persons holding a city disabled
permit parking sticker and paying an application and installation fee of $70
for a reserved permit parking sign adjacent to the property the applicant
resides in should the application be approved by city staff. This fee must be
submitted with the application. City disabled reserved parking permits expire
every June 30 and applicants must re-apply by paying a $25 renewal and
maintenance fee.
      (1)   The city disabled parking permit shall be numbered to correspond to
the sign posted or to the property and only the vehicle bearing that disabled
parking permit number shall be allowed to park therein;
      (2)   Persons who do not display a valid and current disabled plate or
permanent handicapped placard are subject to a $350 fine and tow;
      (3)   Violators who display a valid and current disabled plate or
permanent handicapped placard but no City of Blue Island disabled parking
permit sticker are subject to a $350 fine for parking in violation of a sign
and subject to tow;
      (4)   Disabled parking permit stickers shall only be issued to one
vehicle per property and only one disabled parking permit number shall be
issued per property;
      (5)   The Public Works Department shall develop the appropriate signage,
in compliance with this section and 625 ILCS 5/11-1301 et seq., clearly
designating the disabled permit parking number on the sign, so as to highlight
the restricted nature of the spot; and
      (6)   The disabled plate or permanent handicapped placard is not
transferable. The authorized holder of the disabled plate or permanent
handicapped placard must be present and must enter or exit the vehicle at the
time the reserved parking privileges are being used.
   (I)   Section 11-1301.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-1301.3)
is hereby incorporated into this section by reference.
   (J)   The Mayor and Aldermen of the city reserve the right to limit the
number of reserved permit parking spaces on a block.
   (K)   City staff has the right and authority to review and reevaluate the
current use of parking spaces for the disabled person pursuant to this section
and shall make recommendations to the City Clerk and/or Mayor and Aldermen of
the city as to any such reserved permit parking spaces which may no longer be
appropriate. The City Clerk shall have the right to revoke any reserved permit
parking spaces previously approved.
   (L)   No person shall sell, assign, rent or lease any disabled permit
parking sticker or charge a fee for the use thereof. No person shall file a
sworn affidavit, as required herein, which the person knows to be false or
believes to be false at the time of filing.
   (M)   No person shall continue to display a disabled reserved permit parking
sticker which has been terminated, cancelled and recalled pursuant to this
section.
   (N)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle or stop a
motor vehicle for the purpose of loading or unloading persons or thing, other
than persons with disabilities, in any public parking area posted as a drop off
zone for persons with disabilities.
   (O)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section shall be fined
not more than $350, except that anyone who fraudulently uses a city disabled
parking permit sticker in violation of this section, shall be subject to a $500
fine and revocation of the sticker.
(Prior Code, § 72.14) (Ord. 2001-353, passed 6-26-2001; Ord. 2016-001, passed
1-12-2016; Ord. 2016-006, passed 2-23-2016; Ord. 2021-031, passed 8-24-2021;
Ord. 2021-056, passed 11-23-2021)
§ 72.14 RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      PARK. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than
when temporarily and actually engaged in loading or unloading of  merchandise,
property or passengers, and except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic, or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-
control signal or device.
   (B)   Nonresident parking restrictions.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for non- residents to park any vehicle on any
public street or portion thereof on which:
         (a)   The city has acted to prohibit parking by non-residents; and
         (b)   The city has acted to limit parking by non-residents during a
certain time period.
      (2)   Appropriate signs shall be erected by the Superintendent of Public
Works, informing the public of any parking limitations or prohibitions enacted
pursuant to this section.
      (3)   Temporary non-resident parking permits may be issued at the
discretion of the City Administrator for licensed caregivers or other temporary
visitors assisting city residents for a period not to exceed three months,
after an application is made for the same with the City Clerk.
   (C)   Resident parking permits.
      (1)   The city may establish residential parking zones based on
geographic locations within the city.
      (2)   Residents living on a public street that is limited to residential
permit parking who wish to park on the street shall apply to the city for a
residential parking permit at the same time as they apply for their vehicle
registration as provided in §
73.02.
      (3)   The City Clerk shall create a uniform application for residential
parking permits.
      (4)   The City Clerk shall be responsible for accepting, processing and
issuing residential parking permits and temporary non-resident visitor permits
and verifying the applicant’s compliance with all other city licensing,
certification and registration requirements. No applicant may be issued a
residential parking permit that has failed to obtain a city vehicle sticker or
who has outstanding city violations, including parking citations. No applicant
may be issued a temporary non-resident parking permit without providing the
necessary information with his/her application and obtaining approval from the
City Administrator.
      (5)   Upon receipt of an application and proof of residence, and
verification of compliance with all other city code provisions, the City Clerk
is hereby authorized to issue annual residential parking permit decals to
residents of the district.
   (D)   Any person found in violation of any provision of this section shall
be fined not less than $50 not more than $750 for each offense for each
offense. Each day a violation occurs or is allowed to continue shall constitute
a separate and distinct offense. Violations of this section shall be
administered through administrative adjudication of vehicular regulation
violations.
   (E)   Appropriate signs shall be erected by the Superintendent of Public
Works on the streets designated above and/or to be designated in the future
informing the public that parking thereon is restricted.
(Prior Code, § 72.15) (Ord. 2021-030, passed 8-24-2021; Ord. 2024-013, passed
4-9-2024)
§ 72.15 OVERNIGHT PARKING.
   (A)   OVERNIGHT PARKING is defined as parking on any street in the city’s
residential zoning districts from the hours of 2:00 a.m. until 6:00 a.m.
   (B)   Overnight parking is prohibited with the following exceptions:
      (1)   Vehicles displaying a valid city vehicle registration;
      (2)   Vehicles displaying a valid city permanent overnight parking
permit;
      (3)   Vehicles that have been registered with the City Police Department
online or via phone for temporary overnight visitor parking, which is allowed
no more than seven times per month. Any person requesting permission to park
vehicles overnight may submit their request online at www.frontlinepss.com/
blueisland or by calling 708-385-1313; or
      (4)   Vehicles parked within a one block radius of the following streets:
Western Avenue from 119th Street to Grove Street; and Olde Western Avenue from
Canal Street to 135th Street. No vehicle shall park within these designated
areas between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. Monday through Friday
morning, and between the hours of 3:30 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. Saturday and Sunday
mornings.
   (C)   The city vehicle registration or permanent overnight parking permit
required on residential city streets must be fully and completely affixed to
the lower front passenger side of the windshield. Partially removed or
partially affixed vehicle registration stickers or permanent overnight permits
will result in a citation for violation of this section.
   (D)   Any resident desiring a permanent overnight permit shall file an
application for such purpose with the City Clerk pursuant to §
73.02.
   (E)   Any person found in violation of any provision of this section shall
be fined not less than $50 and not more than $750 for each offense. Each day a
violation occurs or is allowed to continue shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense. Violations of this section shall be administered through
administrative adjudication of vehicular regulation violations.
   (F)   Appropriate signs shall be erected by the Superintendent of Public
Works on the streets designated above and/or to be designated in the future
informing the public that parking thereon is restricted.
(Ord. 2021-030, passed 8-24-2021)
§ 72.16 ONE-HOUR PARKING ZONES.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park such vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts of streets of the city for a longer time than
one hour, between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day of the week
on Olde Western Avenue and on Western Avenue from 119th Street to 135th Street.
(Ord. 2024-021, passed 4-23-2024)
§ 72.17 PARKING PROHIBITED ON WESTERN AND OLDE WESTERN BETWEEN CERTAIN HOURS.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park such vehicle
upon Olde Western Avenue or on Western Avenue from 119th Street to 135th
Street, between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day of the week.
(Ord. 2024-021, passed 4-23-2024)
§ 72.18 TIME RESTRICTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a vehicle to permit the
vehicle to remain parked on any public street for more than 30 consecutive days
without moving the vehicle.
(Ord. 2024-038, passed 8-27-2024)
CHAPTER 73: VEHICLE LICENSING
Section
   
73.01   Definitions
   
73.02   City vehicle license required; fee
   
73.03   Application
   
73.04   Exemptions
   
73.05   Insignia; disposition
   
73.06   New car purchase; new residential fees
   
73.07   Due date; expiration; license year
   
73.08   Taxicabs
   
73.09   Effective date
 
   
73.99   Penalty
§ 73.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOTOR VEHICLES. Every vehicle which is propel led otherwise than by muscular
power, including, but not limited to, automobiles, motorcycles, motor bicycles,
motor scooters, motor trucks, truck tractors and all vehicles propelled by
mechanical or electrical power, except traction engines, cars or equipment
designed to be used on rails or tracts.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or
association of any kind.
(Prior Code, § 73.02) (Ord. 99-252, passed 4-27-1999; Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-
12-2016)
§ 73.02 CITY VEHICLE LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE.
   (A)   Annual license required; fee; exemptions.
      (1)   Each owner of a motor vehicle who resides within the city, or whose
vehicle has its situs or base within the city, shall annually purchase a
license for such vehicle and pay to the city an annual license fee.
      (2)   (a)   The United States, the state, units of local government and
school districts created under the laws of the state shall be exempt from the
requirement to obtain an annual license and pay the annual license fee for all
vehicles owned by said public bodies and used exclusively for the public
purposes of said public body.
         (b)   Owners of “commercial motor vehicles”, as defined in 625 ILCS 5/
18b-101, that are registered under 625 ILCS 5/3-402.1 shall be exempt from the
requirement to obtain an annual license and pay the annual license fee.
   (B)   Use of licensed vehicle.
      (1)   No person shall use, or cause or permit any agents or employees to
use, any motor vehicle whose owner resides within the city, or whose situs or
base is within the city, upon the public streets or highways in the city unless
such vehicle is licensed.
      (2)   Leased or rented vehicles may be registered in the name of the
owner or custodian of the vehicle, and if such vehicle is in custody of the
resident of the city assigned its total use, that person shall be required to
register/license such vehicle in accordance herewith.
      (3)   It shall constitute prima facie evidence that a motor vehicle is
operated upon the public streets or highways within the city when the motor
vehicle is registered with the Secretary of State of the state to a named
person at an address within the city boundaries or when the motor vehicle has
its situs or base within the city.
   (C)   Situs or base. A motor vehicle has its situs or base where it is
principally garaged or from whence it is principally dispatched or where the
movement of such vehicle usually originates.
   (D)   Commercial vehicles.
      (1)   No commercial vehicle shall be parked in the city for any length of
time unless a current vehicle license sticker is affixed to its front
windshield from the city, except if the owner or operator of the vehicle is
actively engaged in performing a service at a residence or business within the
city boundaries.
      (2)   All commercial vehicles not actively engaged in providing a service
within the city may be licensed in the name of the vehicle’s actual owner or in
the name of the person in the city or entity who is the custodian of the
vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 73.03) (Ord. 99-252, passed 4-27-1999; Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-
12-2016; Ord. 2020-036, passed 9-22-2020; Ord. 2022-033, passed 4-26-2022)
Penalty, see § 73.99
§ 73.03 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Any person desiring to license a motor vehicle as required by §
73.02 shall file an application with the City Clerk, upon a form to be
provided, setting forth the name and address of the applicant. The applicant
must also submit the following information:
      (1)   Current city mailing address of the applicant, or business address
of the applicant if a firm, partnership, association or corporation;
      (2)   A description of the vehicle, including license plate, make, model
and color;
      (3)   In the case of a vehicle designed and used for commercial purposes,
the manufacturer’s rated load carrying capacity in tons; and
      (4)   Such other information as may be reasonably required by the City
Clerk to carry into effect the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   A dealer in motor vehicles shall not apply for more vehicle licenses
than dealer plates issued by the Secretary of State of the state.
   (C)   Upon payment of the annual license fee as provided in the city’s fee
and fine schedule, §
39.01, the City Clerk shall issue or cause to be issued a vehicle license,
which shall be attested by the City Clerk, authorizing the use of such vehicle
within the city until its expiration date.
(Prior Code, § 73.04) (Ord. 99-252, passed 4-27-1999; Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-
12-2016; Ord. 2020-036, passed 9-22-2020; Ord. 2022-033, passed 4-26-2022)
Penalty, see § 73.99
§ 73.04 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   In the event the owner of a motor vehicle who applies for a motor
vehicle license as hereinabove provided is 65 years of age or older and
produces satisfactory proof of the same by a birth certificate, baptismal
record or otherwise, the annual motor vehicle license fee shall be reduced to
the amount indicated in the fee and fine schedule. This exemption is limited to
one vehicle of the first division per household. The annual motor vehicle
license fee for a disabled veteran who qualifies for registration of a motor
vehicle under the provisions of 625 ILCS 5/3-609, upon finishing satisfactory
proof thereof, shall be one-third the amount set forth hereinabove for one
vehicle of the first division or one motor vehicle of the second division
weighing not more than 8,000 pounds.
   (B)   No person having moved to, now being a resident of, the city shall be
exempt from the provisions of this chapter for a period greater than 30 days
from the date of first becoming a resident of the city, by reason of vehicle
having been registered, taxes or licensed in a state other than the State of
Illinois or in another municipality of the State of Illinois.
(Prior Code, § 73.06) (Ord. 99-252, passed 4-27-1999; Ord. 03-437, passed 5-27-
2003; Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-2016)
§ 73.05 INSIGNIA; DISPOSITION.
   (A)   General. With the issuance of a vehicle license, the City Clerk shall
deliver to the licensee and appropriate insignia bearing a number, the class of
the vehicle, and the year for which the license is issued. It shall be the duty
of the licensee to promptly and properly affix such insignia on the vehicle
licensed at the lower right-hand corner of the windshield as viewed from inside
the vehicle. Failure to so affix insignia shall be deemed a violation hereof.
   (B)   Return of faulty insignia. When, after issuance of license and
insignia as aforesaid, an insignia or suitable portion thereof is returned with
claim of fault, the City Clerk will issue replacement insignia with
corresponding license without charge to claimant.
   (C)   Loss of insignia. If a claim of loss of insignia is made, a
replacement insignia with corresponding license for the same vehicle only,
shall be issued with presentation of a receipt at full price. A refund will be
issued if the lost sticker is subsequently found and presented to the City
Clerk’s office.
   (D)   Disposition of vehicle. When a vehicle licensed in the current license
year is disposed of in any manner, the license insignia shall be removed
therefrom by the licensee and such removed insignia or a suitable portion
thereof along with a receipt for the current year be presented to the City
Clerk at the time of applying for a license for a succeeding vehicle in the
same license year. Full credit therefor shall be applied toward the licensing
of the succeeding vehicle for the unexpired portion of that license year. In
that case, a transfer charge shall be paid by the licensee to the City Clerk,
in addition to difference in fee, if any, due to the difference in class, if
any, of the disposed of vehicle and the succeeding vehicle being licensed.
   (E)   Damaged or defaced insignia. In the event an insignia becomes defaced
or damaged rendering it illegible, the Clerk shall upon payment of a
replacement fee by applicant issue another insignia to be affixed to the motor
vehicle originally licensed.
(Prior Code, § 73.07) (Ord. 99-252, passed 4-27-1999; Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-
12-2016) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.06 NEW CAR PURCHASE; NEW RESIDENTIAL FEES.
   (A)   Resident requirement. Residents with newly purchased vehicles have 30
days from the date of purchase to obtain a valid vehicle license. Licenses
purchased 31 days or after the date of purchase will incur a late penalty and
require payment of two times the original fee.
   (B)   Half-year license fee structure for vehicle purchases. Any vehicle
license issued after January 1 for a vehicle purchased after January 1 of the
year will pay one-half of the cost, subject to a pro rata discount, if
purchased within 30 days after the purchase of the vehicle. Licenses purchased
31 days or after the date of purchase or lease will incur a late penalty
requiring payment of two times the reduced fee above. All such licenses shall
expire on June 30 following the date of issuance.
   (C)   New resident requirement. New residents have 30 days from the date of
their real estate closing or lease to obtain a valid vehicle license at the
regular fee rate. Licenses purchased 31 days after the date of closing or lease
will incur a late penalty, which will require payment of two times the original
fee.
   (D)   Half-year license fee structure for new residents. Any new resident
requesting a vehicle license after January 1 of the year will pay one-half of
the cost, subject to a pro rata discount, if purchased within 30 days after the
date of closing or lease. Licenses purchased 31 days after the date of closing
or lease will incur a late penalty requiring payment of two times the reduced
fee above. All such licenses shall expire on June 30 following the date of
issuance.
(Prior Code, § 73.08) (Ord. 99-252, passed 4-27-1999; Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-
12-2016; Ord. 2022-033, passed 4-26-2022) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.07 DUE DATE; EXPIRATION; LICENSE YEAR.
   (A)   All licenses and permits expire on June 30 of each year. Vehicle
licenses and permits may be available on May 1 of each year and must be
displayed before July 1.
   (B)   Vehicle renewal licenses purchased after June 30 are deemed late and
will incur a late payment penalty requiring payment of two times the original
fee.
(Prior Code, § 73.09) (Ord. 99-252, passed 4-27-1999; Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-
12-2016; Ord. 2022-033, passed 4-26-2022) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.08 TAXICABS.
   (A)   Applications for operation shall be made to the City Clerk’s office by
the owner of the taxicab company. They will provide the following:
      (1)   Description of the cab;
      (2)   License plate number;
      (3)   Meter rates; and
      (4)   Insurance certificate.
   (B)   The vehicle sticker fee as set forth in the city’s fee and fine
schedule shall be charged per taxicab and applied to a business registration
license.
   (C)   The taxicab vehicle sticker will be placed in the rear window driver’s
side.
   (D)   The taxicab vehicle sticker will permit the taxicab company to use
city owned cab stands and to pick up customers within the city limits.
   (E)   Any driver not having a valid license required by the motor vehicle
laws of the state or any such person whose license as such driver has been
revoked or suspended found driving a taxicab shall cause the revocation of the
company’s business registration certificate.
   (F)   The foregoing additions to license fees shall not be construed to be
in lieu of any penalty hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 73.10) (Ord. 99-252, passed 4-27-1999; Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-
12-2016) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.09 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effect on May 28, 2022, and shall
begin to apply for the annual licensing requirements at that time.
(Prior Code, § 73.11) (Ord. 99-252, passed 4-27-1999; Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-
12-2016; Ord. 2022-033, passed 4-26-2022)
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   The minimum fine is $50.
(Ord. 2022-033, passed 4-26-2022)
CHAPTER 74: BICYCLES
Section
   
74.01   Definitions
   
74.02   Rental agencies
   
74.03   Operating regulations
§ 74.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BICYCLE. A light vehicle with two tandem wheels, neither of which are less
than 20 inches in diameter, with solid or pneumatic tires, having a steering
wheel and a saddle seat or seats and propelled by the feet acting on treadles
connected to cranks or levers.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The Chief of Police of the city or any member of the Police
Department of the city designated by the Chief of Police to act in the Chief’s
place and stead.
   DEALER IN BICYCLES. Any person engaged in the business of selling bicycles
at retail or wholesale.
   RENTAL AGENCY. Any person engaged in the business of offering for rental and
renting bicycles for use by the public.
   ROADWAY. The portion of any alley, street or public highway between the
regularly established curb lines, if any, or if there are no regularly
established curb lines, then between the two outer edges thereof.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of a street between the curbline and the abutting
property line ordinarily used for pedestrian travel.
(Prior Code, § 74.01) (Ord. 1517, passed 3-23-1942; Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-
2016)
§ 74.02 RENTAL AGENCIES.
   Bicycles offered for rent by a rental agency shall be equipped by the rental
agency with the lights and other appropriate safety equipment required by law
and shall be kept in good and safe working order. Rental agencies shall comply,
in all respects, with all of the provisions of this chapter, and shall be
responsible for the condition of the bicycles they rent. The Chief of Police
shall make periodical inspections of rental agencies to ascertain that they are
complying with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 74.04) (Ord. 1517, passed 3-23-1942; Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-
2016)
§ 74.03 OPERATING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Abreast. When two or more persons in a group are operating bicycles,
they shall not ride abreast, but shall ride in single file.
   (B)   Clinging to vehicles. No person operating a bicycle within the city
shall cling or attach himself or herself or his or her bicycle to any other
moving vehicle.
   (C)   Emerging from alleys, driveways or garages. The operator of a bicycle
emerging from an alley, driveway or garage shall stop the bicycle immediately
prior to driving onto or across a sidewalk or onto or across a sidewalk line,
projected across an alley and shall exercise extreme care in these cases.
   (D)   Extra passengers. No person operating a bicycle within the city shall
carry another person on the same bicycle. This restriction shall not apply to
tandem bicycles.
   (E)   Intoxicated; drugs; riding. No person shall operate a bicycle within
the city while under the influence of liquor or drugs.
   (F)   Lights. No bicycle shall be operated within the city between 30
minutes before sunset and 30 minutes before sunrise without a clear, white,
properly lighted headlight, visible under normal atmospheric conditions from
the front thereof for not less than 200 feet, and firmly attached to the
bicycle, or without a red reflector, firmly attached to the bicycle, which is
clearly visible in the headlight beam of an automobile, for a distance of 200
feet to the rear of the bicycle.
   (G)   Place of operation. Bicycles may not be operated upon any sidewalks.
   (H)   Parking. No person shall at any time place any bicycle or bicycles
along buildings in such a manner as to interfere with the ingress or egress
thereof or to interfere with pedestrians, or along roadways where they may
interfere with traffic or with persons entering or alighting from automobiles.
No person shall move or in any manner interfere with any bicycle which is
properly parked, nor shall any person interfere or, in any manner, hinder any
person from properly parking a bicycle; except that, members of the Police
Department or Fire Department may move or, in proper cases, prevent the parking
of a bicycle, when, in the judgment of a police officer or firefighter, the
member’s action is necessary in order to properly safeguard persons or
property.
   (I)   Right; keep to. All bicycles, when operated on roadways, shall be kept
to the right and shall be operated as nearly as practicable at the right-hand
edge of the roadway.
   (J)   Speed. No bicycle shall be operated faster than is reasonable and
proper, and every bicycle shall be operated with reasonable regard for the
safety of the rider and of other persons and property.
   (K)   Traffic regulations; observation. Every person operating a bicycle
within the city shall observe all traffic signs and signals, and shall observe
all other traffic rules and regulations applicable thereto.
   (L)   Reckless riding. At no time shall a bicycle be ridden in a reckless,
careless or negligent manner, or in such a manner as to endanger lives of
pedestrians or in such a manner as to interfere with lawful traffic and the use
of the streets. Riding without hands on the handlebars, deliberate wobbling
from side to side, and other unnecessary and dangerous acts conducive to
accidents are considered reckless riding.
   (M)   Turns. The operator of a bicycle on a roadway, when making a right
turn, shall follow the right-hand lane next to the right-hand edge of the
roadway, and the operator of a bicycle on a roadway, when making a left turn,
shall approach the point of turning in the traffic lane nearest the center of
the roadway, and shall not cut the left-hand corner. No operator of a bicycle
shall suddenly start, slow down, stop or attempt to turn, without first giving
the standard signal required by state law for motor vehicles under the same
circumstances.
(Prior Code, § 74.05) (Ord. 1517, passed 3-23-1942; Ord. 2016-001, passed 1-12-
2016)
CHAPTER 75: OVERWEIGHT AND OVERSIZED VEHICLES
Section
   
75.01   Definitions
   
75.02   Permits
   
75.03   Application for permit
   
75.04   Police escorts
   
75.05   Bonds, indemnification and insurance
   
75.06   Suspension and reinstatement
   
75.07   Permit fees schedule
   
75.08   Unlawful operation of vehicles
§ 75.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANNUAL PERMIT. A permit issued to a single truck, truck-tractor power unit
or piece of special mobile equipment which is valid for unlimited moves for a
period not to exceed one year from the date of issuance.
   CITY. The City of Blue Island.
   NON-DIVISIBLE. A vehicle and a load will be considered non-divisible when
further separating or dismantling the vehicle or load:
      (1)   Would require more than eight work hours to dismantle using
appropriate equipment. The applicant has the burden of proof as to the number
of work hours required to dismantle the load;
      (2)   Will compromise or destroy the intended use of the load only. A
load can be either permanently mounted or temporarily secured equipment. Any
parts, fluids or material necessary to the operation of only the power unit
portion of the vehicle shall be deemed non-divisible; and
      (3)   Would prohibit the vehicle from hauling one attachment that is
necessary to the operation of the load. To be considered non-divisible, the
attachment must be securely mounted to the load in the manner it is used and
not carried as a separate object on the hauling vehicle. Is the duty of the
applicant to declare such an attachment in the permit application.
   ONE-WAY OR SINGLE-TRIP PERMIT. One move from the point of origin to the
point of destination. Any additional stops between the point of origin and the
point of destination are expressly prohibited. Single trip permits are valid
for five consecutive days from the date of issuance unless otherwise directed
by the Police Department.
   POLICE DEPARTMENT. The City of Blue Island Police Department.
   QUARTERLY PERMIT. A permit issued to a single truck, truck-tractor power
unit or piece of special mobile equipment which is valid for unlimited moves
for a period not to exceed three months from the date of issuance.
   ROUND-TRIP PERMIT. Two trips over the same route in opposite directions.
ROUND-TRIP PERMITS are valid for ten consecutive days from the date of
issuance.
(Ord. 2021-063, passed 12-14-2021)
§ 75.02 PERMITS.
   (A)   (1)   A permit shall be required for the movement of any vehicle or
combination of vehicles, that is non-divisible or is carrying a load that is
non-divisible, while operating on roadways and/or bridges within the
jurisdiction of the city which exceeds the following limits:
         (a)   Maximum gross weight of more than 80,000 pounds;
         (b)   Maximum single axle weight of more than 20,000 pounds;
         (c)   Maximum tandem axle weight of more than 34,000 pounds;
         (d)   Axle weights or series of axle weights that exceed the maximum
limits set forth in 625 ILCS 5/15-112(f);
         (e)   Maximum gross length of 42 feet for single vehicles;
         (f)   Maximum gross length of more than 55 feet for tractor-
semitrailer combinations;
         (g)   Maximum gross length of more than 60 feet for all other
combinations;
         (h)   Maximum gross width of more than eight feet, six inches; and
         (i)   Maximum gross height of more than 13 feet, six inches.
      (2)   Exempt from permits are the following:
         (a)   Fire Department vehicles;
         (b)   Those vehicles operating under an emergency declaration;
         (c)   City owned vehicles engaged in emergency utility repair; and
         (d)   Equipment used for snow and ice removal, owned and/or operated
by any governmental body.
   (B)   Permits shall be issued only in the name of a person, firm, business
or corporation that owns and operates the transporting vehicle or that operates
the vehicle under a bona fide lease agreement.
   (C)   Permits for vehicles that are both overweight and/or oversize are
valid only one-half hour before sunrise until one-half hour after sunset, on
any day which a permit issued by the Illinois Department of Transportation is
valid.
   (D)   Permits are non-transferable and apply only to the permittee.
   (E)   The city may issue revisions to permits:
      (1)   To correct an error attributed to the city;
      (2)   To correct an error attributed to the applicant, discovered prior
to the move; and
      (3)   To adjust weights, dimension or routes as issued on the permit,
before the move is made.
   (F)   The permit, when issued, constitutes an agreement between the
permittee and the city that the move described in the application will take
place only as described. The permittee has the responsibility to report to the
Police Department any inaccuracies or errors on the part of either the city or
the permittee before starting any move. Undertaking the move is prima facie
evidence of acceptance of the permit as issued and its terms.
   (G)   The routing prescribed in the permit constitutes the sole extent of
the authority granted by the permit for the use of the roads within the
jurisdiction of the city and any vehicle and/or load found to be off route will
be considered off route and without a permit. Permits shall be in the drivers
possession at all times unless otherwise directed by the Police Department and
presented upon demand to any and all police officers for the purpose of
inspection.
   (H)   Any vehicle(s) and/or load found to be divisible will render the
permit null and void. The entire gross weight and axle weights of the vehicle
(s) with the load are subject to legal weights. It is the duty of the applicant
to verify the non-divisibility of the vehicle(s) before making application for
the permit. The permit application itself is prima facie evidence that the
applicant confirmed the vehicle(s) and/or load were non-divisible.
   (I)   If required, arrangement shall be made by the permittee to have the
proper utilities notified, property moved and/or bridge or highway analysis
performed and completed in advance of any permit movement.
   (J)   All movements under the permit shall be made in accordance with all
applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.
   (K)   Permits are null and void if altered for the purpose of deception. The
permits issued under this section constitute the grant of a privilege by the
city and may be denied or suspended for such reasons as the city may deem
rationally related to its government interests including, but not limited to:
      (1)   A permittee knowingly providing incorrect information in an
application for a permit;
      (2)   A permittee, its agents or employees operating on a permit which
has been altered for purposes of deception;
      (3)   Non-compliance by permittee, its agents or employees with federal,
state or local ordinances pertaining to the transport of goods or operation of
a vehicle engaged in the transport of goods; and
      (4)   Moving on city streets without a valid permit as required under
this section.
   (L)   All single trip or round-trip permits are limited to movements on
assigned routes only.
   (M)   All quarterly or annual overweight permits are restricted to the
following maximum limitations and routing;
      (1)   Twelve foot width;
      (2)   Thirteen foot, six inch height;
      (3)   Fifteen foot length; and
      (4)   May not use any city street as a “cut-thru” to avoid using a
county, state or township highway.
   (N)   These permits are subject to all standards of application set forth in
§ 75.03, except that the load may be interchanged provided none of the above
listed maximum weight and size dimensions are exceeded. Quarterly and annual
permits shall list the registration number (commonly referred to as the license
plate number) and state for the power unit and vehicle identification number
(VIN). The serial number of the power unit and/or owner applied number shall
also be listed if applicable.
(Ord. 2021-063, passed 12-14-2021)
§ 75.03 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   All applications for permits shall be given full consideration.
Permits for proposed moves may be issued:
      (1)   When the city roadways and bridges will not be unduly damaged; and
      (2)   When the safety of the traveling public will be adequately
protected.
   (B)   Applications for a permit to move an oversized and/or overweight
vehicle, and/or load must be made to the Police Department. The following
information shall be included on the permit application:
      (1)   Company name;
      (2)   Company address;
      (3)   Company fax and telephone numbers;
      (4)   Description of hauling vehicle or power unit;
      (5)   Description of load to be moved and if the load is carrying an
attachment;
      (6)   Maximum dimensions, gross weight and axle weights of the vehicle
including load;
      (7)   Roads under the jurisdiction of the city to be traveled; and
      (8)   Any special conditions.
(Ord. 2021-063, passed 12-14-2021)
§ 75.04 POLICE ESCORTS.
   Police escorts are required for certain vehicles and loads as indicated in
the subsection herein. The total number of officers necessary to provide for a
safe move shall be determined by the Police Department, based upon the size and
weight of the permit move. Fees for escorts shall be in addition to the permit
fees set forth herein. Escort fees shall provide for a minimum of two hours of
service calculated by the most current overtime rate established by the Police
Department.
(Ord. 2021-063, passed 12-14-2021)
§ 75.05 BONDS, INDEMNIFICATION AND INSURANCE.
   (A)   The permittee shall assume total liability for any and all damages to
streets, bridges, city owned appurtenances and private or public property while
engaged in a permit move. The measure of liability is the cost for all repairs
or replacement of property damaged by the permittee.
   (B)   The permittee shall indemnify and hold harmless the city and/or
members of the Police Department from any costs, judgements or settlements,
including attorney fees, arising from physical injuries, including loss of
life, or damage to or loss of property related to acts or omissions by the
permittee, its officers, agents or employees pursuant to the permit.
   (C)   Upon application for a permit, each applicant shall provide evidence
of a valid comprehensive general liability insurance policy, with an insurance
company approved by the city, for protection against personal injury or
property damage in the amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence. The city and the
Police Department shall be listed as a certificate holder on the policy.
(Ord. 2021-063, passed 12-14-2021)
§ 75.06 SUSPENSION AND REINSTATEMENT.
   (A)   Suspension of a current permit shall be for the time determined
appropriate by the Police Department; however, reinstatement may be made upon
conditions determined by the city and payment of all outstanding settlements or
judgements.
   (B)   The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall administer and
enforce this section and shall have the authority to grant, deny, suspend or
reinstate permits. Any applicant or permittee denied a permit or who has had a
permit suspended, upon request, shall be given a hearing before the Chief of
Police first, then the City Mayor if the permittee is still unsatisfied.
   (C)   No permits shall be issued to an applicant or company who has
outstanding fees or payments due to the city.
(Ord. 2021-063, passed 12-14-2021)
§ 75.07 PERMIT FEES SCHEDULE.
   (A)   The city with respect to highways under its jurisdiction shall collect
a fee as shown herein from applicants for the issuance of a permit to operate
or move a vehicle or combination of vehicle(s), and/or loads, which fit the
categories shown. Any axle or gross weight greater than the maximum weights set
forth in this chapter are subject to special assessment and investigation to
determine appropriate fees.
   (B)   The City Clerk’s office is responsible for the billing, invoicing and
collection of permit fees. The Clerk’s office, in its discretion, may make
rules and regulations as to acceptable methods of payment and due dates. Any
unpaid permit fees will be turned over to a collection agency under contract of
the city.
   (C)   Fee schedule.
      (1)   The fee schedule for single vehicles shall be as follows:
Maximum length                                45 feet
Maximum width                                 12 feet
Maximum height                                13 feet, 6 inches
Category #1 A; Axles: 2
Gross weight                                  48,000 pounds
Any single axle weight not to exceed          25,000 pounds
Single trip permit fee                        $15
Round trip permit fee                         $25
Quarterly permit fee                          $85
Annual permit fee                             $340
Category #2A; Axles: 2
Gross weight                                  54,000 pounds
Any single axle weight not to exceed          28,000 pounds
Single trip permit fee                        $20
Round trip permit fee                         $35
Quarterly permit fee                          $100
Annual permit fee                             $400
Category #3A; Axles: 3+
Gross weight                                  60,000 pounds
Any single axle weight not to exceed          21,000 pounds
Two axle tandem weight not to exceed          40,000 pounds
Single trip permit fee                        $25
Round trip permit fee                         $45
Quarterly permit fee                          $115
Annual permit fee                             $460
Category #4A; Axles: 3+
Gross weight                                  68,000 pounds
Any single axle weight not to exceed          25,000 pounds
Two axle tandem weight not to exceed          48,000 pounds
Single trip permit fee                        $30
Round trip permit fee                         $55
Quarterly permit fee                          $130
Annual permit fee                             $520
Category #5A; Axles: 3+
Gross weight                                  72,000 pounds
Any single axle weight not to exceed          25,000 pounds
Two axle tandem weight not to exceed          48,000 pounds
Single trip permit fee                        $60
Round trip permit fee                         $115
Quarterly permit fee                          $270
Annual permit fee                             $1,080
Category #6A; Axles: 3+
Gross weight                                  80,000 pounds
Any single axle weight not to exceed          27,000 pounds
Two axle tandem weight not to exceed          54,000 pounds
Single trip permit fee                        $70
Round trip permit fee                         $135
Quarterly permit fee                          $285
Annual permit fee                             $1,140
Category #7A; Axles: 4+
Gross weight                                  72,000 pounds
Any single axle weight not to exceed          21,000 pounds
Category #7A; Axles: 4+
Two axle tandem weight not to exceed          40,000 pounds
Single trip permit fee                        $35
Round trip permit fee                         $65
Quarterly permit fee                          $145
Annual permit fee                             $580
Category #8A; Axles: 4+
Gross weight                                  76,000 pounds
Any single axle weight not to exceed          23,000 pounds
Two axle tandem weight not to exceed          44,000 pounds
Single trip permit fee                        $40
Round trip permit fee                         $75
Quarterly permit fee                          $160
Annual permit fee                             $640
Category #9A; Axles: 4+
Gross weight                                  80,000 pounds
Any single axle weight not to exceed          27,000 pounds
Two axle tandem weight not to exceed          54,000 pounds
Three or four axle group weight not to exceed 60,000 pounds
 
      (2)   The fee schedule for combination vehicles shall be as follows:
Maximum length                                            115 feet
Maximum width                                             12 feet
Maximum height                                            13 feet, 6 inches
Category #1B; Axles: 5+
Gross weight                                              88,000 pounds
Any single axle weight not to exceed                      23,000 pounds
Two axle tandem or three or four axle group weight not to 44,000 pounds
exceed
Category #1B; Axles: 5+
Single trip permit fee                                    $30
Round trip permit fee                                     $55
Quarterly permit fee                                      $190
Annual permit fee                                         $760
Category #2B; Axles: 5+
Gross weight                                              100,000 pounds
Any single axle weight not to exceed                      25,000 pounds
Two axle tandem or three or four axle group weight not to 48,000 pounds
exceed
Single trip permit fee                                    $40
Round trip permit fee                                     $75
Quarterly permit fee                                      $220
Annual permit fee                                         $880
Category #3B; Axles: 6+
Gross weight                                              110,000 pounds
Any single axle weight not to exceed                      23,000 pounds
Two axle tandem weight not to exceed                      44,000 pounds
Three or four axle group weight not to exceed             54,000 pounds
Single trip permit fee                                    $45
Round trip permit fee                                     $85
Quarterly permit fee                                      $235
Annual permit fee                                         $940
Category #4B; Axles: 6+
Gross weight                                              120,000 pounds
Any single axle weight not to exceed                      25,000 pounds
Two axle tandem weight not to exceed                      48,000 pounds
Three or four axle group weight not to exceed             60,000 pounds
Single trip permit fee                                    $50
Category #4B; Axles: 6+
Round trip permit fee                                     $95
Quarterly permit fee                                      $250
Annual permit fee                                         $1,000
Category #5B; Axles: 6+
Gross weight                                              143,000 pounds
Any single axle weight not to exceed                      27,000 pounds
Two axle tandem weight not to exceed                      54,000 pounds
Three or four axle group weight not to exceed             78,000 pounds
Single trip permit fee                                    $60
Round trip permit fee                                     $115
Quarterly permit fee                                      $325
Annual permit fee                                         $1,300
Category #6B; Axles: 7+
Gross weight                                              162,000 pounds
Any single axle not to exceed                             25,000 pounds
Two axle tandem weight not to exceed                      50,000 pounds
Three axle group weight not to exceed                     75,000 pounds
Four axle group weight not to exceed                      100,000 pounds
Single trip permit fee                                    $70
Round trip permit fee                                     $135
Quarterly permit fee                                      $400
Annual permit fee                                         $1,600
Category #7B: Axles: 8+
Gross weight                                              187,000 pounds
Any single axle weight not to exceed                      25,000 pounds
Two axle tandem weight not to exceed                      50,000 pounds
Three axle group weight not to exceed                     75,000 pounds
Category #7B: Axles: 8+
Four axle group weight not to exceed                      100,000 pounds
Single trip permit fee                                    $80
Round trip permit fee                                     $155
Quarterly permit fee                                      $500
Annual permit fee                                         $2,000
 
      (3)   The fee schedule for over dimension (oversized vehicles) shall be
as follows:
Legal weight(s) but oversize only
Legal weight(s) but oversize only
Category #1C
Width                  10 feet
Height                 13 feet, 6 inches
Length                 115 feet
Escort                 No
Single trip permit fee $15
Round trip permit fee  $25
Quarterly permit fee   $75
Annual permit fee      $300
Category #2C
Width                  12 feet
Height                 13 feet, 6 inches
Length                 115 feet
Escort                 No
Single trip permit fee $20
Round trip permit fee  $40
Quarterly permit fee   $120
Annual permit fee      $480
Category #3C
Width                  14 feet
Height                 13 feet, 6 inches
Length                 115 feet
Escort                 No
Category #3C
Single trip permit fee $30
Round trip permit fee  $55
Quarterly permit fee   $165
Annual permit fee      $660
Category #4C
Width                  18 feet
Height                 16 feet
Length                 135 feet
Escort                 Yes
Single trip permit fee $50
Round trip permit      $95
Category #5C
Width                  >18 feet
Height                 >16 feet
Length                 >135 feet
Escort                 Yes
Single trip permit fee $100
Round trip permit fee  $195
 
(Ord. 2021-063, passed 12-14-2021)
§ 75.08 UNLAWFUL OPERATION OF VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle, on the streets hereinafter
designated, of a gross weight greater than indicated:
   (A)   Division Street from 127th Street to Des Plaines Street, a limitation
of five tons gross weight.
   (B)   Vine Street from Broadway to 135th Street, a limitation of five tons
of gross weight.
   (C)   California Avenue from Broadway to 135th Street, a limitation of five
tons of gross weight.
   (D)   Mozart Street from Broadway to 135th Street, a limitation of five tons
of gross weight.
   (E)   Francisco Avenue from Broadway to 135th Street, a limitation of five
tons of gross weight.
   (F)   135th Street from Mozart Street to Vine Street, a limitation of five
tons of gross weight.
(Ord. 2024-036, 8-27-2024; Ord. 2025-042, passed 8-12-2025)
CHAPTER 76: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   One-way traffic
   
II.   Stop streets
SCHEDULE I. ONE-WAY TRAFFIC.
   (A)   Restriction. Any vehicle proceeding on the following streets on school
days between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 8:30 a.m. and between the hours of 2:00
p.m. to 3:00 p.m. shall abide by the one-way traffic signs to be erected in the
following areas.
 
Location                                    Restriction Details
Greenwood Avenue between 123rd Street and   One-way southbound traffic only
Grunewald Avenue
Public Alley West of Western Avenue between One-way southbound traffic only
123rd Street and James Grunewald Street
Lewis Street between Greenwood Avenue and   One-way eastbound only
Western Avenue
 
   (B)   Signage. Appropriate signs shall be erected by the Public Works
Department on the street designated above informing the public regarding the
one-way traffic requirements.
   (C)   Penalty. The operator of any vehicle violating or failing to comply
with any provisions of this schedule shall be fined not less than $50 and not
more than $750 for each offense.
(Ord. 2022-014, passed 2-22-2022; Ord. 2025-046, passed 8-26-2025; Ord. 2025-
075, passed 12-16-2025)
SCHEDULE II. STOP STREETS.
   (A)   The operator of any vehicle proceeding on the streets and in the
directions hereinafter designated, said street being within the City of Blue
Island, shall stop such vehicle at the stop signs hereinafter provided before
proceeding, except when directed to proceed by a police officer or as otherwise
provided by law:
Stop Street Direction At Intersection With
Stop Street                    Direction       At Intersection With
Irving Avenue                  All             122nd Street
Maple Avenue                   Northbound      High Street
Maple Avenue                   Southbound      High Street
122nd Street                   All             Irving Avenue
Alley adjacent to 2337 Prairie Northbound      Stop sign located in the alley
Street                                         adjacent to 2337 Prairie Street
Cochran Avenue                 North and south Greenwood Avenue
Birdsall Street                Southeast       Ann Street
Greenwood Avenue               North and south High Street
123rd Street                   All             Highland Avenue
 
   (B)   Appropriate traffic signs shall be erected by the Superintendent of
Public Works on each corner at or near the intersections listed above,
informing the public that vehicular traffic traveling in every direction must
stop before said intersection.
   (C)   The operator of any vehicle violating or failing to comply with any
provisions of this schedule shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $750
for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 2023-004, passed 1-10-2023; Ord. 2023-009, passed 2-14-2023; Ord. 2023-
038, passed 9-12-2023; Ord. 2024-043, passed 10-22-2024; Ord. 2024-044, passed
10-22-2024; Ord. 2024-048, passed 11-26-2024; Ord. 2025-054, passed 10-14-2025)
CHAPTER 77: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Residential-only parking
   
II.   Residential permit parking
SCHEDULE I. RESIDENTIAL-ONLY PARKING.
   (A)   No nonresidential persons shall stop, stand or park on the following
streets:
Street Location
Street           Location
Everett Street   2900 block, north and south sides
Francisco Avenue Between Edison Street and Walnut Street
119th Avenue     Between Gregory and the 119th Avenue Metra Station
121st Place      North or south side of the street of the 2300 block
Oak Street       2400 Block, north and south sides, from Western Avenue to the
                 first alley west of Western Avenue
Chatham Street   From Grove Street to the Chatham Street Bridge
Irving Avenue    From Grove Street to Fulton Street
Fulton Street    From Irving Avenue to Chatham Street
 
   (B)   Appropriate signs shall be erected by the Public Works Department on
the street designated above informing the public regarding the residential-only
parking requirement.
   (C)   The operator of any vehicle violating or failing to comply with any
provisions of this schedule shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750
for each offense.
(Ord. 2022-035, passed 5-24-2022; Ord. 2022-043, passed 7-26-2022; Ord. 2023-
026, passed 4-25-2023; Ord. 2024-007, passed 1-23-2024; Ord. 2024-020, passed
4-23-2024; Ord. 2024-031, passed 6-25-2024)
SCHEDULE II. RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING.
   (A)   The following locations are hereby designated Permit Parking Only Zone
B-10. Appropriate signs shall be erected by Public Works Department on the
streets designated below informing the public regarding the Residential Parking
restrictions. Upon receipt of an application and appropriate proof of actual
residence within the Residential Permit Parking Only Zone B-10, the City Clerk
is hereby authorized to issue annual "Residential Parking Permit" decals to
residents of the District whose principal place of residence is located in the
district.
 
Street           Location
Francisco Avenue East and west sides on 128th Street
Clinton Avenue   East and West sides on 128th Street
 
   (B)   The operator of any vehicle violating or failing to comply with any
provisions of this schedule shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750
for each offense.
(Ord. 2022-058, passed 10-25-2022; Ord. 2024-041, passed 10-8-2024)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   EMERGENCIES; CIVIL DEFENSE
      
92.   FAIR HOUSING
      
93.   FIRE PREVENTION; FIREWORKS
      
94.   HEALTH REGULATION
      
95.   NUISANCES
      
96.   RECREATION AND LEISURE
      
97.   ALARM SYSTEMS
      
98.   TREES
      
99.   PORTABLE STORAGE AND SHIPPING CONTAINERS
      
100.   SHORT TERM RENTAL UNITS
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.001   Definitions
Administration and Licensing
   
90.015   Animal control and welfare officer; position created
   
90.016   Duties of animal control and welfare officer
   
90.017   Prohibited animals
   
90.018   License required
   
90.019   Procedure to obtain license
   
90.020   Inoculation certificate required for license
   
90.021   License fee; expiration
   
90.022   License tag and collar to be worn by animal
   
90.023   Removal of tag unlawful
   
90.024   Fee exemption for service animal
   
90.025   Clerk to keep book of registry
Health and Safety Provisions
   
90.040   Running at large prohibited
   
90.041   Release of animal unlawful
   
90.042   Returning animal to owner
   
90.043   Inoculation for rabies required
   
90.044   Procedure for dealing with animals suspected of carrying rabies
   
90.045   Disposition of animal bitten by suspect animal
   
90.046   Disposition of animal that has bitten a person
   
90.047   Control of diseased animals
   
90.048   Quarantine
Tethering of Dogs
   
90.050   Tethering defined
   
90.051   Restrictions on tethering dogs
   
90.052   Prohibitions on tethering dogs
   
90.053   Enforcement; penalties
Impounding
   
90.060   Impounding and disposal
   
90.061   Notice to owner of impounded animals
   
90.062   Redemption of unlicensed animals
   
90.063   Redemption of licensed animals
   
90.064   Public notice of impoundment
   
90.065   Impounding fees
Dangerous Animals
   
90.080   Running at large of dangerous animals unlawful; exception
   
90.081   Killing dangerous animals; impoundment
   
90.082   Redemption of dangerous animals
   
90.083   Disposition of dangerous animal which has bitten a person; costs
Humane Treatment
   
90.095   Cruelty to animals prohibited
   
90.096   Number of animals to be kept
   
90.097   Adequate housing required
   
90.098   Breeding of animals; limitation on number
   
90.099   Housing and sanitation requirements
   
90.100   Collection and disposal of refuse
   
90.101   Separate structures for housing
   
90.102   Pet shops and kennels
   
90.103   Veterinary hospitals
   
90.104   Use of leghold traps prohibited
Apiaries
   
90.115   Definitions
   
90.116   Permit required
   
90.117   Permit application
   
90.118   Notification to neighboring properties; site plan
   
90.119   Maintenance and operation of apiary
   
90.120   Right of entry; nuisance abatement
   
90.121   Permit revocation
Keeping of Poultry
   
90.135   License required
   
90.136   Application
   
90.137   License fee
   
90.138   Regulations and prohibitions
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any living creature or animal of a species customarily used in
Illinois as ordinary house pets including fish confined in an aquarium other
than piranha, birds and insects, which are being sheltered within the primary
residential structure located thereon and being kept by the owner or person in
occupation thereof for personal or family purposes but excluding homo sapiens
and wild or exotic animals.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. Any premises within or without the city designated by the
City Council for the purpose of impounding and caring for animals under
authority of this chapter.
   CAT. All members of the feline family, commonly known as HOUSE CATS.
   CHICKEN COOP. The structure for keeping or housing female poultry that is
permitted by the chapter.
   CHICKEN RUN. An enclosed area for feeding and grazing adjacent to the
chicken coop, as permitted by the chapter.
   CHICKEN TRACTOR or ARK. A movable chicken coop lacking a floor which allows
poultry to scratch the ground for food. It may be moved around a yard to
preclude permanent damage to grass and landscaped areas.
   DANGEROUS ANIMAL. Any animal which has bitten any person in such a manner as
to cause abrasion of the skin of such person or which shall cause reasonable
fear of bodily injury to any person by attacking or by threatening to attack
such person; including, but not limited to, a lion, tiger, leopard, ocelot,
jaguar, cheetah, margay, mountain lion, lynx, bobcat, jaguarundi, bear, hyena,
wolf, coyote or any poisonous life-threatening reptile.
   DOG. All members of the canine family.
   EXOTIC ANIMAL. Animals other than domestic animals, farm animals, and wild
animals which are not native to Illinois.
   FARM ANIMAL. Animals which are considered livestock or ordinarily found on a
farm including but not limited horses, cattle, sheep, swine, mules, goats,
turkeys, chickens, roosters or ducks.
   GUIDE DOG. Any dog normally used for guidance of the blind, such dog being
identified by a certificate issued by any recognized guide dog training school.
   HEN. A female chicken.
   KENNEL. Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of breeding,
buying, selling or boarding cats and dogs,
   OWNER. Any person, firm or corporation having a right of property in an
animal or who keeps or harbors an animal or who has in its care or acts as a
custodian thereof or who knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about any
premises occupied by such person for a period of over 48 hours.
   POULTRY. Domesticated fowl, commonly known as chicken, of the species Gallus
gallus domesticus. Ducks, geese, pea fowl, quail, peacocks, pigeons, turkeys
and others are not considered domestic fowl for the purpose of this chapter.
   ROOSTER. A male chicken.
   VETERINARY HOSPITAL. Any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed
veterinarian for the diagnosis and treatment of diseases and injuries of
animals.
   WILD ANIMAL. Any animal that:
      (1)   Typically is found in a non- domesticated state and that because of
its size or vicious propensity or because it is poisonous or for any other
substantial reason poses a potential danger to persons, other animals or
property; or
      (2)   Would ordinarily be confined to a zoo, or one that would ordinarily
be found in the wilderness of this state, country or another state or country,
or not indigenous to this state or country.
(Prior Code, § 90.001) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017; Ord. 2020-031, passed
8-25-2020)
ADMINISTRATION AND LICENSING
§ 90.015 ANIMAL CONTROL AND WELFARE OFFICER; POSITION CREATED.
   There is hereby created the position of Animal Control and Welfare Officer
who shall be assigned by the Chief of Police or designee.
(Prior Code, § 90.015) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 90.016 DUTIES OF ANIMAL CONTROL AND WELFARE OFFICER.
   The Animal Control and Welfare Officer shall be a police officer for the
purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter and shall perform such
duties under the supervision of the Chief of Police. Such officer is hereby
authorized to make all necessary arrests in enforcing the provisions of this
chapter. The duties of the Animal Control and Welfare Officer shall be in
addition to the enforcement by the Police Department. Such Officer shall have
such other and further powers as are now, or hereinafter may be, provided for
municipal pound masters under the statutes of the state and the ordinances of
the city.
(Prior Code, § 90.016) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 90.017 PROHIBITED ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or harbor a wild or exotic
animal within the limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 90.017) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.018 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep a dog or cat, or any
animal that is found to be outdoors and visible to the public, unless such
person shall procure a license therefor.
(Prior Code, § 90.018) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.019 PROCEDURE TO OBTAIN LICENSE.
   Application for such license shall be made to the City Clerk, which
application shall state the name and address of the owner, primary and
secondary phone number, email address, the name, breed, color and sex of each
animal and also the date and certificate number of the dog’s or cat’s rabies
vaccination.
(Prior Code, § 90.019) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 90.020 INOCULATION CERTIFICATE REQUIRED FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Before a license is issued, a certificate of inoculation against
rabies for each dog or cat issued by the County Rabies Inspector or by the
Inspector’s deputy or by a licensed veterinarian, shall be submitted to the
City Clerk for examination.
   (B)   No license shall be issued for any dog or cat unless such animal’s
inoculation certificate bears a date within one year prior to the date of
application for license.
   (C)   Such certificate shall be returned to the applicant after the current
dog or cat license number has been stamped thereon.
(Prior Code, § 90.020) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 90.021 LICENSE FEE; EXPIRATION.
   The fee for each license shall be as set forth in the city’s fee schedule.
The license shall expire on April 30 next following the issuance thereof.
(Prior Code, § 90.021) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 90.022 LICENSE TAG AND COLLAR TO BE WORN BY ANIMAL.
   (A)   Upon the payment of said license fee, the City Clerk shall furnish to
a person paying the same a license certificate and metallic tag for each animal
for which such fee has been paid. The shape of such metallic tag may be changed
each year and it shall have stamped thereon the year for which the fee is paid,
the letters B.I.A.T. and the number to the tag to correspond with the number on
the license certificate.
   (B)   Every animal kept within the city shall be provided by its owner or
keeper with a collar made of leather, metal or other substantial material to
which a current license tag shall be securely fastened and which collar and tag
shall be kept around the animal’s neck during the license period. A separate
and distinct offense shall be deemed to have been committed for each and every
day which shall elapse after the first conviction for a violation of any of the
provisions of this section.
(Prior Code, § 90.022) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.023 REMOVAL OF TAG UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner or
keeper, to remove the license tag from any animal for which an animal license
has been obtained.
(Prior Code, § 90.023) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.024 FEE EXEMPTION FOR SERVICE ANIMAL.
   Upon application for a license as provided herein, a properly identified
service dog shall be held exempt from the fee required for issuance of a
license. This section shall not be construed to waive any other license
requirement.
(Prior Code, § 90.024) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 90.025 CLERK TO KEEP BOOK OF REGISTRY.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall keep a complete registry, in a book to be kept
for that purpose, of all licensed animals, describing the same by name, breed,
color and sex and shall also enter the name and address of the owner or keeper
as given and the number of the city license tag.
   (B)   Said animal shall wear said tags on a collar or otherwise be affixed
to the animal to allow for identification.
(Prior Code, § 90.025) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
HEALTH AND SAFETY PROVISIONS
§ 90.040 RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall cause or permit any animal owned by such person to run
at large on any public way or public place.
   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of an animal or animals to
keep, or cause to be kept, such animal or animals under control at all times to
prevent such animal or animals from doing any of the following prohibited acts,
each of which is declared to be a public nuisance:
      (1)   Entering any church, community house, public hall, bank building,
gasoline station, public garage, grocery, meat market, bakery or other retail
store or shop, excluding any shop for the sale of animal pets or animal
grooming, anywhere within the city during the time that any of such places or
establishments are open for use by the public persons entitled to the use of
the same;
      (2)   Going upon and being upon any private or public school premises or
grounds at any time without specific written permission from the proper school
authorities;
      (3)   Jumping upon any person to the annoyance of such person;
      (4)   Chasing a motor vehicle or bicycle on a public or private street or
sidewalk;
      (5)   Damaging or destroying private property including, but not limited
to, gardens, shrubbery and lawns of any person other than property of the owner
of the animal;
      (6)   Defecating upon any private property without prompt removal of such
defecation, other than upon property of the owner of the animal;
      (7)   Barking or howling so as to substantially disturb the quiet of any
person at any time of the day or night;
      (8)   Running at large of a female dog in heat; and/or
      (9)   Running loose in the hallway of any building occupied by two or
more families.
   (C)   Exceptions:
      (1)   The foregoing provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs
leading blind persons.
      (2)   The foregoing provisions of this section shall not apply to any
animal restrained by a leash not more than three feet in length.
(Prior Code, § 90.040) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.041 RELEASE OF ANIMAL UNLAWFUL.
   No person shall untie, take or release any animal out of the enclosure or
off the premises of its licensed owner or keeper.
(Prior Code, § 90.041) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.042 RETURNING ANIMAL TO OWNER.
   If any animal is found at large and its owner can be identified and located
and, when necessary, such animal is properly licensed, then it need not be
impounded, but may instead be taken to the owner subject to possible citation
from a police officer for violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 90.042) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 90.043 INOCULATION FOR RABIES REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep an animal within the
corporate limits of the city unless said animal has been inoculated for rabies
as provided by the State Animal Control Act, 510 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 90.043) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.044 PROCEDURE FOR DEALING WITH ANIMALS SUSPECTED OF CARRYING RABIES.
   (A)   Every veterinarian or other person discovering or suspecting any
animal to be suffering with rabies shall forthwith report such fact to the
Animal Control and Welfare Officer giving the name and address of the owner or
keeper of such animal and the license number thereof, if known. Such animal
shall be immediately impounded by a police officer and, at the expense of the
owner, shall be placed in the charge of a veterinarian in the county, licensed
by the state, for a period of not less than ten days.
   (B)   If, on the report of such veterinarian, such animal shall be
ascertained to be suffering with rabies, such animal shall be immediately
killed, the skull containing the brain of such animal forthwith delivered to
the laboratory of the State Department of Public Health. If such animal should
die during the interval of observation, the intact brain shall forthwith be
delivered to the laboratory or the State Department of Public Health.
(Prior Code, § 90.044) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 90.045 DISPOSITION OF ANIMAL BITTEN BY SUSPECT ANIMAL.
   Any animal which shall have been bitten by another animal having, or
suspected of having, rabies shall be immediately impounded for not less than
ten days of observation and disposed of as provided in §
90.044 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 90.045) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 90.046 DISPOSITION OF ANIMAL THAT HAS BITTEN A PERSON.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal, when notified that
such animal has bitten any person or has so injured any person as to cause an
abrasion of the skin, to sell or give away such animal or to permit or allow
such animal to be taken beyond the limits of the city, except to a veterinary
hospital within the county, but it shall be the duty of such owner, upon
receiving notice thereof, to immediately place such animal in a duly licensed
veterinary hospital within the county, where such animal shall be confined for
a period of at least ten days or to deliver such animal to an Animal Welfare
Officer for such placement.
   (B)   Upon delivery of such animal to a veterinary hospital, notice of the
name and location of such hospital shall immediately be furnished to the Chief
of Police by the owner of such animal. The veterinary hospital shall submit to
the Animal Control and Welfare Officer of the city a certificate stating that
such animal shows no symptoms of rabies or does show symptoms of rabies.
   (C)   At the expiration of ten days of confinement in such veterinary
hospital, the veterinary hospital shall submit to the Animal Control and
Welfare Officer of the city a second certificate stating that the animal does
or does not have rabies. Any such animal free of rabies may then be released
and the Animal Control and Welfare Officer of the city so advised, with payment
of costs by owner to the city.
(Prior Code, § 90.046) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.047 CONTROL OF DISEASED ANIMALS.
   No animal afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease shall be allowed
to run at large or to be exposed in any public place whereby the health of man
or beast may be affected nor shall such diseased animal be shipped or removed
from the premises of the owner thereof, except under the supervision of. the
Animal Control and Welfare Officer.
(Prior Code, § 90.047) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.048 QUARANTINE.
   (A)   Whenever the number of dangerous animals suffering from rabies running
at large in the city shall be such as to endanger the public health, public
safety or general welfare, the Mayor of the city may, in his or her reasonable
discretion, declare that the protection of the public health, public safety or
general welfare requires that, for a definite period to be determined by the
Mayor, or until the Mayor shall otherwise order by proclamation, all animals
shall be confined, at all times, to the premises of the owner or custodian
thereof or, if not on such premises, then to be kept on leash under the control
of such owner or custodian or the owner’s agent.
   (B)   A proclamation of the Mayor containing such declaration shall be
published once in some newspaper of general circulation in the city or such
proclamation shall be posted in three public places in the city designated by
ordinance for such purpose.
   (C)   After the first publication or posting of such proclamation by the
Mayor, it shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any animal to permit
such animal to be at large contrary to the terms of such proclamation.
(Prior Code, § 90.048) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
TETHERING OF DOGS
§ 90.050 TETHER DEFINED.
   As used in this subchapter:
   TETHER. Attaching a dog to a stationary object or a pulley run by means of a
chain, rope, tether, cable, or similar restraint, but does not include the use
of a handheld leash to walk a dog.
(Ord. 2025-064, passed 11-25-2025)
§ 90.051 RESTRICTIONS ON TETHERING DOGS.
   In order to lawfully tether a dog outdoors, an owner must ensure that the
dog is tethered in compliance with the following restrictions:
   (A)   Medical/phvsical condition. The dog must not suffer from a condition
that is known, by the owner, to be exacerbated by tethering.
   (B)   Placement. The lead must be attached so as to prevent the dog from
becoming entangled with another animal or object of any kind. No dog shall be
tethered in a manner that allows the dog to reach the property of another
person, a public walkway, or a road.
   (C)   Length. The lead must measure, when rounded to the nearest whole foot,
at least ten feet in length.
   (D)   Weight and type of lead. The lead may not weigh more than one-eighth
of the dog's body weight and mav not be made from a logging chain or tow chain.
   (E)   Collar or harness; prohibited devices. The dog must be tethered with a
properly fitting harness or collar other than the lead or a pinch, prong, or
choke-type collar.
   (F)   Hardware; swivels. The tether shall include a swivel on each end of
the lead to minimize tangling.
   (G)   Adequate water supply. The dog must have access to a sufficient
quantity of good quality water.
(Ord. 2025-064, passed 11-25-2025)
§ 90.052 PROHIBITIONS ON TETHERING DOGS.
   It is unlawful to tether a dog under any of the following circumstances:
   (A)   Overnight and extended periods. For more than 20 minutes between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
   (B)   Severe weather or extreme temperatures. During severe weather or
extreme temperatures, including heat advisories or when the temperature is
below 32°F.
   (C)   Owner not on premises. While the owner is not on the premises.
(Ord. 2025-064, passed 11-25-2025)
§ 90.053 ENFORCEMENT: PENALTIES.
   (A)   Enforcement. Sections
90.051 and
90.052 shall be enforced by the Animal Control and Welfare Officer.
   (B)   Penalties. Any person that violates §§
90.051 and
90.052 shall be fined $500 for the first offense and $750 for a second or
subsequent offense. Each offense and each day a violation continues constitutes
a separate offense.
   (C)   Cumulative remedies. The fines provided for in this section shall be
in addition to other penalties or remedies available to the city under law. The
imposition of a fine under this section shall not prevent the city from
pursuing other penalties or remedies available under law.
(Ord. 2025-064, passed 11-25-2025)
IMPOUNDING
§ 90.060 IMPOUNDING AND DISPOSAL.
   (A)   The City Council shall provide, or cause to be provided and
maintained, at some suitable place within or without the city, for a period not
to exceed 72 hours, an animal shelter for the impounding of all animals found
running at large within the corporate limits of the city or for any other
animals which, by this chapter or any other ordinance of the city, are required
to be impounded.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Animal Control and Welfare Officer or such
employees of the Police Department, as shall be designated for that purpose by
the Chief of Police, to take up and impound in the municipal animal shelter any
animal found running at large in the city contrary to any of the provisions of
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 90.060) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 90.061 NOTICE TO OWNER OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.
   (A)   The Animal Control and Welfare Officer shall, immediately upon
receiving any animal, make a complete registry, entering the breed, color and
sex of such dog and whether licensed, if known and, if licensed, shall enter
the name and address of the owner or keeper and the number of the license tag,
if known.
   (B)   When any licensed animal shall be impounded, the Animal Control and
Welfare Officer shall forthwith give notice by mail and by either phone or
email to the owner or keeper of such licensed animal, informing such owner or
keeper of the impounding of the animal and that if such animal be not redeemed
within three days of the date of such notice, such animal may be redeemed by
any person paying the required fees.
   (C)   If, after the passage of three days following the notice sent by the
Animal Control and Welfare Officer to the owner or keeper of such licensed
animal, no redemption has occurred, the Animal Control and Welfare Officer
shall cause the animal to be sent to an animal shelter.
(Prior Code, § 90.061) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 90.062 REDEMPTION OF UNLICENSED ANIMALS.
   (A)   For every animal taken up and impounded, as provided in this
subchapter, for which no license fee has been paid to the city, there shall be
paid to the Animal Control and Welfare Officer, for the use of the city, by any
resident desiring to redeem such animal, the total of the following fees:
      (1)   A $25 redemption fee for male and spayed female animals;
      (2)   A $50 redemption fee for un-spayed female animals; and
      (3)   A $20 redemption fee for each day of impoundment or fraction
thereof.
   (B)   No animal can be redeemed by a resident if the animal does not have a
current city license tag. If the animal does not have a current city license,
the resident must pay $50, in addition to the fees listed above, to the Animal
Control and Welfare Officer, who will register the animal with the city and
provide the appropriate license tag.
(Prior Code, § 90.062) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017; Ord. 2021-036, passed
9-14-2021)
§ 90.063 REDEMPTION OF LICENSED ANIMALS.
   When any licensed animal shall be taken up or impounded, the fees to be
charged for the redemption of such animal shall be the same as prescribed in §
90.062 of this chapter concerning unlicensed animals.
(Prior Code, § 90.063) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 90.064 PUBLIC NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   As soon as possible, after impounding any animal as provided herein,
it shall be the duty of the Animal Control and Welfare Officer to enter upon
the records of the animal shelter, in a book to be kept for such purpose, the
date of impounding, a description of the animal impounded and a record as to
whether or not such animal has been licensed as required herein.
   (B)   Public notice of the impounding of the animal shall be given by
posting one copy of the description of the animal and the date of impounding at
the animal shelter and one copy of such notice at the police station at 13031
S. Greenwood Avenue, Blue Island, IL 60408.
(Prior Code, § 90.064) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 90.065 IMPOUNDING FEES.
   The fees to be charged by the Animal Control and Welfare Officer for
impoundment are as described in §
90.062 above.
(Prior Code, § 90.066) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017; Ord. 2021-036, passed
9-14-2021)
DANGEROUS ANIMALS
§ 90.080 RUNNING AT LARGE OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS UNLAWFUL; EXCEPTION.
   It shall be unlawful to permit any dangerous animal or vicious animal of any
kind to run at large within the city. Exhibitions or parades of animals, which
are ferae naturae in the eyes of the law, may be conducted only upon securing a
permit from the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 90.080) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.081 KILLING DANGEROUS ANIMALS; IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   The owner of any dangerous animal shall keep the said animal, or cause
said animal to be kept, confined in a secure enclosure.
      (1)   If any such animal is found running at large, it shall, on the
first offense, be taken up and impounded and shall not be released, except
pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter.
      (2)   On the second offense, the animal shall be permanently removed from
the city and the license for said animal shall be revoked.
   (B)   Provided, however, that, if any dangerous, fierce or vicious animal so
found at large cannot be safely taken up and impounded such animal may be slain
by any police officer or other person designated by the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 90.081) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.082 REDEMPTION OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   Impounded dangerous animals shall be kept at the animal shelter for not less
than three days and it shall be the duty of the Animal Control and Welfare
Officer to cause notice by telephone and notice by mail upon the registered
owner of any licensed animal impounded of such fact, such notice to be mailed
within 13 hours from the time of impoundment. Upon payment of costs pursuant to
§
90.065 of this chapter, such animal shall be released from impoundment and
delivered to the owner thereof.
(Prior Code, § 90.082) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 90.083 DISPOSITION OF DANGEROUS ANIMAL WHICH HAS BITTEN A PERSON; COSTS.
   All costs of maintaining any dangerous animal in a veterinary hospital shall
be paid by the owner. In all cases where any animal which has bitten a person
or caused an abrasion of the skin is slain by any police officer, whether by
order of the court or otherwise, and a period of less than 15 days has elapsed
since the day on which such animal bit any person or caused an abrasion of the
skin of any person, it shall be the duty of the police officer slaying such
animal to forthwith deliver intact the skull containing the brain of such
animal to the laboratory of the State Department of Health.
(Prior Code, § 90.083) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
HUMANE TREATMENT
§ 90.095 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall cruelly treat any animal in the city in any way. Any person
who inhumanely beats, underfeeds, overloads or abandons any animal shall be
deemed guilty of a violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 90.095) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.096 NUMBER OF ANIMALS TO BE KEPT.
   No person shall keep or maintain more than a total of three dogs and cats
within the corporate limits of the city; provided, however, that, this shall
not apply to a licensed kennel, licensed pet shop, licensed veterinarian,
licensed veterinarian hospital or authorized rescue facility.
(Prior Code, § 90.096) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.097 ADEQUATE HOUSING REQUIRED.
   Adequate separate space and housing used for more than three animals shall
be subject to inspection
at reasonable times and hours by the Health Officer or the Animal Control and
Welfare Officer.
(Prior Code, § 90.097) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 90.098 BREEDING OF ANIMALS; LIMITATION ON NUMBER.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall keep or maintain any animals for
breeding or food purposes within the corporate limits of the city without the
consent in writing of all property owners and persons living within 800 feet
each way from the place where it is proposed to breed such animals.
   (B)   No person shall keep more than one adult male and one adult female,
plus their offspring. Fish, fowl and animals kept for scientific or educational
purposes shall be exempt from this limitation.
(Prior Code, § 90.098) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.099 HOUSING AND SANITATION REQUIREMENTS.
   Every owner shall provide animals with adequate space and housing and shall
keep the same in a clean and sanitary condition and free from filth, offal or
other refuse.
(Prior Code, § 90.099) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.100 COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF REFUSE.
   (A)   The owner or custodian of any animal shall collect, or cause to be
collected, immediately all filth, offal, soil or defecation on any public
property or upon any street, sidewalk, public way, play area or common grounds
owned jointly by members of a homeowner’s association, or upon private property
other than that of the owner. The refuse shall be collected immediately in air-
tight containers or plastic bags and disposed of in a manner as otherwise may
be permitted by law.
   (B)   No person owning, harboring or keeping an animal within the city shall
permit any waste matter from the animal to collect and remain on the property
of the owner or custodian so as to cause or create an unhealthy, unsanitary,
dangerous or offensive living condition on the owner’s or custodian’s property,
or to abutting property of others, as determined by the city’s Building
Department.
   (C)   No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any animal shall
cause unsanitary, dangerous, or offensive conditions by virtue of the size or
number of animals maintained at a single location or due to the inadequacy of
the facilities, as determined by the city’s Building Department.
(Prior Code, § 90.100) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017; Ord. 2022-010, passed
2-22-2022) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.101 SEPARATE STRUCTURES FOR HOUSING.
   (A)   No separate structure or enclosure used for the housing of animals
shall be erected or maintained nearer than 100 feet from any church or school.
   (B)   Each separate structure or enclosure shall otherwise comply with
applicable building, zoning, health or sanitation codes of the city and the
statutes of the state.
(Prior Code, § 90.101) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.102 PET SHOPS AND KENNELS.
   In addition to the provisions for housing and sanitation as set forth in §
90.101 of this chapter, pet shops and kennels shall comply with other
provisions of ordinances or statutes of the state now in full force and effect
or any ordinances or statutes, amendatory or supplementary thereto, pertaining
to the licensing and maintenance of kennels.
(Prior Code, § 90.102) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.103 VETERINARY HOSPITALS.
   In addition to the provisions for housing and sanitation as set forth in §
90.101 of this chapter, veterinary hospitals shall comply with other provisions
of ordinances or statutes of the state now in full force and effect or any
ordinances or statutes amendatory or supplementary thereto pertaining to the
licensing and maintenance of veterinary hospitals.
(Prior Code, § 90.103) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.104 USE OF LEGHOLD TRAPS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to set, use or maintain any
leghold trap or similar device which is spring activated and which trap is
composed of saw-toothed, spiked or toothed jaws or any other leghold trap
capable of inflicting excruciating pain to trapped animals.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the sale, transfer, possession,
setting or use in or under buildings or otherwise, of standard household mouse
or rat traps for the purpose of controlling mice, rats and rodents. Nor shall
this section apply to the possession or use of traps for display or exhibition
purposes by not-for-profit organizations or to a person in the act of turning
over possession of traps prohibited in division (A) above to a local law
enforcement agency or to any animal welfare agency.
   (C)   Conviction under this section shall result in the confiscation of all
equipment, animals and pelts used in, or obtained by reason of, violation of
this section.
(Prior Code, § 90.104) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
APIARIES
§ 90.115 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APIARY. Colonies, hives and other equipment associated with honey bees
assembled in one location for beekeeping operations: also known as a BEE YARD.
   BEE. All life stages of the common domestic honey bee, apis mellifera
species.
   BEE DISEASES. Any infectious or contagious diseases of bees as specified by
the Illinois Department of Agriculture, including, but not limited to, American
foulbrood.
   BEEKEEPER. A person who owns or has charge of one or more colonies of bees,
or is requesting to own or take charge of one or more colonies of bees, and has
demonstrated that, he or she has obtained formal education or sufficient
practical experience to act as a BEEKEEPER.
   COLONY. The entire honey bee family or social unit living together or an
aggregate of honey bees in a hive consisting principally of workers, but
having, when perfect, one queen and at times many drones, including the brood.
   EXOTIC STRAIN OF BEES. Any developed strain of bees not known to be present
ordinarily in the state as specified by the Department of Agriculture.
   FLYWAY BARRIER. An obstacle designed to cause bees to fly upward after
exiting the hive and directing them away from neighboring and adjoining areas
inhabited by humans and at least six feet in height.
   HIVE. A frame hive, box hive, box, barrel, log gum, skep or any other
receptacle or container, natural or artificial, or any part thereof, which is
used or employed as a domicile for bees or the shelter housing a colony of bees
including the combs, honey and pollen. HIVE also includes the colony of bees
where indicated by the context.
   NUISANCE. Bees, colonies or items of bee equipment where bee diseases, bee
parasites or exotic strains of bees exist; or hives that cannot be readily
inspected; or colonies that are not registered.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 90.116 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall acquire, keeps or stock honey bees in the city without
being a beekeeper and obtaining a valid permit issued by the Community
Development Committee.
   (B)   A permit shall be valid for one year unless revoked pursuant to this
section. Permits must be renewed annually and expire on December 31 of each
year.
   (C)   A permit provides permission for honey beekeeping at the address
listed in the permit application only and by the permit holder only, and shall
not be transferred to any other person or location.
   (D)   The beekeeper must notify the Building Department when a property is
going to be vacated. Upon vacating a property, the beekeeper must remove all
apiary structures and bees from the property.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.117 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   Submissions for permits shall include the following:
      (1)   Completed application;
      (2)   Application fee;
      (3)   Copy of inspection certificate required by the Illinois Bees and
Apiaries Act;
      (4)   Copy of registration documentation or certificate issued by the
Illinois Department of Agriculture;
      (5)   Adequate proof demonstrating the applicants training ands
experience. An applicant who fails to demonstrate the requisite training or
experience will not be issued a bee keeping permit. The determination of
whether the applicant has the requisite training and experience will be at the
sole discretion of the Committee; and
      (6)   Proof of notification to neighboring properties as set forth in §
90.118.
   (B)   Permit renewal requires submission of a completed application
accompanied with the renewal fee. A late fee of two times the application fee
along with the application fee shah be collected from every owner or keeper of
honey bees if the owner or keeper fails to obtain a permit prior to acquiring
the honey bees.
   (C)   Prior to issuance of a permit, the applicant shall submit to an
inspection and demonstrate that all requirements of this section are met.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 90.118 NOTIFICATION TO NEIGHBORING PROPERTIES; SITE PLAN.
   (A)   Before an initial or renewal permit is issued, applicants shall
furnish to the city, copies of written proof containing the neighbor’s signed
acknowledgment of receipt of notice. In the absence of a signed receipt, the
applicant may submit copies of notices mailed to neighboring properties via
certified mail with delivery confirmation or return receipt requested.
   (B)   Notices shall be provided to all residents of abutting and adjoining
or diagonally abutting properties, including those across an alley, and shall
inform such residents that the applicant has applied for a permit hereunder,
and informing that any written objections to issuance of the permit should be
submitted to the city within 14 days of receipt of the notice.
   (C)   The city shall consider all objections and may deny a permit request
based on neighbor objections. An applicant, if not the property owner, shall
obtain the written consent of the property owner where the apiary shall be
kept.
   (D)   An applicant must submit a scaled dimensional drawing, showing all
adjoining structures and property lines together with the proposed apiary.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 90.119 MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION OF APIARY.
   (A)   A permit authorizes the keeping of honey bee hives on a premises,
provided the following requirements are met.
      (1)   No more than four hives are allowed on one premises.
      (2)   No hive shall exceed 20 cubic feet in volume.
      (3)   Honey bees are limited to eastern European races of apis mellifera.
      (4)   A minimum six-foot high fly way barrier, consisting of either or
some combination of closed fence, semi-solid fence, dense vegetation, building,
other solid flyway barrier or other barrier which the city deem adequate,
between the hive(s) and the property lines for all hives located within 20 feet
of the property line. A flyway barrier is not required if the hive or hives are
kept at least ten feet off the ground.
      (5)   A constant and adequate supply of water shall be provided within
the enclosure to prevent bees from seeking water sources at a nearby property.
The water source shall be designed to allow honey bees to access water by
landing on a hard surface. This provision shall not apply during the winter.
      (6)   All honey bees shall be kept in hives with removable frames which
shall be kept in sound and usable condition.
      (7)   All hives and related structures that form the apiary shall be
located a minimum of ten feet from the all property lines, unless the owner of
the adjoining property has provided written permission for closer placement.
      (8)   All hives and related structures that form the apiary shall be
located a minimum of 20 feet from all public sidewalks, and may not be located
in front or side yards.
      (9)   Hives shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from a neighbor’s
primary dwelling on any adjoining lots unless the owner of the adjoining
property has provided written permission for closer hive placement.
      (10)   No honey bees shall be kept on any premises which is a multi-
tenant facility or contains two or more dwelling units.
      (11)   Hives shall be actively maintained. Hives not under active human
management and maintenance shall be dismantled or removed by the most recent
permit holder or property owner.
      (12)   In any instance in which a hive exhibits unusually aggressive
characteristics it shall be the duty of the beekeeper to destroy or re-queen
the hive. Queens shall be selected from stock bred for gentleness and non-
swarming characteristics.
   (B)   In addition to compliance with the requirements of this section, no
beekeeper shall keep a hive or hives that cause any unhealthy conditions or
interfere with the normal use and enjoyment of human or animal life of others,
any public property or property of others.
   (C)   The operations shall at all times comply with applicable laws
including, but not limited to, the Illinois Bees and Apiaries Act, being 510
ILCS 20/1 et seq., in its current form and as amended.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.120 RIGHT OF ENTRY; NUISANCE ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Personnel responsible for the enforcement of local ordinances may
enter upon any property required to hold a permit in this section at all
reasonable times to inspect the premises, obtain photographs or take any other
action deemed necessary to properly enforce the provisions of this section.
   (B)   If such inspection reveals any hive kept, in violation of any
requirements enumerated herein, in addition to any other remedy available under
the this code, city personnel may order the violation corrected within 14 days.
      (1)   Notice of violation shall be mailed to both the permit holder and
the property owner on which the apiary is located.
      (2)   If the permit holder fails to correct the violation within 14 days,
the hive in violation may be destroyed and/or removed from the municipality by
the city at the expense of the permit holder or property owner.
   (C)   The Building Department, shall have authority to abate nuisances as
defined by this section and related to the operation or presence of an apiary
and obtain any relief or costs allowed by law.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 90.121 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   A permit shall be subject to revocation upon failure to comply with any
provisions of this section, or if the city determines that continued
maintenance of the hive constitutes a reasonable threat to the general health
or safety of others. Once a permit is revoked, a permit shall not be reissued
for the same premises.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
KEEPING OF POULTRY
§ 90.135 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall own, keep, maintain or harbor poultry within the city
without obtaining an annual license therefor.
(Ord. 2020-031, passed 8-25-2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.136 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application for a poultry license shall be made upon such printed
forms as provided by the city and shall include the following information:
      (1)   The address of the residence to be licensed;
      (2)   The name, telephone number, email of the property owner;
      (3)   A site plan indicating the location of the proposed chicken coop
and chicken run. The site plan should be drawn to scale and indicate the lot
size, location of the principal residence and accessory structures on the lot
where the poultry will be located as well as the location of the principal
residential structure on adjacent property to the side and rear yards; and
      (4)   A description of the screening to be provided on the rear and side
yards. If a chicken tractor is to be used, the area it will be moved within the
property shall be delineated on the site plan. The screening method for this
are will be identified on the site plan.
   (B)   If the license application is for a new chicken coop, a city building
permit and final inspection will be required. If the application is for an
annual renewal license, the applicant will indicate if any changes have been
made from the original building permit and site plan approval.
(Ord. 2020-031, passed 8-25-2020)
§ 90.137 LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   The annual poultry license fee shall be $50 per year.
   (B)   Whenever the ownership of a residence shall change, a new owner
desiring to maintain the chicken coop shall notify the city and pay to the city
the sum of $10, whereupon the city shall change the records accordingly for the
coop.
   (C)   The licensing period shall begin with the fiscal year and shall run
for one year. If licenses are obtained within the fiscal year, it will expire
on the next April 30, with the renewal cycle beginning May 1 of each year.
   (D)   Persons who fail to obtain a license as required will be subject to a
$150 fee.
   (E)   Licensed premises shall be inspected annually by a City Health
Inspector and Compliance Officer to confirm compliance with the provisions of
this chapter. The annual inspection fee is $100. The inspection shall include:
      (1)   The size, structural condition and sanitation of the chicken coop;
      (2)   The proper location and setback of the chicken coop and enclosed
chicken run;
      (3)   Proper storage of poultry feed; and
      (4)   Screening of the chicken coop and chicken run.
(Ord. 2020-031, passed 8-25-2020; Ord. 2023-041, passed 10-24-2023)
§ 90.138 REGULATIONS AND PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to house or keep any live poultry within 20 feet
of any school or church or public street without a poultry license. Further,
any live poultry shall be housed equidistant from each property line or at
least 20 feet from any residence other than the residence of the owner of such
animals. Consideration will be given for up to a 15-foot reduction of the
required setbacks by administrative review, dependent on screening of the rear
yard, setback and configuration of the licensed and adjacent residential
property, and the design of the chicken coop.
   (B)   Poultry licenses are required for the keeping of live poultry and will
be issued only under the following conditions:
      (1)   Property shall be zoned R-1 Single- Family Residential with a
minimum lot size of 4,800 square feet;
      (2)   A building permit is required for the construction of a chicken
coop, outdoor enclosed chicken run, chicken tractor or the installation of a
prefabricated chicken coop. If electricity is installed to the chicken coop it
must be installed underground; extension cords or above ground wire are not
permitted. Any electrical work requires an electrical permit. The Building
Department shall inspect any structure related to the keeping of poultry to
determine compliance with city code. Upon staff review existing non-residential
structures may be allowed for the housing of hens;
      (3)   Should allow no more than ten hens. No roosters are allowed;
      (4)   Chicken coop and enclosed chicken run requirements:
         (a)   All keeping of poultry must be kept in a chicken coop; poultry
are not allowed to be housed within a residence;
         (b)   Each licensed premises shall contain a single chicken coop with
dimensions no larger than 24 square feet in area and six feet in height as
measured from grade, elevated at least one foot off of the ground;
         (c)   Chicken coops shall be constructed of solid materials on all
sides, including roof and door(s); the chicken coop must be constructed in such
a manner so as to protect the hens from predators and trespassers, provide
adequate ventilation to minimize odors, allow easy ingress and egress for hens
and protection from weather elements including cold temperatures;
         (d)   Hens may be allowed outside of the chicken coop between dawn and
dusk only in an enclosed, covered chicken run no larger than 32 square feet and
no taller than six feet. Each hen shall have a minimum space of two square feet
within the enclosed run. The screening enclosing this area must be buried at 12
inches deep and six inches flat to prevent predators from digging under the
fence. Chicken wire shall not be used for screening. If hardware cloth, or
welded wire mesh is used, it must be a minimum of 19-gauge wire;
         (e)   Both chicken coops and enclosed outdoor chicken runs shall be
located:
            1.   Only in a rear yard;
            2.   A minimum of ten feet from any lot line;
            3.   Equidistant from each property line or at least 20 feet from
residential structures not occupied by licensee; and
            4.   At least ten feet from the principal building.
         (f)   To accommodate free range hens the outside enclosure may be
provided through the use of a mobile screened enclosure commonly referred to as
a chicken tractor. Placement of the chicken tractor must maintain the setbacks
outlined within this chapter;
         (g)   The area of confinement shall be secured at all times and shall
consist of an enclosed run which shall have sufficient fresh air, provide shade
and an enclosed area (coop) which shall be freely accessible to the hens during
the night and in inclement weather (heat, rain, wind, storm, snow, cold); and
         (h)   All areas used for the feeding and grazing shall be maintained
to prevent soil erosion and run off to neighboring properties.
      (5)   Screening of the premises:
         (a)   Licensed premises must contain a six-foot solid fence to screen
the area which contains the chicken coop and open chicken run from adjacent
properties. Consideration will be given for a vegetative screen instead of a
fence if the setback distance between the chicken coop and residential
structures not occupied by the licensee is greater than 100 feet; and
         (b)   Use of a chicken tractor will require the entire area within
which the tractor is moved to meet this screening requirement.
      (6)   Hens shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all times with fresh
water. All premises on which hens are kept or maintained shall be kept clean
from filth, garbage and any substances which attract rodents.
         (a)   Food shall be provided on a regular basis throughout the day.
Stored feed must be kept in a rodent- and predator-proof container.
         (b)   All chicken coops and enclosed chicken runs shall be maintained
in good, structurally sound repair and in a neat, clean, presentable and
attractive condition.
         (c)   No hen shall be kept in a manner so as to create noxious odors
or noise of a loud, persistent and habitual nature.
         (d)   Hens will not be slaughtered on the poultry owner’s property.
         (e)   Hens shall be maintained in a healthy condition. Ill hens shall
either receive appropriate medical care or be culled.
      (7)   Failure to comply with these conditions may result in revocation of
the license and fine not to exceed $750 per day.
(Ord. 2020-031, passed 8-25-2020)
CHAPTER 91: EMERGENCIES; CIVIL DEFENSE
Section
Blue Island Homeland Security and Emergency
Management Agency (BIHSEMA)
   
91.01   Agency established
   
91.02   Coordinator; appointment and duties
   
91.03   Functions of Agency
   
91.04   Service as mobile support team
   
91.05   Agreements with political subdivisions
   
91.06   Emergency action
   
91.07   Compensation
   
91.08   Reimbursement by state
   
91.09   Purchases and expenditures
   
91.10   Oath
   
91.11   Office space
   
91.12   Appropriation; levy of taxes
Emergency Telephone System
   
91.25   Imposition of surcharge
   
91.26   Residence in city
   
91.27   Definitions
   
91.28   Certified list of network connections
   
91.29   Telecommunications carriers to remit surcharge to city; return
   
91.30   Credit for overpayment
   
91.31   Recovery action to be commenced within certain time period
Cross-reference:
   Building Regulations; Construction, see
Ch. 150
   Zoning, see
Ch. 165
BLUE ISLAND HOMELAND SECURITY
AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (BIHSEMA)
§ 91.01 AGENCY ESTABLISHED.
   (A) There is created the city’s Blue Island Homeland Security and Emergency
Management Agency (BIHSEMA) to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury
or damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other
hostile action or from natural or manmade disaster in accordance with the
Emergency Management Agency Act, 20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.
   (B)   The BIHSEMA shall consist of the Coordinator and such additional
members as may be selected by the Coordinator.
(Prior Code, § 91.01) (Ord. 2336, passed 4-27-1976; Ord. 2015-002, passed 1-13-
2015; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 91.02 COORDINATOR; APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Coordinator of the City BIHSEMA shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of City Council and shall serve until removed by
the Mayor.
   (B)   The Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration, training and operation of the BIHSEMA, subject to the direction
and control of the Mayor as provided by statute.
   (C)   In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve
as Coordinator, the Mayor, or any person designated by the Mayor, shall be and
act as Coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided in this section,
(Prior Code, § 91.02) (Ord. 2336, passed 4-27-1976; Ord. 2015-002, passed 1-13-
2015; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 91.03 FUNCTIONS OF AGENCY.
   (A)   The City BIHSEMA shall perform such BIHSEMA functions within the city
as shall be prescribed by the state plan and program prepared by the Governor
and orders, rules and regulations, as may be promulgated by the Governor. In
addition, the BIHSEMA shall perform duties outside the corporate limits as may
be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other political
subdivision, municipality or quasi-municipality entered into as provided by the
Emergency Management Agency Act, 20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.
   (B)   The BIHSEMA shall coordinate efforts to prevent, protect against and
mitigate the effects of, respond to and recover from all incidents, whether
human-made or natural. The BIHSEMA will work to accomplish these functions
through monitoring and sharing intelligence related to potential homeland
security events and other incidents within the city, within the county, and
within the state by developing an operational response capability and
developing and enhancing partnerships with all relevant groups, entities and
agencies.
   (C)   The BIHSEMA may oversee and support the prudent use of grant monies to
prepare, train and equip first responders, investing in the men and women who
respond to emergencies in Blue Island and surrounding areas
(Prior Code, § 91.03) (Ord. 2336, passed 4-27-1976; Ord. 2015-002, passed 1-13-
2015; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 91.04 SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM.
   (A)   All members of the City BIHSEMA organization may be designated as
members of a mobile support team created by the Director of the State ESDA as
provided by law.
   (B)   The leader of the mobile support team shall be designated by the
Coordinator of the city BIHSEMA organization.
   (C)   Any member of a mobile support team who is a city employee or officer,
while serving on call to duty by the Governor or the State Director, shall
receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and immunities
incident to the member’s employment or office. Any member who is not a paid
officer or employee of the city while serving shall receive reasonable
compensation, as provided by law, from the state.
(Prior Code, § 91.04) (Ord. 2336, passed 4-27-1976; Ord. 2015-002, passed 1-13-
2015; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 91.05 AGREEMENTS WITH POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   The Coordinator of BIHSEMA may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other
cities or political subdivisions of the state but no such agreement shall be
effective until it has been approved by the Mayor City Council, and by the
State Director of ESDA.
(Prior Code, § 91.05) (Ord. 2336, passed 4-27-1976; Ord. 2015-002, passed 1-13-
2015; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 91.06 EMERGENCY ACTION.
   If the Governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of
actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence of a major
disaster within the state resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile action
or from human-made or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the BIHSEMA to
cooperate fully with the State ESDA and with the Governor in the exercise of
emergency powers as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 91.06) (Ord. 2336, passed 4-27-1976; Ord. 2015-002, passed 1-13-
2015; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 91.07 COMPENSATION.
   Members of the BIHSEMA, who are paid employees or officers of the city, if
called for training by the State Director of ESDA, shall receive for the time
spent in training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position held.
Members who are not city employees or officers shall receive compensation for
training as may be established by the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 91.07) (Ord. 2336, passed 4-27-1976; Ord. 2015-002, passed 1-13-
2015; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 91.08 REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE.
   The State Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund:
   (A)   Any reimbursement by the state to the city for expenses incident to
training members of the BIHSEMA as prescribed by the State Director of ESDA;
   (B)   Compensation for services and expenses of members of a mobile support
team while serving outside the city in response to a call by the Governor or
State Director of ESDA as provided by law; and
   (C)   Any other reimbursement made by the state incident to BIHSEMA
activities as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 91.08) (Ord. 2336, passed 4-27-1976; Ord. 2015-002, passed 1-13-
2015; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 91.09 PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES.
   (A)   The Mayor may authorize, on recommendation of the Coordinator of
BIHSEMA, any purchase of contracts necessary to place the city in a position to
combat effectively any disaster resulting from the explosion of any nuclear or
other bomb or missile, to protect the public health, safety and property and to
provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of human-made or natural
disaster.
   (B)   In the event of enemy-caused or other disaster, the City Coordinator
of BIHSEMA is authorized, on behalf of the city, to procure such services,
supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes in view
of the exigency without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities
normally prescribed by law pertaining to city contracts or obligations, as
authorized by the Emergency Management Agency Act, 20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.;
provided that, if the Mayor acts at such time, the Mayor shall act subject to
the directions and restrictions imposed by that body.
(Prior Code, § 91.09) (Ord. 2336, passed 4-27-1976; Ord. 2015-002, passed 1-13-
2015; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 91.10 OATH.
   Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the City BIHSEMA
organization shall, before entering upon such person’s duties, subscribe to the
following oath, which shall be filed with the Coordinator:
I,__________, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend and
bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the
Constitution of the State of Illinois and the territory, institutions and
facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and
domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or
purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties
upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do
not advocate, nor am I, nor have I been, a member of any political party or
organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United
States or of this state by force or violence; and that during such time as I am
affiliated with the BIHSEMA. I will not advocate nor become a member of any
political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government
of the United States or of this state by force or violence.
(Prior Code, § 91.10) (Ord. 2336, passed 4-27-1976; Ord. 2015-002, passed 1-13-
2015; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 91.11 OFFICE SPACE.
   The Mayor is authorized to designate office space in a city building, or
elsewhere, for the City BIHSEMA.
(Prior Code, § 91.11) (Ord. 2336, passed 4-27-1976; Ord. 2015-002, passed 1-13-
2015; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 91.12 APPROPRIATION; LEVY OF TAXES.
   The Mayor and City Council may make an appropriation for BIHSEMA purposes in
the manner provided by law and, if permitted by law, may levy in addition, for
BIHSEMA purposes only, a tax in the amount and manner as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 91.12) (Ord. 2336, passed 4-27-1976; Ord. 2015-002, passed 1-13-
2015; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM
§ 91.25 IMPOSITION OF SURCHARGE.
   A surcharge is hereby imposed on monthly billed subscribers of
telecommunications carriers residing within the city at a rate of $0.73 per
month per network connection, as hereinafter defined for funding of a 9-1-
1 emergency telephone system.
(Prior Code, § 91.25) (Ord. 89-76, passed 9-12-1989; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017)
§ 91.26 RESIDENCE IN CITY.
   A monthly billed subscriber shall be deemed to reside within the city if the
service address, as hereinafter defined is located within the city.
(Prior Code, § 91.26) (Ord. 89-76, passed 9-12-1989; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017)
§ 91.27 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NETWORK CONNECTION. The number of voice grade communication channels
directly between a subscriber and a telecommunications carrier’s public
switched network without the intervention of any other telecommunications
carrier’s switched network which would be required to carry the subscriber’s
inter- premises traffic.
   SERVICE ADDRESS.
      (1)   The location of the subscribers telecommunications facilities
accessing the network connection or connection(s) that are subject to the
surcharge.
      (2)   If this is not a defined location, SERVICE ADDRESS shall mean the
location of a subscribers primary use of the network connection as defined by
telephone number, authorization code or location in the state where bills are
sent.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER. Any natural individual firm, trust, estate,
partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation,
municipal corporation or political subdivision of the state or a receiver,
trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court
engaged in the business of transmitting messages by means of electricity.
(Prior Code, § 91.27) (Ord. 89-76, passed 9-12-1989; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017)
§ 91.28 CERTIFIED LIST OF NETWORK CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall provide any telecommunications carrier collecting
the surcharge with a certified list of those network connections assigned to
the city to be exempt from imposition of the surcharge.
   (B)   The certified list may be revised by the City Clerk on 60-day prior
written notice provided to the telecommunications carriers.
(Prior Code, § 91.28) (Ord. 89-76, passed 9-12-1989; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017)
§ 91.29 TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS TO REMIT SURCHARGE TO CITY; RETURN.
   (A)   Each telecommunications carrier is hereby authorized and instructed to
deduct 3% from the gross amount of surcharge collected prior to remittance
under division (B) below in reimbursement for the expense of accounting and
collecting the surcharge.
   (B)   Every telecommunications carrier shall remit to the city or Emergency
Telephone System Board Treasurer the amount of the surcharge collected for each
calendar month within 30 days following expiration of each month to which the
surcharge applies, net of any network or other 9-1-1 or sophisticated 9-1-
1 system charge then due the particular telecommunications carrier as shown on
an itemized bill and the 3% accounting and collection charge described in
division (A) above.
   (C)   Simultaneously with the remittance described in division (B) above,
each telecommunications carrier shall make a return to the city or Emergency
Telephone System Board Treasurer for the period to which the remittance applies
stating as follows:
      (1)   The name of the telecommunications carrier;
      (2)   The telecommunications carrier’s principle place of business;
      (3)   The number of network connections to which the surcharge applies;
      (4)   The amount of surcharge collected; and
      (5)   Such other reasonably and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
(Prior Code, § 91.29) (Ord. 89-76, passed 9-12-1989; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017)
§ 91.30 CREDIT FOR OVERPAYMENT.
   If it shall appear that an amount of surcharge has been paid which was not
due under the provisions of this subchapter, whether as the result of a mistake
of fact or an error of law, such amount shall be credited against any surcharge
due, or become due, under this subchapter; provided that, no amounts
erroneously paid more than three years prior to the filing of a claim therefor
shall be so credited. Ninety days prior notice shall be given to the Emergency
Telephone System Board on any credit against a surcharge due.
(Prior Code, § 91.30) (Ord. 89-76, passed 9-12-1989; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017)
§ 91.31 RECOVERY ACTION TO BE COMMENCED WITHIN CERTAIN TIME PERIOD.
   No action to recover any amount of surcharge due under the provisions of
this subchapter shall be commenced more than three years after the due date of
such amount.
(Prior Code, § 91.31) (Ord. 89-76, passed 9-12-1989; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017)
CHAPTER 92: FAIR HOUSING
Section
Community Rights Program
   
92.01   Purpose
   
92.02   Definitions
   
92.03   Enforcement; Planning Committee; rules
   
92.04   Unlawful housing practices
   
92.05   Exemptions
   
92.06   Complaints; conciliation; hearing procedures
Housing Stock Quality Protection
   
92.20   Duty to inform Building Department of property conveyance
   
92.21   Certificate of compliance required
   
92.22   Inspection fee
   
92.23   Making false statement in notice of intent unlawful
 
   
92.99   Penalty
COMMUNITY RIGHTS PROGRAM
§ 92.01 PURPOSE.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city and the purpose of this
subchapter that all persons shall be assured full and equal opportunity to
obtain fair and adequate housing for themselves and their families within the
city and to secure to all persons an equal opportunity to view, purchase,
lease, rent or occupy real estate in the city without discrimination because of
their race, color, religion, sex, gender identity, military discharge status,
parental status, housing status, immigration status, order of protection
status, creed, ancestry, disability, age, marital status, presence or age of
children, national origin, sexual orientation or source of income.
(Prior Code, § 92.01) (Ord. 09-075, passed 8-25-2009; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017; Ord. 2025-018, passed 6-24-2025)
§ 92.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ATTORNEY FOR THE COMMITTEE. Any attorney, duly licensed by the state,
designated by the City Attorney to act as legal counsel for the committee in
accordance with city policies and procedures.
   CHAIR. The duly appointed Chair of the City Planning Committee or the
Chair’s designee.
   COMMITTEE. The City Planning Committee.
   COMPLAINANT. Person(s) filing a charge of unfair housing practices.
   CONVEYANCE. The legal mechanism by which property rights are transferred
from one party to another, providing a clear and legally recognized record of
the change in ownership. As used in this chapter, conveyance excludes the
following: reconveyance deeds; joint tenancy transfer of property to a
surviving owner; tenancy by the entirety transfer of property to the surviving
owner; transfer of ownership to a trust created by the current owner of the
property with no transfer of occupancy; transfer of ownership via trust to a
business entity by the current owner of the property with no transfer of
occupancy.
   DISCRIMINATE. To treat any person(s) differently from others because of
race, color, religion, sex, creed, ancestry, disability, age, marital status,
presence or age of children, national origin, sexual orientation or source of
income.
   LEASE. Any sublease, assignment or rental and any contract to enter into any
sublease, assignment or rental.
   LENDING INSTITUTION. Any bank, insurance company, savings and loan
association or person(s) in the business of lending money or guaranteeing
loans, any person(s) in the business of obtaining, arranging or negotiating
loans or guarantees as agent or broker and any person(s) in the business of
buying or selling loans or instruments for the payment of money which are
secured by title to, or a security interest in, real estate.
   MANAGER. The Director of Finance and Administration or designee.
   OWNER. Any person(s) who holds legal or equitable title to, owns any
beneficial interest in any housing accommodation, who holds legal or equitable
title to shares of or any beneficial interest in any real estate cooperative
which owns any real property or any person(s) who is acting as the agent,
manager or employee of the owner.
   REAL ESTATE TRANSACTION. The purchase, sale, exchange or lease of any
housing accommodation or business, commercial or industrial property and an
option to do any of the foregoing.
   RESPONDENT. Person(s) charged with violating any provision of this
subchapter.
   SALE. Any contract to sell, exchange or convey, transfer or assign legal or
equitable title to, or a beneficial interest in, a housing accommodation or
business, commercial or industrial property.
   SOURCE OF INCOME. The lawful manner by which an individual supports himself
or herself and his or her dependents.
   STEERING. To influence, or attempt to influence, by words or acts, the
choice or location of housing of a prospective purchaser, occupant or tenant in
connection with viewing, buying, leasing or occupying real estate, based on
race, color, religion, sex, creed, ancestry, disability, age, marital status,
presence or age of children, national origin, sexual orientation or source of
income, so as to promote or maintain segregation.
(Prior Code, § 92.02) (Ord. 09-075, passed 8-25-2009; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017; Ord. 2025-018, passed 6-24-2025)
§ 92.03 ENFORCEMENT; PLANNING COMMITTEE; RULES.
   (A)   The Planning Committee shall be charged with the duty of enforcing the
provisions of this subchapter and, in discharging this responsibility, it shall
have the power to:
      (1)   Gather and provide for the exchange of information relative to the
provisions of this subchapter among real estate brokers and salespersons,
lenders, developers, employers, municipal officials and community groups within
the city;
      (2)   Receive and investigate complaints charging discrimination in
housing;
      (3)   Seek conciliation of, hold hearings and make findings of fact with
respect to any such complaint;
      (4)   Administer oaths, take sworn testimony and subpoena witnesses and
pertinent documents, which power may be enforced by proper petition to any
court of competent jurisdiction;
      (5)   Initiate such general and specific investigations as it deems
necessary in order to discourage and prevent violations; and
      (6)   Upon good cause and appropriate investigation, initiate complaints.
   (B)   The Committee shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this
subchapter, to investigate all complaints filed under this subchapter and to
recommend sanctions.
   (C)   The Committee shall adopt and publish such rules and regulations made
at any regular or special meeting as may be necessary to carry out the
provisions of this subchapter; provided that, a quorum is present. Such rules
and regulations or changes thereto shall be subject to approval by the Mayor
and City Council.
(Prior Code, § 92.03) (Ord. 09-075, passed 8-25-2009; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017)
§ 92.04 UNLAWFUL HOUSING PRACTICES.
   The following acts shall constitute violations of this subchapter:
   (A)   To discriminate against any person(s) in the terms, conditions or
privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or
facilities in connection therewith, because of his, her or their race, color,
religion, sex, creed, ancestry, disability, age, marital status, presence or
age of children, national, origin, sexual orientation or source of income;
   (B)   To refuse to sell or rent, after the making of a bona fide offer, or
to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable
or deny, a dwelling to any person(s) because of his, her or their race, color,
religion, sex, creed, ancestry, disability, age, marital status, presence or
age of children, national origin, sexual orientation or source of income;
   (C)   To represent to any person(s) because of his, her or their race,
color, religion, sex, creed, ancestry, disability, age, marital status,
presence or age of children, national origin, sexual orientation, or source of
income, that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when
such dwelling is in fact so available;
   (D)   To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published,
any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a
dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based upon
a person(s) race, color, religion, sex, creed, ancestry, disability, age,
marital status, presence or age of children, national origin, sexual
orientation or source of income or an intention to make such preference,
limitation or discrimination;
   (E)   To, for profit, induce or attempt to induce any person(s) to buy, sell
or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective
entry into the neighborhood of any person(s) of a particular race, color,
religion, sex, creed, ancestry, disability, age, marital status, presence or
age of children, national origin, sexual orientation or source of income;
   (F)   To discriminate in connection with borrowing or lending money,
guaranteeing loans, accepting mortgages or otherwise financing a real estate
transaction of any person(s) on the grounds of his, her or their race, color,
religion, sex, creed, ancestry, disability, age, marital status, presence or
age of children, national origin, sexual orientation or source of income;
   (G)   To delay the processing of or denying a loan or other financial
assistance to a person(s) applying for the purpose of purchasing, constructing,
improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling or to discriminate in the fixing
of that amount, interest rate, duration or other terms or conditions of such
loan or other financial assistance because of his, her or their race, color,
religion, sex, creed, ancestry, disability, age, marital status, presence or
age of children, national origin, sexual orientation or source of income;
   (H)   To discriminate in appraising the value of real estate or in the sale
of insurance in connection with a real estate transaction of any person(s)
because of his, her or their race, color, religion, sex, creed, ancestry,
disability, age, marital status, presence or age of children, national origin,
sexual orientation or source of income;
   (I)   To enter into a listing agreement which discriminates against any
person(s) because of his, her or their race, color, religion, sex, creed,
ancestry, disability, age, marital status, presence or age of children,
national origin, sexual orientation or source of income;
   (J)   To deny any person(s) access to, or membership or participation in,
any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers’ organization or other
service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or
renting dwellings or to discriminate against any person(s) in the terms and
conditions of such access, membership or participation on account of his, her
or their race, color, religion, sex, creed, ancestry, disability, age, marital
status, presence or age of children, national origin, sexual orientation or
source of income;
   (K)   To engage in steering;
   (L)   To act or undertake as real estate broker, salesperson or agent, with
respect to any dwelling, the disposition of which requires such person(s) to
participate in discrimination;
   (M)   To perform any act of discrimination with the intention of restricting
or limiting the housing choice of any person(s);
   (N)   To coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any person(s). in
the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of, such person’s having exercised
or enjoyed, or on account of such person’s having aided or encouraged any other
person(s) in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by
this subchapter;
   (O)   To solicit any owner to sell, rent or list residential property at any
time after receiving written notice that such owner does not desire to sell,
rent or list such residential property. Such notice may be given by the owner
or by a third party on the owner’s behalf;
   (P)   To intentionally interfere with the performance of a duty or exercise
of a power by the Committee on or by its members or representatives;
   (Q)   To engage in sexual harassment in any real estate transaction. SEXUAL
HARASSMENT means any unwelcome sexual advance, request for sexual favors or
conduct of a sexual nature when:
      (1)   Submission to such conduct is an explicit or implicit term or
condition of an individuals real estate transaction;
      (2)   Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used
as the basis for any decision affecting the individuals real estate
transaction; or
      (3)   Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering
with an individuals real estate transaction or creating an intimidating,
hostile or offensive environment with respect thereto.
   (R)   To aid or abet any of acts described in this section performed in
violation of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 92.04) (Ord. 09-075, passed 8-25-2009; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.05 EXEMPTIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall:
   (A)   Apply to the rental, lease or occupancy of a room in an owner-occupied
single-family dwelling;
   (B)   Prohibit a religious organization, association or society or any non-
profit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by, or in
conjunction with, a religious organization or society from limiting the sale,
rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than
commercial purposes to a person of the same religion or from giving preference
to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of
race, color, sex, creed, ancestry, disability, age, marital status, presence or
age of children, national origin, sexual orientation or source of income;
   (C)   Prohibit a private club, not in fact open to the public, which, as an
incident to its primary purpose or purposes, provides lodgings which it owns or
operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or
occupancy of such lodgings to its members and their guests or from giving
preference to its members;
   (D)   Prohibit the operation of housing units designed and offered
predominantly for use and occupancy by persons over the age of 62;
   (F)   Prohibit the operation of housing units designed and offered
predominantly for use and occupancy by persons with a disability;
   (G)   Prohibit any charitable or educational organization from limiting to
person(s) of the same sex the rental of living accommodations in facilities
primarily providing single-room occupancy; and
   (H)   Prohibit an initial condominium declaration limiting ownership, rental
or occupancy of a condominium unit to a person 55 years of age or older,
provided that the person or immediate family of a person owning, renting or
lawfully occupying such unit prior to the recording of the initial declaration
shall not be deemed to be in violation of such age restriction as long as they
continue to own or reside in such housing accommodation.
(Prior Code, § 92.05) (Ord. 09-075, passed 8-25-2009; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.06 COMPLAINTS; CONCILIATION; HEARING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Filing of complaint. The Committee, or any person(s) aggrieved in any
manner by a violation of any provision of this subchapter, may file with the
Manager or designee, a written complaint setting forth his, her or their
grievance within 180 days after the date of the alleged violation. The
complaint shall be filed on a form provided by the Manager or designee.
   (B)   Investigation.
      (1)   After receipt of the complaint, the Manager or designee shall
conduct an investigation of the alleged violation. If the Manager or designee
finds that probable cause of a violation exists, the Manager or designee shall
submit the Manager’s or designee’s findings in writing to the Chair of the
Planning Committee. Upon receipt of the findings, the Chair shall schedule a
conciliation conference not less than ten, and not more than 30, days from the
date the Chair receives the written findings.
      (2)   The Manager or designee shall cause a copy of the complaint to be
served upon the respondent along with notice of the date, time and location of
the conciliation conference. A copy of the complaint and notice of the date,
time and location of the conference shall also be served upon the complainant.
      (3)   If the Manager or designee finds that probable cause does not
exist, the Manager will dismiss the complaint and shall notify the Chair of the
Planning Committee in writing of the Manager’s or designee’s findings. Upon
receipt of the findings the Chair will send out notification to the
complainant, indicating the results of the investigations and the finding of no
probable cause.
      (4)   If a complaint indicates multiple respondents, and subsequent to
the investigation by the Manager or designee probable cause is found with
regard to one or more of the respondents, then the Committee shall proceed on
the complaint against those parties for which probable cause was found. The
named parties for which no probable cause was found shall be dismissed by the
Committee. The Chair shall cause notification to be sent to the complainant
with regard to the findings of the investigation and to the parties for which
probable cause was found.
   (C)   Conciliation conference.
      (1)   A panel of three Committee members shall be convened in an effort
to resolve the parties’ differences in private. The Chair of the Planning
Committee or the Chair’s designee shall preside over the Conciliation
conference panel. The Chair of the Planning Committee shall select two members
of the Planning Committee to serve on the panel. The Manager, or designee and
an attorney for the Committee shall be present. The complainant and respondent
may be represented by attorneys if they desire. The conference shall be closed
to all other persons. However, in the discretion of the panel, a complainant or
respondent may include an additional person such as an interpreter or family
member.
      (2)   No evidence shall be taken at the conciliation conference. The sole
purpose of the conference will be to attempt to reconcile the parties. If the
parties cannot reach agreement at the conference, a public hearing upon the
complaint shall be scheduled.
   (D)   Non-disclosure. Members of the Committee or its staff shall not
disclose the filing of a complaint, what transpires during the course of an
investigation or what transpires during the course of a conciliation
conference, except as such disclosures are deemed essential to the
investigation and endeavors at conciliation or are made at a public hearing in
accordance with division (E) below. Nothing in this division (D) shall be
construed to prevent the Manager or designee and the Committee from disclosing
dismissal notices or conciliation agreements, including the reasons therefore.
The identities of the parties shall not be disclosed without their consent.
   (E)   Public hearing.
      (1)   If an agreement between the parties cannot be reached at the
conciliation conference, the Chair of the Planning Committee or designee shall
set a date for a public hearing upon the complaint, The date for the hearing
shall be decided upon at the conciliation conference and shall be no less than
ten days, and no more than 30 days, from the conclusion of the conciliation
conference.
      (2)   The Chair of the Planning Committee or designee shall convene and
preside at the hearing. The hearing panel will be composed of five members of
the Planning Committee. The panel shall include the following: the Chair or
designee; the Planning Committee Chair or designee; and three Committee members
to be selected by the Chair. An attorney for the Committee and the Manager or
designee shall also be present.
      (3)   At the hearing, the complainant and respondent shall have the right
to be represented by legal counsel, the right to call witnesses and the right
to cross-examination. Rules of procedure adopted by the Committee shall govern
the proceedings. Testimony taken at the hearing shall be under oath or
affirmation and an official transcript shall be made and filed in the Manager’s
office. The hearing shall be open to the public.
      (4)   After all evidence has been taken, the panel shall take the matter
under advisement. The panel will render its decision in writing with findings
of fact. Copies of the decision shall be sent to the parties and transmitted to
the Manager. A majority vote of those panel members present at all sessions of
the hearing is required to decide the matter. If the panel finds that there was
no violation of this subchapter, the complaint shall be dismissed. If, however,
the panel finds that a violation of this subchapter has occurred, it shall take
action as it deems proper consistent with this section, including, but not
limited to, the following:
         (a)   Issuing an order to cease and desist from any unlawful housing
practices as determined by the panel;
         (b)   Recommending that the Manager request that the City Attorney
institute proceedings to enforce, against any person(s) or business found in
violation of this subchapter, the fine provided;
         (c)   Recommending that the Manager request that the City Attorney
apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for:
            1.   An order restraining the party from violating any provision of
this subchapter; or
            2.   Such other or further relief as may be appropriate for the
enforcement of this subchapter and for the elimination of violations.
      (d)   Recommending that the Manager request that the City Attorney
petition or institute proceedings with the Department of Registration and
Education for the purpose of causing the Department to revoke, suspend or
refuse to renew the license granted by such department to the party found to
have violated any provision of this subchapter.
   (F)   State law references. Civil Administrative Code of Illinois, 20 ILCS
2105/2105-5 et seq. In addition to the penalty provided for herein, the public
hearing panel may order restitution, specific performance and any and all
remedies the panel deems just and appropriate in accordance with its findings.
The panel may further recommend that the Manager request that the City Attorney
institute appropriate proceeding to enforce the order of the panel.
   (G)   Continuance of conciliation conference or public hearing.
      (1)   The Chair of the public hearing panel may grant a continuance and
postpone the convening of the public hearing if a party requests a continuance
in writing in a timely and reasonable manner. Such a continuance may be granted
even if it is more than 30 days from the conclusion of the conciliation
conference.
      (2)   A continuance of a conciliation conference may not be granted
without the Conciliation conference panel convening,
      (3)   If a party fails to appear at either the conciliation conference or
the public hearing, the panel may proceed with and conclude the matter.
   (H)   Evidence and subpoena power.
      (1)   No strict rules of evidence shall apply in conducting a
conciliation conference or public hearing, however, the conciliation conference
panel and the public hearing panel shall determine the relevance of any
evidence to be submitted for consideration in its respective proceeding. If
said evidence is not deemed relevant it will not be accepted.
      (2)   The public hearing panel shall have the power to subpoena records
or individuals for testimony at the public hearing, as it relates to a specific
matter.
      (3)   The conciliation conference panel shall not have such subpoena
powers.
   (I)   Retention of jurisdiction. The Planning Committee shall retain
jurisdiction for one year after the conclusion of a conciliation conference or
public hearing.
(Prior Code, § 92.06) (Ord. 09-075, passed 8-25-2009; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017)
HOUSING STOCK QUALITY PROTECTION
§ 92.20 DUTY TO INFORM BUILDING DEPARTMENT OF PROPERTY CONVEYANCE.
   (A)   Commercial or residential property. All owners, agents, brokers or any
individual or legal entity having ownership or control of any commercial or
residential property which is conveyed in any manner within the city must
notify the City Building Department, no more than ten days after a purchase and
sale agreement is executed, no more than ten days prior to a scheduled
conveyance, or no more than ten days before public notification of an intent to
sell or rent is made or published, whichever shall occur first, on a form
provided by the Department, including all required attachments. Home purchases,
building conveyances, and unit rentals within the city, other than sales of
newly remodeled properties that have undergone and passed final inspection by
the Building Department, cannot be completed without an intent to sell
inspection.
   (B)   Residential property. All owners, agents, brokers or any individual or
legal entity having ownership or control of any residential property which is
offered for sale or rental within the city must notify the City Building
Department with notice, 14 days prior to the first real estate listing
agreement is executed or 14 days prior to the public notification of an intent
to sell or rent is made or published, whichever shall occur first, on a form
provided by the Department, including all required attachments.
   (C)   Inspection for compliance. The notice form shall also constitute the
requestor’s invitation for the Building Department to inspect the property
(“compliance inspection”) to determine whether such property is in compliance
with the following specific requirements, which the Mayor and Aldermen of the
City find are related to the public health, safety and welfare:
      (1)   Compliance with the Property Maintenance Code. All structures shall
be in compliance with
Chapter 150 of this code and the codes adopted therein; and
      (2)   Inspection to determine possible illegal conversions. All
structures shall be inspected to determine whether they have been illegally
converted. For purposes of this division (C)(2), ILLEGALLY CONVERTED means that
the property was converted to another or additional use beyond that for which
the property was originally permitted, and which: (a) is in violation of the
property’s zoning limitations; and (b) is not a legal non-conforming use per
Chapter 165 of this code, the city’s zoning ordinance.
   (D)   Proposed compliance inspection. When the requestor provides notice to
the Building Department, the Department will schedule a proposed compliance
inspection to be conducted within 28 calendar days of the notice. The notice
form shall include the following attachments:
      (1)   Identification of requestor, copy of driver’s license or state ID;
      (2)   A notarized intent to sell and/or intent to rent form;
      (3)   The date and time of the proposed compliance inspection;
      (4)   A space for the requestor to indicate that the owner and/or tenant
either consents to the compliance inspection or refuses to consent; and
      (5)   If consent is provided, for occupied rental dwellings, the city
must also request and obtain the consent of the tenant prior to conducting any
inspection.
   (E)   Inspection procedures.
      (1)   In the event consent is given or a warrant issued, the Department
shall conduct the compliance inspection as provided in divisions (C) and (D)
above. Within seven business days after the compliance inspection, the
Department shall issue a written notice of violations and repairs, if any,
necessary to bring the property into compliance with this section. In the event
the inspection reveals a structure which has been illegally converted, the
Department shall issue a notice of deconversion specifying the measures which
must be taken in order to bring the illegally converted structure into
compliance with applicable zoning regulations.
      (2)   A party issued a notice of repairs as provided for in division (E)
(1) above shall proceed to make such repairs. Upon completion of said repairs
and notice thereof to the Department, the Department will conduct a
reinspection within seven business days thereafter. Upon completion of the
follow-up repairs and the completion of any deconversion measures required by
the Department, the Department shall issue a certificate of compliance.
      (3)   In the event the owner disputes the determination of violations and
repairs, the owner may file a request for administrative review. An independent
administrative hearing officer appointed by the city shall convene an
administrative hearing within five business days from the date of appeal. Upon
completion of the administrative hearing, the hearing officer will issue a
final determination of violations and repairs.
   (F)   Conditional certificate of compliance. A requestor or owner who has
not completed the repairs identified through the inspection may nevertheless
transfer ownership of property if:
      (1)   (a)   The owner or agent:
            1.   Deposits with the city an amount of money determined by the
Building Department to be sufficient to bring the structure into compliance
with all city building and zoning ordinances and any applicable housing, fire
or property maintenance codes or regulations; or
            2.   Pays a fine to the city in the amount of $2,500. This
exception may only be used once in a 36-month period.
         (b)   Wholesaling of property within the city must follow the
provisions in this chapter, and each and every sale of property, even if an
assignment of a real estate contract will require a certificate of compliance.
In addition, each and every sale must comply with Illinois State law,
including, but not limited to, Public Act 101-0357; and
         (c)   All high-priority safety violations have been remedied to the
satisfaction of the Building Department.
      (2)   (a)   The buyer, conveyee, transferee, assignee or successor in
title, ownership or interest (hereinafter “buyer”) has entered into an
agreement with the city whereby the buyer agrees to bring the structure into
compliancewithin 180 days of the closing or within a time frame established via
written agreement with the city.
         (b)   If the buyer enters into such an agreement, a conditional
certificate of compliance will issue in order to allow the closing and/or
conveyance to be completed. The conditional certificate of compliance shall be
issued by the Department and shall terminate on the one hundred eighty-first
day after closing or conveyance, and no extensions shall be granted. A buyer,
conveyee, transferee, assignee or successor in title who elects to accept the
premises, subject to the inspection with existing violations, and who agrees,
in order to close, to be responsible as provided herein shall execute a sworn
affidavit, satisfactory to the Building Department, which will clearly indicate
that the buyer, conveyee, transferee, assignee or successor in title is fully
aware of the existing violations as well as the possibility of violations that
may have existed but were undiscovered due to lack of access and agrees to
accept the requirement and obligation to bring the structure into compliance
within 180 days of the closing or within a time frame established via written
agreement with the city. The city shall issue a certificate of compliance upon
completion of the repairs necessary to bring the dwelling or structure into
compliance.
         (c)   In the event the buyer, conveyee, transferee, assignee or
successor in title fails to complete the required repairs and have the repairs
verified on reinspection, the Building Department is hereby authorized to
pursue enforcement proceedings through the city’s administrative adjudication
process or, at his or her discretion, through the Circuit Court of Cook County.
The buyer, conveyee, transferee, assignee or successor in title hereby agrees
to submit to the jurisdiction and venue of the city’s administrative
adjudication process and the Circuit Court of Cook County and to waive service
of summons, subject only to the notice requirement as required by law, in order
to enable the city to expeditiously obtain an order of compliance with this
section.
         (d)   If reasonable proof that the repairs have been completed is not
received by the Building Department within the required period for the repairs
to be completed, the city may also issue a citation for violation of this
chapter and/or the escrow repair agreement and may also pursue any applicable
administrative or judicial remedies to bring the structure and property into
compliance with applicable codes and regulations.
   (G)   Licensed and bonded contractors. No building shall be erected, altered
or repaired within the city unless a building permit has been obtained from the
Building Department. No person shall begin any work for which a building permit
is required or begin any work in preparation for the work until a building
permit has been obtained. It shall be the responsibility of all workers and
persons furnishing materials to ascertain that a building permit has been
properly issued before commencing work or delivery of material. Further, all
contractors performing repairs identified in the point-of-sale inspection shall
be licensed by the city and bonded and shall make available, upon request,
copies of their license(s), verification of their liability insurance, errors
and omissions insurance policies and surety bond.
   (H)   Validity of certificate of compliance. A certificate of compliance
issued to the seller shall be valid for 180 days from the date of issuance.
   (I)   No warranty. In issuing a certificate of compliance or a conditional
certificate of compliance, the city and its agents do not make any warranty,
representation or statement, nor does it intend to insure or guarantee to
either buyer or seller of the property subject to the point-of-sale inspection
or any of their designees, agents, representatives, heirs or assigns or any
other interested party, including mortgage companies, insurance companies,
banks or any other party which may have any interest relative to the property
subject to the point-of-sale inspection, nor does the city affirm that there
are no additional unnoted violations relative to any other provisions of any of
the municipal code of the city or relevant statutes, ordinances, rules and
regulations of the County of Cook, the State of Illinois or the United States
of America.
   (J)   Occupancy without certificate unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any
person to hereafter occupy by purchase, rental, lease or otherwise, or for any
owner or agent thereof to permit the occupation of, any commercial property, or
addition thereto, or part thereof, for any purpose until a certificate of
compliance or temporary certificate of compliance has been issued by the
Building Department.
   (K)   Separate occupancies; new tenants. Said certificate is required for
each and every separate occupancy, and in the case of rental or lease, said
certificate is required for each new tenant.
   (L)   False statements unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to
knowingly make any false statement in the notice of intent to sell or rent
property.
   (M)   Unpaid fines and fees unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any property
seller to obtain a certificate of compliance for the sale of commercial or
residential property within the city for which there are outstanding fines or
fees owed to the city. All outstanding fines and fees must be paid by the
seller prior to the city’s issuance of a certificate of compliance. The
certificate of compliance must state that the structure, building or dwelling
unit complies with all applicable zoning regulations of the city, that a final
water bill has been paid to the city, that the seller has purchased a city-
supplied AMR compatible water meter and had it installed by a city employee or
licensed plumber or the buyer has agreed to install the same within 30 days of
purchase as part of the as is agreement; and that all outstanding liens of the
city placed on record upon the property in question have been paid to the city.
The cost of the water meter shall be as set forth in the city’s fee and fine
schedule.
(Prior Code, § 92.20) (Ord. 91-296, passed 11-26-1991; Ord. 09-048, passed 1-
27-2009; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017; Ord. 2021-038, passed 9-14-2021; Ord.
2022-021, passed 4-12-2022; Ord. 2024-023, passed 4-23-2024; Ord. 2025-018,
passed 6-24-2025) Penalty, see § §
92.99
§ 92.21 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No residential property shall be sold unless the owner shall furnish
the buyer with a certificate of occupancy based on inspection of the property
five days prior to the sale of the property.
   (B)   No residential property shall be rented unless the lessor shall
furnish the tenant with a certificate of occupancy based on an inspection of
such property 30 days prior to tenancy.
(Prior Code, § 92.21) (Ord. 10-109, passed 9-14-2010; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017)
§ 92.22 INSPECTION FEE.
   (A)   (1)   Each applicant for a certificate of occupancy, in conjunction
with the sale or rental of a single-family residence, shall pay the required
inspection fee.
      (2)   The inspection fee shall be waived to any applicant selling his or
her existing residence and then purchasing and relocating his or her residence
within the city limits.
   (B)   Each applicant for a certificate of occupancy, in conjunction with the
sale or rental of a multi-family residence containing two or more dwelling
units, shall pay the required inspection fee plus an additional fee for each
apartment unit located in the building.
   (C)   Each applicant for a certificate of occupancy, in conjunction with the
rental of a single- family residence, shall pay the required inspection fee
based on the size of the property.
   (D)   Each applicant for a certificate of occupancy, in conjunction with the
rental of a mixed- use commercial property, shall pay the required inspection
fee plus an additional fee for each additional unit located within the
building.
   (E)   All certificates of occupancy that are issued pursuant to an
inspection under this section shall be valid for one year from the date of
issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
(Prior Code, § 92.22) (Ord. 09-048, passed 1-27-2009; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017; Ord. 2021-038, passed 9-14-2021)
§ 92.23 MAKING FALSE STATEMENT IN NOTICE OF INTENT UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false statement in
the notice of intent to sell or rent residential property.
(Prior Code, § 92.23) (Ord. 88-29, passed 6-10-1986; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   The fine for violations per §
92.20 shall be not less than $200 nor more than $1,000 per day for each day the
violations remain uncorrected.
(Ord. 2022-021, passed 4-12-2022)
CHAPTER 93: FIRE PREVENTION; FIREWORKS
Section
Pyrotechnic Displays and Consumer Fireworks
   
93.01   Unlawful possession; findings
   
93.02   Definitions
   
93.03   Possession, sale and use
   
93.04   Adoption of state law
   
93.05   License required; permit; bond
   
93.06   Prohibited displays
   
93.07   Effective date
Fire Prevention and Safety Provisions
   
93.20   Adoption of Uniform Fire Code
   
93.21   Establishment and duties of Bureau of Fire Prevention
   
93.22   Appointment and duties of fire prevention officer
   
93.23   District limits where storage of explosives and blasting agents
prohibited
   
93.24   District limits where storage of flammable liquids in outside above-
ground tanks prohibited
   
93.25   District limits where underground flammable liquid tanks prohibited
   
93.26   District limits where bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas
prohibited
   
93.27   Transportation, storage and handling of explosives and flammable
liquids
   
93.28   Flammable liquids
   
93.29   Liquefied petroleum gas
   
93.30   Modifications to Fire Prevention Code
   
93.31   Enforcement
   
93.32   New materials, processes or occupancies which may require permits
   
93.33   Appeals from decision of Fire Chief
   
93.34   Use of burglar bars prohibited
   
93.35   Elevator inspections
   
93.36   Automatic sprinkler systems
 
   
93.99   Penalty
PYROTECHNIC DISPLAYS AND
CONSUMER FIREWORKS
§ 93.01 UNLAWFUL POSSESSION; FINDINGS.
   (A)   Pursuant to 425 ILCS 35/0.01 et seq., being the Pyrotechnic Use Act,
it is unlawful for any person, firm, co-partnership or corporation to knowingly
possess, offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail or use or explode any
display, fireworks, flame effects or consumer fireworks.
   (B)   Pursuant to 425 ILCS 35/2, the City Council shall have the power to
adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the granting of permits for
pyrotechnic fireworks displays and consumer displays.
   (C)   The City Council has determined that outdoor pyrotechnic displays
shall be permitted within the city only in those specific instances when a
permit for such a display is first obtained by a person who possesses a current
pyrotechnic distributor’s license and current lead pyrotechnic operator’s
license, issued by the office of the State Fire Marshal, which licenses are in
good standing.
   (D)   The City Council has determined that all indoor pyrotechnic displays,
and other pyrotechnic displays of any kind whatsoever, shall be prohibited.
   (E)   The City Council has determined that all consumer pyrotechnic displays
of any kind whatsoever shall be prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 93.01) (Ord. 06-035, passed 6-27-2006; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017)
§ 93.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LEAD PYROTECHNIC OPERATOR. An individual who is responsible for the safety,
setup and discharge of the pyrotechnic display and who is licensed pursuant to
the Pyrotechnic Distributor and Operator Licensing Act, being 225 ILCS 227/1 et
seq.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, company,
consortium, joint venture or commercial entity.
   PYROTECHNIC DISPLAY. The detonation, ignition or deflagration of display
fireworks or flame effects to produce visual or audible effects of an
exhibitional nature before the public, invitees or licensees, regardless or
whether admission is charged, and as may be further defined in the Pyrotechnic
Operator Licensing Act.
   SPECIAL EFFECTS FIREWORKS. Pyrotechnic devices used for special effects by
professionals in the performing arts in conjunction with theatrical, musical or
other productions that are similar to consumer fireworks in chemical
compositions and construction, but are not intended for consumer use and are
not labeled as such or identified as intended for indoor use. SPECIAL EFFECTS
FIREWORKS are classified as fireworks UN0431 or UN0432 by the United States.
Department of Transportation under 49 C.F.R. § 172.101.
(Prior Code, § 93.02) (Ord. 06-035, passed 6-27-2006; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 425 ILCS 35/1
§ 93.03 POSSESSION, SALE AND USE.
   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
co-partnership or corporation to knowingly possess, offer for sale, expose for
sale, sell at retail or use or explode any display fireworks, flame effects or
consumer fireworks within the city.
(Prior Code, § 93.03) (Ord. 06-035, passed 6-27-2006; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017)
§ 93.04 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.
   The city hereby adopts and incorporates herein by reference the Emergency
Administration Rules- Pyrotechnic Distributor and Operator Licensing, 41 Ill.
Adm. Code part 230 as the rules and regulations that pertain to and concern
definitions and general requirements for pyrotechnic displays, compliance
standards and qualifications for licensees of pyrotechnic displays.
(Prior Code, § 93.04) (Ord. 06-035, passed 6-27-2006; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017)
§ 93.05 LICENSE REQUIRED; PERMIT; BOND.
   (A)   Pyrotechnic displays may only be performed by a person who possesses a
current pyrotechnic distributor license and a current lead pyrotechnic operator
license, issued by the office of the State Fire Marshal, which is in good
standing.
   (B)   Pyrotechnic displays may only be conducted and performed by a person
who first applies for and receives a permit issued by the Fire Chief for the
city in accordance with the Pyrotechnic Use Act of the state, 425 ILCS 35. The
permit application shall be submitted not less than 15 days prior to the
proposed date of the pyrotechnic display.
   (C)   No permit to conduct and perform a pyrotechnic display shall be issued
by the Fire Chief for the city unless it is first determined that the person or
entity applying for the permit possesses the licenses set forth in division (A)
above.
   (D)   No permit to conduct and perform a pyrotechnic display shall be issued
by the Fire Chief for the city until the Fire Chief and/or his or her designee
has inspected the proposed display site and determines that the display can be
performed in compliance with applicable NFPA standards adopted by the office of
the State Fire Marshal pursuant to 41 Ill. Adm. Code parts 230 and 235 then in
effect at the time the application for a permit is filed.
   (E)   No permit to conduct and perform a pyrotechnic display shall be issued
by the Fire Chief until the applicant provides proof of a current product
liability insurance policy in an amount of not less than $1,000,000, a current
general liability insurance policy in an amount of not less than $1,000,000 and
a current certificate of insurance naming the city as an additional named
insured under the respective products liability and general liability insurance
policies. The permittee shall also sign an agreement to indemnify, protect,
defend, pay attorney fees for and on behalf of and hold harmless, the city, its
officials, officers, employees and agents and each of them, of and from any and
all claims for personal injury, property damage and/or death which may be
caused by, or may result from, the pyrotechnic display, the negligence of any
permittee or any of its operators, employees or agents and/or the willful acts
of any permittee, any of its operators, employees or agents.
   (F)   No permit to conduct a pyrotechnic display shall be issued by the Fire
Chief unless the applicant submits proof of a current worker’s compensation
policy of insurance insuring all of the pyrotechnic operators, employees,
agents and assistants.
   (G)   The applicant for a permit to conduct a pyrotechnic display shall be
required to pay a permit fee set forth in city’s fee schedule. The application
for the permit shall be made on a form substantially similar to the form
provided by the Fire Chief.
(Prior Code, § 93.05) (Ord. 06-035, passed 6-27-2006; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.06 PROHIBITED DISPLAYS.
   Except as set forth herein, all other types of pyrotechnic displays,
consumer displays of fireworks and the use of fireworks is hereby prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 93.06) (Ord. 06-035, passed 6-27-2006; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.07 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The ordinance from which the provisions of this subchapter derive shall be
in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication
in pamphlet form as provided by law. A full, true and complete copy of this
subchapter shall be published in pamphlet form by authority of the City Council
as corporate authorities.
(Prior Code, § 93.07) (Ord. 06-035, passed 6-27-2006; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017)
FIRE PREVENTION AND
SAFETY PROVISIONS
§ 93.20 ADOPTION OF UNIFORM FIRE CODE.
   (A)   Adoption. The city shall hereby adopt the 2012 NFPA 1. Uniform Fire
Code® as if fully set forth herein.
   (B)   Supplemental regulations.
   SECTION 10.1 - MONITORING OF FIRE ALARM AND AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS.
   Newly installed automatic sprinkler systems, and fire detection systems
shall be supervised directly by the Blue Island Dispatch Center and transmit
signals via wireless radio transmitter. Existing Automatic sprinkler systems
and Fire detection systems shall be converted to transmit directly to the Blue
Island Dispatch Center via wireless radio transmitter by January 1, 2014.
   SECTION 10.2 - PLACEMENT OF COMBINATION STYLE SMOKE/CO ALARMS IN EXISTING
APARTMENT BUILDINGS.
   Existing apartment buildings shall be required to have combination style
smoke/co alarms in all corridors, and in all sleeping areas. Such devices shall
be hard wired directly to the buildings electrical system and shall have
battery back-up.
   SECTION 10.3 - NEW CONSTRUCTION OF NON-SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.
   The first responding fire department apparatus shall be able to reach all
interior points of a newly constructed non-single family residential structure
with a 150 foot initial attack hose or a distance approved by the code official
and/or Fire Chief. Where this requirement cannot be met, an interior standpipe
system equipped with fire department hose connections will be required. The
standpipe system shall be installed in accordance with the currently adopted
version of NFPA 14 (Standard for installation of standpipe and hose systems).
The standpipe system shall be connected to a public water system, and shall
have a fire department connection.
(Prior Code, § 93.50) (Ord. 04-483, passed 4-27-2004; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017)
§ 93.21 ESTABLISHMENT AND DUTIES OF BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION.
   (A)   The Fire Prevention Code and the Life Safety Code shall be enforced by
the designated Fire Prevention Officer in the City Fire Department, which shall
be under the supervision of the Chief of the Fire Department.
   (B)   The Chief of the Fire Department may detail members of the Fire
Department as inspectors. The Chief of the Fire Department shall recommend to
the Mayor the employment of technical inspectors, who, when such authorization
is made, shall be selected based on their fitness for the position.
   (C)   A report of the Fire Prevention Officer shall be made annually and
transmitted to the Fire Chief and the Public Health and Safety Committee. The
report shall contain all proceedings under this code, with such statistics as
the Chief of the Fire Department may wish to include. The Chief of the Fire
Department shall also recommend any amendments to the code which, in the
Chief’s judgment, shall be desirable.
(Prior Code, § 93.54) (Ord. 2257, passed 1-14-1978; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-
2017)
§ 93.22 APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES OF FIRE PREVENTION OFFICER.
   (A)   (1)   The Chief of the Fire Department may detail such members of the
Fire Department as inspectors, as shall from time to time be necessary. The
Chief of the Fire Department shall recommend to the Public Health and Safety
Committee of the City Council the employment of a Fire Prevention Officer who,
when such authorization is made, shall be selected through an examination to
determine his or her fitness for the position. The examination shall be
conducted in accordance with the existing rules of the Civil Service Commission
of the city as they pertain to and concern promotions, with the exception that
the first examination shall be open to all full-time members of the Fire
Department, regardless of their classification.
      (2)   All subsequent examination for this position shall be conducted in
accordance with the then existing rules of the Civil Service Commission of the
city as they pertain to and concern promotions, without the aforementioned
exception.
   (B)   The grading of the examination shall be done in accordance with the
rules of the Civil Service Commission of the city with appropriate credits
given for seniority, record of service and military service as set forth in the
rules of the Civil Service Commission.
   (C)   An appointment made to the position of Fire Prevention Officer shall
be made in accordance with the existing rules of the Civil Service Commission
of the city.
   (D)   The duties and responsibilities of the Fire Prevention Officer shall
be those which are set forth and described in the job description prepared by
the Chief of the Fire Department and which are set forth herein.
   (E)   The salary of the Fire Prevention Officer shall be that which is
authorized and approved by the City Council.
   (F)   (1)   The position of the Fire Prevention Officer is a staff position
which reports directly to the Fire Chief. The Fire Prevention Officer
supervises the enforcement of the Fire Prevention Code. The Fire Prevention
Officer also serves as code consultant to the staff and performs research and
other administrative functions as directed by the Fire Chief.
      (2)   In addition, the Fire Prevention Officer:
         (a)   Coordinates activities between the Fire Department and State
Fire Marshal’s Office, Division of Fire Prevention;
         (b)   Prepares Fire Code violations for
prosecution in the circuit court system or administrative adjudication;
         (c)   Analyzes applications and approves licenses where Fire
Department approval is required;
         (d)   Reviews plans for new construction and for remodeling of
existing buildings for compliance to Fire Prevention Code and for existing and
other fire safety provisions of the Building Code;
         (e)   Supervises, plans and directs public fire safety education
programs;
         (f)   Photographs fire scenes and all such events as directed by the
Fire Chief;
         (g)   Investigates fire scenes to determine cause and origin of fire;
         (h)   Shall, from time to time, assume all duties and responsibilities
of a firefighter; and
         (i)   Performs such other duties determined by the Fire Chief to be
appropriate and necessary to effectively perform and carry out the position and
functions of a Fire Prevention Officer.
(Prior Code, § 93.55) (Ord. 86-52, passed 11-25-1986; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017)
§ 93.23 DISTRICT LIMITS WHERE STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS
PROHIBITED.
   The limits of the districts referred to in the Fire Prevention Code, in
which the storage of explosives or blasting agents is to be prohibited, shall
be defined as the entire area within the city corporate limits, except as
allowed by special use permit.
(Prior Code, § 93.56) (Ord. 2257, passed 1-14-1978; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-
2017)
§ 93.24 DISTRICT LIMITS WHERE STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS IN OUTSIDE ABOVE-
GROUND TANKS PROHIBITED.
   The limits of districts referred to in the Fire Prevention Code, in which
installations of additional outside aboveground flammable liquid tanks are to
be prohibited, shall be defined as the entire area within the city corporate
limits.
(Prior Code, § 93.57) (Ord. 2257, passed 1-14-1978; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-
2017)
§ 93.25 DISTRICT LIMITS WHERE UNDERGROUND FLAMMABLE LIQUID TANKS PROHIBITED.
   The limits of districts in which additional installations of underground
flammable liquid tanks are to be prohibited shall include the areas which the
City Building and Planning Department has designated, or shall designate, with
the following zoning:
   (A)   All classes of residential zoning;
   (B)   LC Land Conservation; and
   (C)   C-1 commercial zoning, except as may be allowed within C-1 commercial
zoning by a special use permit.
(Prior Code, § 93.58) (Ord. 2287, passed 1-14-1978; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-
2017)
§ 93.26 DISTRICT LIMITS WHERE BULK STORAGE OF LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS
PROHIBITED.
   The limits referred to in the Fire Prevention Code, in which bulk storage of
liquified petroleum gas is prohibited, shall be defined as the entire area
within the city corporate limits.
(Prior Code, § 93.59) (Ord. 2257, passed 1-14-1975; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-
2017)
§ 93.27 TRANSPORTATION, STORAGE AND HANDLING OF EXPLOSIVES AND FLAMMABLE
LIQUIDS.
   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle containing explosives on any
street in the city except in compliance with the following rules.
   (A)   No such vehicle shall be operated unless it is marked, loaded and
equipped in full compliance with all applicable state and federal laws and
regulations.
   (B)   (1)   No vehicle carrying explosives shall be parked or permitted to
stand anywhere in the city longer than is necessary to make a lawful delivery.
      (2)   The standing of such vehicle made necessary by mechanical trouble,
traffic conditions, accident or in obedience to the direction of a police
officer or traffic signals shall not be considered a violation of this section.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle carrying explosives on any
street in the city that is so slippery from ice, snow or from any other causes
to be unsafe for driving.
   (D)   (1)   No work involving danger of sparks, fire, friction or concussion
which might cause an explosion shall be performed on any vehicle carrying
explosives.
      (2)   No such vehicle shall be brought to or kept in any garage in the
city.
      (3)   No such vehicle shall be permitted to remain anywhere in the city
under any circumstances for a period of more than five hours.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful to transport or store liquid nitroglycerine
anywhere in the city.
   (F)   The provisions of §§
93.20 through
93.33 of this chapter relating to explosives shall apply to all types of
explosives, blasting agents and fireworks. It shall not apply to the
transportation of nitroglycerine in tablet or capsule form for medical use, nor
to the lawful transportation or storage of properly packed ammunition in
quantities not exceeding 28 pounds in weight, nor to the transportation of
ammunition by the U.S. or state armed forces or by police officers or other
conservators of the peace in the performance of their duties.
(Prior Code, § 93.60) (Ord. 2257, passed 1-14-1978; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-
2017)
§ 93.28 FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS.
   (A)   Storage, transportation, sale and use of flammable liquids of all
types shall be governed by the Fire Prevention Code and by applicable state
laws.
   (B)   The Fire Chief has the authority to increase the requirements of the
state law where the safety of life or property is endangered by the proposed or
actual storage, sale, transportation or use of liquified petroleum gas.
(Prior Code, § 93.61) (Ord. 2257, passed 1-14-1975; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-
2017)
§ 93.29 LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS.
   (A)   The storage, sale, transportation and use of liquified petroleum gas
shall be governed by the Fire Prevention Code and by applicable state law.
   (B)   The Fire Chief has the authority to increase the requirements of state
law where the safety of life or property is endangered by the proposed or
actual storage, sale, transportation or use of liquified petroleum gas.
(Prior Code, § 93.62) (Ord. 2257, passed 1-14-1975; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-
2017)
§ 93.30 MODIFICATIONS TO FIRE PREVENTION CODE.
   (A)   The Chief of the Fire Department may make recommendations to the
Public Health and Safety Committee to modify any of the provisions of the Fire
Prevention Code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee or the owner
or lessee’s duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the
way of carrying out the strict letter of the code; provided that, the spirit of
the code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done.
   (B)   The particulars of modification, when granted or allowed, and the
decision of the Fire Chief shall be entered upon records of the Department and
a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant upon approval by the Public
Health and Safety Committee.
(Prior Code, § 93.63) (Ord. 2257, passed 1-14-1975; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-
2017)
§ 93.31 ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department, or the Chief’s
authorized representatives, to see that the provisions of §§
93.20 through
93.33 of this chapter, the Fire Prevention Code and the Life Safety Code, are
enforced. To that end, all members are vested with the power and authority of
police officers in the enforcement of §§
93.20 through
93.33 of this chapter. However, they shall not be subject to the statutory
requirements or privileges of the regular members of the Police Department or
be entitled to any additional compensation.
(Prior Code, § 93.64) (Ord. 2257, passed 1-14-1978; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-
2017)
§ 93.32 NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES OR OCCUPANCIES WHICH MAY REQUIRE PERMITS.
   The Public Health and Safety Committee, upon the recommendation of the Chief
of the Fire Department and the Fire Prevention Officer shall determine and
specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new
materials, processes or occupancies which shall require permits in addition to
those enumerated in the code. The Fire Prevention Officer shall post the list
on a conspicuous place in the Officer’s office and distribute copies to
interested persons upon request.
(Prior Code, § 93.65) (Ord. 2257, passed 1-14-1975; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-
2017)
§ 93.33 APPEALS FROM DECISION OF FIRE CHIEF.
   Whenever the Chief of the Fire Department shall disapprove an application or
refuse to grant a permit applied for or when it is claimed that the provisions
of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have
been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the
decision of the Chief of the Fire Department to the Public Health and Safety
Committee within ten days from the date of the decision appealed.
(Prior Code, § 93.66) (Ord. 2257, passed 1-14-1975; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-
2017)
§ 93.34 USE OF BURGLAR BARS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any residential structure,
or portion thereof, to install or permit the installation of any burglar bar or
bars, cage, grill, gate or other similar device on, over, in front of or behind
any window, door or other similar opening in any residential structure.
(Prior Code, § 93.68) (Ord. 97-152, passed 6-24-1997; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017)
§ 93.35 ELEVATOR INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Authority is granted hereby to the City Fire Department to annually
inspect and license all elevator, manlift, dumbwaiter and/or escalators within
corporate limits of the city in accordance with the applicable provisions of
the laws of the state, including, but not limited to, 225 ILCS 312/1 et seq.
   (B)   The City Fire Department may enter into contracts with private
inspectors to conduct the annual inspections for elevator, manlift, dumbwaiter
and/or escalators in accordance with the applicable provisions of the laws of
the state and the owner of any building inspected shall pay the fees charged by
the inspector for such inspections plus an annual license fee. No elevator
shall be placed into or kept in service without the foregoing required
inspections and license.
   (C)   The ordinance from which the provisions of this section derive shall
be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and
publication in pamphlet form as provided by law. A full, true and complete copy
of this section shall be published in pamphlet form, by authority of the City
Council as corporate authorities.
(Prior Code, § 93.69) (Ord. 08-007, passed 2-26-2008; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017)
§ 93.36 AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Scope and applicability. This section applies to automatic sprinkler
requirements within all new construction buildings, when a substantial
alteration of any existing buildings is made, and when specified changes in the
occupancy or use of an existing building occurs within the city.
   (B)   General requirements for automatic sprinkler systems; new
construction. Automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed and maintained in
new construction buildings per NFPA 13, 13R, or 13D, based on the following
occupancies:
      (1)   Group A (Assembly).
         (a)   Required for all Group A occupancies with an occupant load of
300 or more.
         (b)   Required in all Group A occupancies with a fire area over 5,000
square feet.
         (c)   Required in all Group A high-rise buildings (defined as 55 feet
or taller).
         (d)   Required in all enclosed Group A-5 accessory use areas in excess
of 1,000 square feet.
      (2)   Group B (Business).
         (a)   Required for all buildings with fire areas exceeding 5,000
square feet.
         (b)   Required for buildings occupancies with an occupant load of 300
or more.
         (c)   Required for high-rise buildings (defined as 55 feet or taller).
      (3)   Group E (Educational).
         (a)   Required in all Educational Group E fire areas that have an
occupant load of 300 or more.
         (b)   Required for Group E occupancies when the fire area exceeds 5000
square feet.
         (c)   Required in Group E occupancies that are located on a level
other than the exit discharge.
      (4)   Group F (Factory/Industrial) feet.
         (a)   Required in Group F-1 fire areas that are located more than
three stories above grade plane.
         (b)   Required in Group F-1 fire areas wherein the combined area on
all floors exceeds 24,000 square feet.
      (5)   Group H (High Hazard).
         (a)   Required for all Group H occupancies without exception.
      (6)   Group I (Institutional).
         (a)   Required for all Group I-1, I-2, I-3, and I-4 occupancies.
      (7)   Group M (Mercantile).
         (a)   Required when the fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet.
         (b)   Required when Group M fire area is located more than three
stories above grade plane.
         (c)   Required in Group M-1 fire areas when the square footage on all
floors exceeds 24,000 square feet.
         (d)   Required for high-rise buildings (defined as 55 feet or taller).
         (e)   Required throughout the Group M-1 fire area where the area used
for the display and sale of upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 5,000
square feet.
      (8)   Group R (Residential).
         (1)   R-1 (Hotels, Motels): Sprinklers required per NFPA 13.
         (2)   R-2 (Apartments, Dorms): Sprinklers required per NFPA 13R or 13.
         (3)   R-3 (One- and Two-family Dwellings): Sprinklers required per
NFPA 13D.
         (4)   R-4 (Assisted Living): Sprinklers required per NFPA 13R.
      (9)   Group S (Storage).
         (a)   Required when the fire area exceeds over 5,000 square feet.
         (b)   Required when the S-1 fire area is located more than three
stories above grade plane.
         (c)   Required when the combined area of all Group S-1 fire areas on
all floors exceeds 24,000 square feet.
         (d)   Required when the building is more than two stories in height
and used for the storage of commercial vehicles where the fire area exceeds
5,000 square feet.
      (10)   Group U (Utility/Miscellaneous).
         (a)   Not required unless attached to other sprinkled occupancies or
when the structure exceeds 5,000 square feet.
   (C)   General requirements; existing buildings. If there is a change of
occupancy for an existing building or an alteration to an existing building
that covers 50% or more of the aggregate area of the building, the requirements
for automatic sprinkler systems in the 2021 International Existing Building
Code will be analyzed by the Building Department and the Fire Department of the
city on an individual basis and a determination regarding the same will be
issued by the city.
(Ord. 2025-028, passed 5-27-2025)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code hereby
adopted in this chapter or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or
fail to comply with any order made thereunder by the Building Commissioner,
Fire Chief or Fire Prevention Officer or who shall build in violation of any
detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder
or any certificate or permit issued thereunder or who shall fail to comply with
an order issued thereunder as affirmed or modified by the City Council within
the time fixed in the order shall, upon a finding of such violation or failure
to comply made in accordance with the terms of Chapter 11 of this code of
ordinances or, upon conviction of a violation or failure to comply by a court
of competent jurisdiction, be fined an amount not less than $100 for each
separate violation.
   (B)   The imposition of one penalty for any violation or failure to comply
shall not excuse the violation or failure to comply and all such persons shall
be required to correct or remedy such violation or failure to comply within a
reasonable time, but in no event more than 30 days after the date of the
finding or conviction of the violation or failure to comply. Each ten days that
a violation or failure to comply is maintained or is in existence shall
constitute a separate offense and violation of §
93.20 of this chapter for which separate prosecutions may be maintained.
   (C)   The application of the above penalty provisions shall not be held or
considered to prevent enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
(Prior Code, § 93.99) (Ord. 91-268, passed 5-28-1991; Ord. 94-277, passed 5-10-
1994; Ord. 2000-298, passed 2-22-2000; Ord. 06-035, passed 6-27-2006; Ord. 08-
007, passed 2-26-2008; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
CHAPTER 94: HEALTH REGULATION
Section
Health Inspector
   
94.01   Enforcement of laws
   
94.02   Expenses; audit
   
94.03   Records to be kept
   
94.04   Advice concerning contagious disease
   
94.05   Inspection of city and report
Health Regulations
   
94.20   Power to cause premises to be disinfected
   
94.21   State laws concerning contagious disease
   
94.22   Burial of human bodies; permit required
   
94.23   When burial permit to be issued; Clerk’s duty
   
94.24   Building regulations
   
94.25   Plumbing regulations
   
94.26   Drainage of surface water
   
94.27   Fumigation of lodging and tenement houses
   
94.28   Unhealthy condition in building to be altered
   
94.29   Slaughterhouses to be kept clean
   
94.30   Meat not to be hung in public place
   
94.31   Vehicles for disposal of garbage
   
94.32   Diseased animals
   
94.33   Where cattle kept to be clean and safe
   
94.34   Dead poultry to be drawn
   
94.35   Regulation of manufacturing products for animal matter
   
94.36   Garbage and offensive matter to be removed with dispatch
   
94.37   Removal of dead animals
   
94.38   Expectorating on sidewalk or public place unlawful
 
   
94.39   Penalty
Smoking
   
94.50   Title and purpose; adoption of Smoke Free Illinois Act
   
94.51   Definitions
   
94.52   Smoking in pubic places
   
94.53   Regulation of smoking in places of employment
   
94.54   Posting of signs; removal of ashtrays
   
94.55   Violations
   
94.56   Other regulations
HEALTH INSPECTOR
§ 94.01 ENFORCEMENT OF LAWS.
   It shall be the duty of the Building Department and other Health Inspectors
to enforce all the laws of the state and ordinances of the city in relation to
the sanitary regulations of the city. For the purpose of carrying out the
foregoing requirements, they shall be permitted, at all times from the rising
to the setting of the sun, to enter into any house, store, stable or other
building and to cause the floors to be raised, if they shall deem it necessary,
in order to make a thorough examination of cellars, vaults, sinks or drains and
to cause all privies to be cleaned and to be kept in good condition and to
cause all dead animals or other nauseous or unwholesome things or substances to
be buried or removed beyond the limits of the city. The city hereby adopts the
2022 Food Code of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration by reference as if
fully set forth herein.
(Prior Code, § 94.005) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017; Ord. 2023-041, passed
10-24-2023)
§ 94.02 EXPENSES; AUDIT.
   All necessary expenses incurred under this chapter shall be audited by the
City Council and paid out of the appropriate fund or, when necessary, out of
the contingent fund of the city; provided that, when practicable, all persons
taken into hospital or quarantine and there receiving aid and care shall pay
such monies as shall be sufficient to meet the expenses, labor and care
incurred in their behalf, which monies, when received, shall be faithfully
kept, accounted for and paid over to the City Treasurer on demand by the
officer receiving the same.
(Prior Code, § 94.006) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 94.03 RECORDS TO BE KEPT.
   It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to provide the necessary books for
keeping a record of all transactions regarding the proper registration of
births and deaths and such other statistical information necessary for
reporting per applicable state statutes including making all necessary reports
to the Illinois Vital Records system or in any other manner required by state
law.
(Prior Code, § 94.007) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 94.04 ADVICE CONCERNING CONTAGIOUS DISEASE.
   Inspectors shall give to the Mayor and other city officials all such
professional advice and information as they may require, with a view to the
preservation of the public health and whenever the Health Inspector shall hear
of the existence of any contagious or epidemic disease, such as diphtheria,
measles, membranous croup, puerperal fever, scarlet fever, smallpox, typhoid
fever, whooping cough and the like, the Health Inspector shall investigate the
same and adopt measures to arrest its progress.
(Prior Code, § 94.008) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 94.05 INSPECTION OF CITY AND REPORT.
   (A)   The Building Department shall cause a thorough sanitary inspection of
the entire area within its jurisdiction to be made at least once each year and
oftener if necessary.
   (B)   The inspection shall include all matters affecting the public health
and a report of the sanitary conditions disclosed by the inspection shall be
made to the City Council and other agencies as appropriate or otherwise
required by law.
(Prior Code, § 94.011) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
HEALTH REGULATIONS
§ 94.20 POWER TO CAUSE PREMISES TO BE DISINFECTED.
   The Building Department shall have power to cause any house or any premises
to be cleaned, disinfected or closed to visitors and to prevent persons from
resorting thereto while any person is laboring under any pestilential or
contagious disease. The Department may, by order in writing, direct any
nuisance to be abated or unwholesome matter or substance, dirt or filth to be
removed from any house or premises and may prescribe the time and mode of doing
so and take any other measures it may deem necessary and proper to prevent the
spread of any contagious, pestilential or epidemic disease.
(Prior Code, § 94.028) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 94.21 STATE LAWS CONCERNING CONTAGIOUS DISEASE.
   The rules and regulations of the State Board of Health concerning cholera,
smallpox, yellow fever, diphtheria, scarlet fever, typhoid fever or other
infectious or contagious disease shall be enforced by the Building Department
and, for the enforcement of such rules and regulations, all public officers of
the city in their proper capacities, are hereby commanded and enjoined to
assist the Department.
(Prior Code, § 94.029) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 94.22 BURIAL OF HUMAN BODIES; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall inter, cremate, deposit in a vault or otherwise dispose of
any human body of any person having died within the corporate limits of the
city, or which may have been found within the corporate limits of the same,
until such person has received a permit so to do, as hereinafter provided,
which permit shall bear date when issued, shall state the name of the deceased,
the date and cause of death, the manner in which the body will be disposed of
and the place of such disposal, the name of the person to whom the permit is
issued and the name of the attending physician, midwife or coroner and shall be
signed by the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 94.035) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 94.23 WHEN BURIAL PERMIT TO BE ISSUED; CLERK’S DUTY.
   (A)   A permit shall be issued by the City Clerk upon the Clerk’s receipt of
the proper certificate of death, made in the manner directed and on the blank
form prescribed by the State Board of Health, by a legally qualified physician
or midwife or by the Coroner of the county.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall enter, in a suitable book to be kept for that
purpose, a record of all burial permits issued, together with all the items of
information contained in the certificates upon which the issue of such permits
are based, and the Clerk shall furnish to the Secretary of the State Board of
Health, at the end of each month, all of such certificates of death received by
the Clerk during the preceding 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 94.036) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 94.24 BUILDING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall erect, or cause to be erected or converted to a new
purpose by alteration, any building or structure which, or any part of which,
shall be inadequate or defective in respect to ventilation, light, sewerage or
any of the provisions or precautions, usually proper, necessary for the
preservation of health nor shall the builder, lessee, tenant or occupant of any
such building or structure (having the right or ability to remedy or prevent
the same) cause or allow any matter or thing to be done in or about any such
building or structure, dangerous or prejudicial to health.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any building, or any part thereof, to be
occupied by any person or for any owner or lessee to allow the same to be
occupied by any person, or allow the same to be occupied as a place in which
any one may dwell or lodge, except when such building, or such parts thereof,
are sufficiently lighted, ventilated, provided and accommodated and in all
respects in that condition of wholesomeness and cleanliness for which this
chapter or any law of the state provided or in which they, or either of them,
require any such premises be kept.
   (C)   No owner, lessee or keeper of any tenement house, lodging house,
boarding house or manufactory shall cause or allow the same to be overcrowded
or cause or allow so great a number of persons to dwell, be or sleep in any
such house, or any portion thereof, as thereby to cause any danger or detriment
to health.
   (D)   No person having the right and power to prevent the same shall
knowingly cause or permit any person to sleep or remain in any cellar or any
place dangerous or prejudicial to health by reason of a want of ventilation or
drainage, or by reason of the presence of any poisonous, noxious or offensive
substance or otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 94.046) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 94.25 PLUMBING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Every building shall be provided with good and sufficient water
closets or privies and shall have proper doors, traps, soil pans and suitable
works and arrangements, so far as may be necessary to ensure the efficient
operation thereof. All cesspools and privy vaults shall be water-tight.
   (B)   No privy vault or cesspool for sewerage shall be permitted in any part
of the city where a public sewer is provided in front of the property lines and
no connection from any cesspool or privy vault shall be made with any sewer or
drain pipe, nor shall any opening be made in the sewer pipe of a building for
the purpose of affording surface drainage for the cellar without provision
against the access of sewer air into the building.
   (C)   Every house situated upon a lot or street in which there is a sewer
shall have the sinks, stationary and bathtubs, water closets or privies
furnished with a proper connection with the sewer, which connection shall be in
all parts adequate for the purpose, so as to permit whatever enters therein to
pass entirely and freely therefrom.
   (D)   All water closets and vaults shall be provided with the proper traps
and connected with the house sewer by a proper tight pipe and shall be
furnished with sufficient water and other proper means for flushing the same
and every owner, lessee and occupant shall take adequate measures to prevent
improper substances from entering such water closets or privies or their
connections and to secure the prompt removal of any improper substances that
may enter them so that no accumulation shall take place and so as to prevent
any exhalation therefrom, offensive, dangerous or prejudicial to health and so
as to prevent the same from becoming obstructed.
   (E)   No privy vault, cesspool or reservoir into which a privy, water
closet, stable or sink is drained shall be established or permitted within 80
feet of any well, spring or other source of water for drinking or culinary
purposes without written permission of the Building Department, and every privy
vault and cesspool shall be cleared and the contents thereof removed, at least
once before March 1 in each year.
(Prior Code, § 94.047) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 94.26 DRAINAGE OF SURFACE WATER.
   Where no sewer exists in the street, the yard or area shall be so graded
that all water from roofs or otherwise and all filth shall flow freely from it,
and all parts of it, into the street gutter by a passage beneath the sidewalk
so as to permit access to remove obstructions or impurities.
(Prior Code, § 94.048) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 94.27 FUMIGATION OF LODGING AND TENEMENT HOUSES.
   The owner or keeper of any lodging house and the owner, agent of the owner
and the lessee of any tenement house, or part thereof, shall, whenever any
person in such house is sick of fever or any infectious, pestilential or
contagious disease, and such sickness is known to the owner, keeper, agent or
lessee, give immediate notice thereof to the Building Department, and thereupon
such officer shall cause the same to be inspected and, when found necessary, to
be immediately cleansed or disinfected at the expense of the owner or occupant
in such manner as may be deemed necessary and effectual, and the Building
Department may also cause the blankets, bedding and bed clothes used by any
such sick person to be thoroughly cleansed, scoured and fumigated or, in
extreme cases, to be destroyed.
(Prior Code, § 94.049) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 94.28 UNHEALTHY CONDITION IN BUILDING TO BE ALTERED.
   Whenever it shall come to the knowledge of the Building Department that the
condition of any building or premises is injurious to the health or dangerous
to the lives of the occupants, or of the public, it shall be the duty of the
Building Department to make a thorough examination of the building or premises
and to direct and instruct as to the remedy of such condition and, if this be
not remedied within a reasonable time, the Building Department shall thereupon
cause the premises or building to be put in good sanitary order, at the cost of
the individual responsible for or causing such unhealthful condition.
(Prior Code, § 94.050) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 94.29 SLAUGHTERHOUSES TO BE KEPT CLEAN.
   The keeping and slaughtering of all cattle and the preparation and keeping
of all meat and fish, birds and fowls, shall be in that manner which is, or is
generally reputed or known to be best adapted to secure and continue their
safety and unwholesomeness as food.
(Prior Code, § 94.053) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 94.30 MEAT NOT TO BE HUNG IN PUBLIC PLACE.
   No person shall slaughter, dress or hang any cattle, or the meat or any part
thereof, within the city, wholly or partly within any street, avenue, sidewalk,
or public alley or place or allow any blood or dirty water or other substance
from such cattle, meat or place killing, or the appurtenances thereof, to run,
fall or be in any such street, avenue, sidewalk, alley or place.
(Prior Code, § 94.054) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 94.31 VEHICLES FOR DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE.
   No person shall allow any cart or other vehicle for carrying any offal,
swill, garbage or rubbish or the contents of any privy, vault, cesspool or
sink, or having upon it or in it any manure or other nauseous or offensive
substances, to stand or remain, nor shall a needless number of vehicles gather
before or near any building, place of business or other premises where any
person may be in the city, or allow such cart or vehicle to occupy an
unreasonable length of time loading or unloading or in passing along any street
or through any inhabited place or ground, nor shall any such cart or vehicle,
or the driver thereof, or anything thereto appertaining, be (or by any person
having a right to control the same be allowed to be) in a condition needlessly
filthy or offensive and, when not in use, all such carts and vehicles and all
implements used in connection therewith shall be stored and kept in some place
where no needless offense shall be given to any of the people of the city.
(Prior Code, § 94.055) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 94.32 DISEASED ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall bring into the city any diseased or sickly horse,
cattle, swine, sheep, dog or cat or other animal or any animals that have been
exposed to any disease that is contagious among such animals.
   (B)   No person shall keep, retain, employ or allow to be kept or retained
at any place within the city, any horse, ass or colt having the disease known
as glanders or farcy.
(Prior Code, § 94.056) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 94.33 WHERE CATTLE KEPT TO BE CLEAN AND SAFE.
   No person shall keep any cattle in any place in the city.
(Prior Code, § 94.057) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 94.34 DEAD POULTRY TO BE DRAWN.
   No person shall expose for sale at any market, or other place in the city,
any dead poultry.
(Prior Code, § 94.058) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 94.35 REGULATION OF MANUFACTURING PRODUCTS FOR ANIMAL MATTER.
   No person shall boil any offal, swill or bones or any fat, tallow or lard
(except upon the same being taken at once from the animal, while the same is
fresh and otherwise inoffensive) or permit or conduct the business of bone
crushing, bone boiling, bond grinding, bone burning, shell burning, gut
cleaning, or the skinning of or making of glue from any dead animal or part
thereof, or the storage or keeping of scrap fat or grease or offensive animal
matter, at any place within the limits of the city or within one mile thereof,
without a special permit from the City Council or conduct the business of
boiling or rendering the fresh lard, fat or tallow, as aforesaid, within the
city without a like special permit from the City Council, specifying the nature
and precise location of the proposed business.
(Prior Code, § 94.059) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 94.36 GARBAGE AND OFFENSIVE MATTER TO BE REMOVED WITH DISPATCH.
   It shall be the duty of every contractor, scavenger, person, agent and
employee who has contracted or undertaken to remove any diseased or dead
animal, offal, rubbish, garbage, dirt, street sweepings, night soil or other
filthy, offensive or noxious substance or are engaged in any such removal or in
the loading or unloading of any such substance, to do the same with dispatch
and in every particular in a manner as clean and least offensive and with as
little danger and prejudice to life and health as possible.
(Prior Code, § 94.060) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 94.37 REMOVAL OF DEAD ANIMALS.
   Any person having a dead animal on his or her premises in the city shall at
once remove, or cause the removal, of such animal to some place without the
limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 94.061) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 94.38 EXPECTORATING ON SIDEWALK OR PUBLIC PLACE UNLAWFUL.
   No person shall spit upon any public sidewalk or upon the floor of any
public conveyance or upon the floor of any theater, hall, assembly room or
public building within the city.
(Prior Code, § 94.062) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 94.39 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
subchapter, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $750, or
not exceeding the maximum fine allowable by state law at the time of the
violation. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 2023-041, passed 10-24-2023)
SMOKING
§ 94.50 TITLE AND PURPOSE; ADOPTION OF SMOKE FREE ILLINOIS ACT.
   (A)   The ordinance from which the provisions of this subchapter derive
shall be known and may be cited as the “Clean Indoor Air Ordinance”, and shall
be liberally construed and applied to promote its purpose and policies.
   (B)   It is the purpose of this subchapter, and the policy of the city, to
provide smoke-free area in enclosed places and to regulate smoking in places of
employment.
   (C)   The city hereby adopts the Smoke Free Illinois Act as set forth in 410
ILCS 82 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 94.075) (Ord. 88-152, passed 12-13-1988; Ord. 2017-005, passed
2-27-2017)
§ 94.51 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BAR. An establishment or enclosed area which is devoted to the serving of
alcoholic beverages for the consumption on the premises and in which the
serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages.
Although a restaurant may contain a BAR, the term BAR shall not include the
restaurant dining area.
   DINING AREA. Any enclosed area containing a counter or tables upon which
meals are served.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for
direct or indirect monetary wages or profit and any person who volunteers his
or her services for a not-for-profit entity.
   EMPLOYER. Any person, partnership, corporation, including a municipal
corporation, or non-profit entity who employs the services of one or more
persons.
   ENCLOSED AREA. All space between a floor and ceiling which is surrounded on
all sides by walls or windows with appropriate openings for ingress and egress
and is not intended to mean areas commonly described as public lobbies and
common corridors.
   HOSPITAL AND HEALTH CARE FACILITIES. Buildings whose primary purpose is the
reception, care and medical treatment of persons who are sick, injured, wounded
or otherwise in need of medical care and treatment These facilities include,
but shall not be limited to, hospitals, medical and dental clinics and offices,
nursing homes and nursing health, care facilities.
   MAIN ENTRANCE. Any public entryway into, or out of an enclosed indoor area
of a hospital or health care facility used by the general public, and/or to
which is invited or permitted to use as and entrance, into or out of the
hospital or health care facility.
   PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT. Any enclosed area under the control of a public or
private employer which employees normally frequent during the course of
employment including, but not limited to, work areas, employees lounges,
cafeterias, restrooms and conference rooms. A private residence is not a PLACE
OF EMPLOYMENT unless it is used as a child care or health care facility.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any enclosed area to which the public is invited. For the
purpose of this section, a hospital is a PUBLIC PLACE.
   PUBLIC SIDEWALK. Any walkway leading to or away from a main entrance to a
hospital or health care facility and which is used by the general public and/or
to which the general public is invited or permitted to use as a means of
ingress or egress to the main entrance.
   RESTAURANT. Any coffee shop, cafeteria, luncheonette, sandwich shop, private
or public school cafeteria or eating establishment and any other eating
establishment, organization or club which gives, or offers for sale, food to
the public, guests, patrons or employees.
   SERVICE LINE. Any indoor line at which one or more persons are waiting for
or receiving services of any kind, whether or not such service involves the
exchange of money.
   SMOKING. Inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar, pipe or
cigarette, hookah, weed, herbs, or any other lighted smoking equipment. SMOKE
or SMOKING does not include smoking that is associated with a native recognized
religious ceremony, ritual or activity by American Indians that is in
accordance with the federal American Indian Religious Freedom Act, being 42
U.S.C. 1996 and 1996a.
(Prior Code, § 94.076) (Ord. 88-152, passed 12-13-1988; Ord. 2017-005, passed
2-27-2017)
§ 94.52 SMOKING IN PUBIC PLACES.
   No person shall smoke in a public place or in any place of employment or
within 15 feet of any entrance to a public place or place of employment. No
person may smoke in any vehicle owned, leased or operated by the state or a
political subdivision of the state. An owner shall reasonably assure that
smoking is prohibited in indoor public places and workplaces unless
specifically exempted by local ordinance or state law.
(Prior Code, § 94.077) (Ord. 07-053, passed 1-9-2007; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017)
§ 94.53 REGULATION OF SMOKING IN PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT.
   (A)   Employers shall provide smoke-free areas for non-smoking employees
within existing facilities to the maximum extent practicable but employers,
owners, operators, managers or other persons who control the premises are not
required to make physical modifications in providing these areas.
   (B)   (1)   Each employee shall be able to designate his or her own work
area as a non-smoking area, if such work area is not also a public place, and
to post the same with an appropriate sign to be provided by the employer.
      (2)   If, due to the proximity of smokers, size of the work area, poor
ventilation or other factors, such designation does not reduce the effects of
smoke to the satisfaction of the employee, the employer shall make additional
accommodation by assigning the employees to different, but comparable work
areas, expanding the size of the work area subject to the prohibition against
smoking or implementing other measures reasonably calculated to minimize or
eliminate the effects of smoke on the employee.
   (C)   Every employer shall adopt a smoking policy which shall be
communicated to all employees. All employers shall supply a written copy of the
smoking policy upon request to any existing or prospective employee. In any
dispute arising under the smoking policy, the health concerns of the non-smoker
shall be given priority.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, every employer
shall have the right to designate any place of employment, or any portion
thereof, as a non-smoking area.
   (E)   No employer shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner retaliate
against any employee or applicant for employment because such employee or
applicant exercises any rights afforded by this section.
(Prior Code, § 94.078) (Ord. 88-152, passed 12-13-1988; Ord. 2017-005, passed
2-27-2017)
§ 94.54 POSTING OF SIGNS; REMOVAL OF ASHTRAYS.
   (A)   “No Smoking” signs or the international “No Smoking” symbol,
consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a
red circle with a red bar across it shall be clearly and conspicuously posted
in each public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by the
owner, operator, manager or other person in control of that place.
   (B)   Each public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited
shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating that
smoking, is prohibited.
   (C)   All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where smoking is
prohibited by the owner, operator, manager or other person having control of
the area
(Prior Code, § 94.079) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 94.55 VIOLATIONS.
   (A) It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, operates or otherwise
controls any premises or facility subject to regulation under this subchapter,
to fail to comply with any of the requirements of §§
94.52 through
94.54 of this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any area designated
pursuant to §§
94.52 through
94.54 of this chapter as a non-smoking area.
(Prior Code, § 94.080) (Ord. 88-152, passed 12-13-1988; Ord. 2017-005, passed
2-27-2017)
§ 94.56 OTHER REGULATIONS.
   (A)   This section shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking
where it is otherwise restricted, or prohibited by any other applicable
ordinance or statute.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any employer,
owner, occupant, lessee, operator, manager or other person in control of any
public place or place of employment may designate a non-enclosed area of a
public place or place of employment including outdoor areas, as an area where
smoking is also prohibited provided that such employer, owner, lessee or
occupant shall conspicuously post signs prohibiting smoking.
(Prior Code, § 94.081) (Ord. 88-152, passed 12-13-1988; Ord. 2017-005, passed
2-27-2017)
CHAPTER 95: NUISANCES
Section
Nuisances Generally
   
95.001   Definitions
   
95.002   Nuisances prohibited; declarations
   
95.003   Abatement notices
   
95.004   Enforcement
   
95.005   Costs and liens
   
95.006   Release and enforcement of lien
Noise
   
95.020   Certain noises prohibited
   
95.021   Mufflers on motor vehicles required; cutouts prohibited
   
95.022   Whistling of locomotive engines
   
95.023   Sirens or gongs on vehicles restricted
Weeds
   
95.035   Definitions
   
95.036   Weeds and tall grass declared a nuisance
   
95.037   Improperly maintained landscaping declared a nuisance
   
95.038   Height of weeds
   
95.039   City to cut upon refusal of owner
   
95.040   Lien
   
95.041   Release and enforcement of lien
Other Nuisances
   
95.055   Common barberry
   
95.056   Barbed wire fences prohibited; removal
   
95.057   Ponds on private property a nuisance
   
95.058   Depositing foul or noxious substances
   
95.059   Excessive light
Chronic Nuisance Properties
   
95.070   Title
   
95.071   Purpose
   
95.072   Definitions
   
95.073   Applicability
   
95.074   Nuisance conditions
   
95.075   Chronic nuisance property
   
95.076   Outcome of chronic nuisance determination; nuisance property
registration
   
95.077   Inspection; reinspection
   
95.078   Annual performance evaluation
   
95.079   Fees established
   
95.080   Alternative chronic nuisance property procedure
   
95.081   Chronic nuisance property procedure for addressing nuisance property
   
95.082   Chronic nuisance property abatement; administrative adjudication
hearing
   
95.083   Chronic nuisance property alternative enforcement
Public Camping
   
95.090   Public camping as a nuisance
   
95.091   Regulation of public camping necessary to promote public health
   
95.092   Public camping not intended use of public property
   
95.093   Definitions
   
95.094   Public camping prohibited
   
95.095   Exceptions to prohibition
   
95.096   Removal of campsite
   
95.097   Disposition and release of personal property
   
95.098   Penalty; mitigation
NUISANCES GENERALLY
§ 95.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY. Property upon which three or more events of
nuisance activities have occurred within a one-month period.
   CONTROL. The ability or authority to regulate, restrain, dominate,
counteract or govern conduct that occurs on that property.
   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle which for a period of seven days
cannot be driven upon public streets for any reason including, but not limited
to, being unlicensed, in a state of disrepair or dismantled or from which the
engine, wheels or other parts have been removed, altered, damaged or otherwise
so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor
power, excluding the following: a motor vehicle which has been rendered
temporarily incapable of being driven under its own motor power in order to
perform ordinary service or repair operations; a motor vehicle that is kept
within a building when not in use; operable historic vehicles over 25 years of
age; and a motor vehicle on the premises of a place of authorized business
engaged in the repair, wrecking or junking of motor vehicles.
   NOXIOUS WEEDS. Canada thistles, and all of its varieties, perennial sow
thistles, European bindweed, leafy spurge, Russian knapweed, Johnson grass,
giant foxtail, hoary cress and ragweed.
   NUISANCE or NUISANCE ACTIVITY. The doing of an unlawful act, or omitting to
perform a duty, or suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or
exist as defined or prohibited herein, which act, omission, condition or thing
either: injures or threatens the health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience,
or welfare of members of the community; offends decency; is offensive to the
senses; unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or renders
dangerous for passage any public or private street, highway, sidewalk, stream,
ditch or drainage; in any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use
of property; interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property; or
tends to depreciate the value of the property of others.
   NUISANCE PROPERTY. Any building or other structure which is in such a
dilapidated condition that it is unfit for human habitation, or kept in such an
unsanitary condition that it is a menace to the health of people residing in
the vicinity thereof, or presents a more than ordinary fire hazard in the
vicinity where it is located.
   OWNER. Any person, partnership, land trust or corporation having any legal
or equitable interest in or control of property. OWNER includes, but is not
limited to:
      (1)   A mortgagee in possession in who is vested with all or part of the
legal title to the property or, all or part of the beneficial ownership and the
rights to the present use and enjoyment of the premises;
      (2)   An occupant who can control what occurs on the property;
      (3)   Any person acting as an agent of an owner; and
      (4)   Taxpayer of record as shown on the county tax rolls.
   PERMIT. To suffer, allow, consent to and acquiesce by failure to prevent, or
expressly assent or agree to the doing of an act.
   PERSON. Any natural person, association, partnership, corporation, trusts or
other entity capable of owning, occupying or using property in the city.
   PERSON IN CHARGE. Any person in actual or constructive possession of a
property, including but not limited to, an owner, occupant of property under
his or her ownership or control.
   PROPERTY. Any real property, including land and that which is affixed,
incidental or pertinent to land, including but not limited to, any premises,
room, house, building or structure, or any separate part or portion thereof,
whether permitted or not.
   PUBLIC WAY. All streets, alleys, sidewalks, boulevards, public parking lots
and other public rights-of-way.
(Ord. 1988, passed 9 27 1965; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 95.002 NUISANCES PROHIBITED; DECLARATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, maintain or allow the
creation, existence or maintenance of a nuisance, a nuisance activity or
nuisance property as set forth in this chapter or any other chapter of the
city’s code of ordinances.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.003 ABATEMENT NOTICES.
   (A)   Notice to abate. Whenever a nuisance is found to exist within the city
or within the city’s extraterritorial jurisdiction, a duly designated officer
or employee of the city shall give written notice to the owner or occupant of
the property upon which such nuisance exists or upon the person causing or
maintaining the nuisance.
   (B)   Recurring nuisance. Only one notice shall be required to be provided
during any calendar year for a particular category of nuisance violation, and
additional notice beyond the initial notice shall not be required if the same
type of nuisance recurs on the property during that calendar year (a “recurring
nuisance violation”). Recurring nuisance violations shall be subject to
immediate abatement and/or fines without additional notice to the violator, the
owner of the property or the occupant thereof.
   (C)   Contents of notice. Notice to abate shall contain:
      (1)   The location of the nuisance, if the same is stationary;
      (2)   A description of what constitutes the nuisance or reference to the
applicable code provisions; and
      (3)   A statement that the nuisance shall be corrected within 72 hours.
   (D)   Service of notice. The notice to abate a nuisance shall be served by
either certified mail with return receipt or first class mail, postage prepaid,
addressed to the owner or occupant of premises or person responsible for
nuisance as indicated in city records, property tax records or records of the
county recorder of deeds. Notice shall also be posted at the location of the
nuisance. Notwithstanding the above, notice may be provided by any manner in
which legal process may be served pursuant to law.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 95.004 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Failure to comply. Any failure to comply with a notice or failure to
abate a nuisance shall result in the issuance of a citation which may include
fines and penalties.
   (B)   Abatement by the city.
      (1)   In addition to any other methods provided by law, whenever any
nuisance exists or is found on any premises within the city after proper notice
to abate, city officials are authorized to cause the same to be summarily
abated in such manner as he or she directs and at the expense of the party
permitting or maintaining the nuisance.
      (2)   Any building, structure or appurtenances thereto, which is not
constructed or kept in a sanitary condition, or in conformity with the
requirements of this code or any other ordinances of the city, is deemed a
nuisance and that nuisance may be abated in the manner herein, elsewhere or by
law provided.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.005 COSTS AND LIENS.
   (A)   Upon the failure of the person upon whom notice to abate a nuisance
was served pursuant to the provisions of this section to abate the same, a duly
designated officer or employee of the city shall proceed to abate such nuisance
pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-60-2 and 65 ILCS 5-11-20 et seq. He or she shall
prepare a statement of costs incurred in the abatement thereof.
   (B)   Any and all costs incurred by the city in the abatement of a nuisance
under the provisions of this subchapter shall constitute a lien against the
property upon which such nuisance existed, which lien shall be filed, proven
and collected pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-20-15 or as provided for by law. Notice
of such lien shall be to all persons from the time of its recording, and shall
bear interest at the legal rate thereafter until satisfied.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 95.006 RELEASE AND ENFORCEMENT OF LIEN.
   (A)   Upon payment of the cost and expense by the owner of, or other persons
interested in such real estate after notice of such lien has been filed, the
lien shall be released by the city to the person paying such costs and expense,
or otherwise filed of record as in the case of filing notice of lien.
   (B)   The lien hereinabove provided for shall be enforced in the manner now
provided by law for the enforcement of mechanics liens.
(Prior Code, § 95.06) (Ord. 1988, passed 1-28-1946; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-
2017)
NOISE
§ 95.020 CERTAIN NOISES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Excessive noise endangers physical and emotional health and well-
being, interferes with legitimate business and recreational activities,
depresses property values, offends the senses and in other respects reduces the
quality of the community and environment; as such the following noise nuisances
are declared and prohibited.
      (1)   No person shall sound any horn or audible signal device of any
motor vehicle of any kind while not in motion, nor shall such horn or signal be
sounded under any circumstances except as required by law, nor shall it be
sounded for any unnecessary or unreasonable period of time.
      (2)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle subject to registration
that will, at any time or under any condition of grade, load, acceleration or
deceleration, operate in such a manner as to offend senses of those in the
immediate area of such operation.
      (3)   No person shall operate or permit to be operated any device used to
receive broadcast sound, or reproduce any recorded sound if the device is
located:
         (a)   On the public way; or
         (b)   In any motor vehicle on the public way; and the sound can be
heard from 75 feet or more from the device. This section does not apply to
authorized emergency vehicles. This section does not apply when the device is
being operated solely to request assistance or warn of a hazardous condition.
      (4)   No person shall use any hammer or power-operated tool for repair or
construction purposes between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. within 600
feet of any building used for residential or hospital purposes if such noise is
audible from any adjacent property used for residential or hospital purposes.
Repairs to public service utilities shall be exempted from this section.
      (5)   No person shall operate any power-driven lawn or garden maintenance
equipment between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. within 600 feet of any
building used for residential or hospital purposes if such noise is audible
from any adjacent property used for residential or hospital purposes.
      (6)   No person shall operate the following equipment between the hours
of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. outdoors within 600 feet of any building used for
residential or hospital purposes or indoors if such equipment is audible from
any adjacent property used for residential or hospital purposes:
         (a)   Power-operated models including automobiles, boats and aircraft;
         (b)   Sound trucks and public address systems;
         (c)   Factory time whistles; and
         (d)   Church bells and carillons.
      (7)   No person shall conduct garbage, yard waste or recycling collection
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. anywhere within the limits of the
city.
      (8)   No person within a residential property, or building used for such
purposes, shall play music, musical instruments, radios, television sets or
phonographs outside at any time using an intercom system between the hours of
9:00 p.m. on weekdays (11:00 p.m. on Friday and Saturday nights) and 7:00 a.m.
on any given day, on any property abutting or across the street from property
zoned and used for residential purposes, if such music is audible more than ten
feet from the property from which the noise is emitting.
      (9)   It shall be unlawful to engage in yelling, shouting or hooting
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. within 600 feet of any building
used for residential or hospital purposes or indoors if such noise is audible
from any adjacent property used for residential or hospital purposes.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to cause or create any unnecessary or unusual
noise at any time which annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose,
health or safety of others unless such noise is necessary for the protection or
preservation of property or of the health, safety or life of some person. No
person shall make or cause, permit or allow to be made upon a public way, or in
such proximity to a public way, as to be distinctly and loudly audible upon
such public way, such noises.
   (C)   No person owning or in possession or control of any building or
premises shall use the same, permit the use of the same, or rent the same to be
used for any business or employment or residential use, or for any purpose of
pleasure or recreation, if such use shall, by its boisterous nature, disturb or
destroy the peace of the neighborhood in which such........[missing material]
(Prior Code, § 95.20) (Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.021 MUFFLERS ON MOTOR VEHICLES REQUIRED; CUTOUTS PROHIBITED.
   No motor vehicle shall be operated upon any public way in the city unless
the same is provided with a muffler in efficient and actual working condition,
the use of a cutout is forbidden and no person shall operate any motor vehicle
in such a manner so as to cause the same to make unusually loud or unnecessary
noise.
(Prior Code, § 95.21) (Ord. 1949, passed 1-28-1948) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.022 WHISTLING OF LOCOMOTIVE ENGINES.
   No railroad company shall cause or allow the whistle of any locomotive
engine to be sounded within the city, except necessary brake signals and such
as may be absolutely necessary to prevent injury to life and property.
(Prior Code, § 95.22) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.023 SIRENS OR GONGS ON VEHICLES RESTRICTED.
   No person shall use, or cause to be used, or permit any of such person’s
agents or employees to use or operate any motor vehicle, wagon or other vehicle
upon the streets or other public places of the city when the motor vehicle,
wagon or other vehicle is equipped with the kind of siren or gong with which
the vehicles belonging to the Police Department or Fire Department of the city
are equipped.
(Prior Code, § 95.23) Penalty, see §
10.99
WEEDS
§ 95.035 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly implies or requires a different meaning.
   NOXIOUS WEEDS. Canada thistles and all of its varieties, perennial sow
thistles, European bindweed, leafy spurge, Russian knapweed, Johnson grass,
giant foxtail, hoary cress ragweed and other weeds of whatever kind.
   TALL GRASS. Grass of any kind that exceeds eight inches in height, except
for grass on public property which is intended to exceed eight inches in
height, such as is or may be found in prairies, wetlands, detention ponds or
other similar areas.
(Ord. 2022-032, passed 4-26-2022)
§ 95.036 WEEDS AND TALL GRASS DECLARED A NUISANCE.
   (A)   No owner of real estate within the city shall knowingly permit the
growth of noxious weeds or tall grass on his or her property.
   (B)   Weeds and tall grass that exist on property within the city are hereby
declared to be a nuisance. Where such a nuisance is found to exist on private
property or on the public parkway abutting private property, the city may issue
a violation notice to the property owner for adjudication through the Circuit
Court or the city’s administrative adjudication system.
   (C)   The violation notice and any penalties that are imposed shall be
independent of, and in addition to, any proceedings to abate the nuisance and
lien on the property for costs as stated in §§
95.039 and
95.040 of this code. Penalties for violations of this section are graduated and
are set forth in §
10.99 of this code.
(Ord. 2022-032, passed 4-26-2022) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.037 IMPROPERLY MAINTAINED LANDSCAPING DECLARED A NUISANCE.
   (A)   All landscaping including, but not limited to, trees, shrubs, plants,
flowers and the like that exists on any property must be properly maintained in
order for the landscaped areas to fulfill the purposes for which they were
established. The owner of the property and any tenant on the property where
landscaping exists shall be jointly and severally responsible for the
maintenance of all landscape materials on the property. Such maintenance shall
include all actions necessary to keep the landscaped areas free of litter,
weeds and debris and to keep plantings healthy and orderly and aesthetically
pleasing in appearance. Improperly maintained landscaping on property within
the city is hereby declared a nuisance.
   (B)   Where such a nuisance is found to exist on private property or on the
public parkway abutting private property, the city may issue a violation notice
to the property owner for adjudication through the Circuit Court or the city’s
administrative adjudication system.
   (C)   The violation notice and any penalties imposed shall be independent
of, and in addition to, any proceedings to abate the nuisance and lien on the
property for costs pursuant to §§
95.039 through
95.041 of this code. Penalties for violations of this section are graduated and
are set forth in §
10.99 of this code.
(Ord. 2022-032, passed 4-26-2022) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.038 HEIGHT OF WEEDS.
   No owner of real estate within the city shall permit any weeds, grass or
plants, other than trees, flowers or other ornamental plants, to grow thereon
to a height in excess of eight inches.
(Ord. 2022-032, passed 4-26-2022) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.039 CITY TO CUT UPON REFUSAL OF OWNER.
   (A)   In the event that the owner of real estate neglects or refuses to
destroy or cut the weeds, tall grass or improperly maintained landscaping as
herein provided, the Superintendent of Public Works shall proceed to destroy or
cut the weeds, tall grass or improperly maintained landscaping.
   (B)   The Superintendent shall keep an account of the cost and expense.
   (C)   The cost and expense shall be charged to and paid by the owner of the
real estate.
(Ord. 2022-032, passed 4-26-2022)
§ 95.040 LIEN.
   (A)   The cost and expense of the destruction or cutting of weeds, tall
grass or improperly maintained landscaping shall be a lien upon the real estate
superior to all other liens and encumbrances, except tax liens.
   (B)   Whenever a bill for the cost and expense remains unpaid for 60 days
after it has been rendered, the City Clerk shall file in the office of the
County Recorder of Deeds or Registrar of Titles a verified notice of lien
setting forth:
      (1)   A legal description of the real estate;
      (2)   The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or
payable for the service;
      (3)   The date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by the
city; and
      (4)   A notice that the city claims a lien for said amount.
   (C)   A duplicate original of the notice of lien shall be mailed to the
owner of the premises, if known, and, in the event the owner or the owner’s
residence is not known, then to a prior lien or encumbrancer or agent of the
owner or occupant of the real estate.
(Ord. 2022-032, passed 4-26-2022)
§ 95.041 RELEASE AND ENFORCEMENT OF LIEN.
   (A)   Upon payment of the cost and expense by the owner of, or other persons
interested in, such real estate after notice of such lien has been filed, the
lien shall be released by the city to the person paying such costs and expense
or otherwise filed of record as in the case of filing notice of lien.
   (B)   The lien hereinabove provided for shall be enforced in the manner now
provided by law for the enforcement of mechanics liens.
(Ord. 2022-032, passed 4-26-2022)
OTHER NUISANCES
§ 95.055 COMMON BARBERRY.
   (A)   It is declared a nuisance for any person, firm or corporation to plant
or permit the growth of, upon any premises, the bush of the species of tall,
common, or European Barberry, further known as Berbis Vulgaris, and its
horticultural varieties, within the corporate limits of the city.
   (B)   It is the duty of the Commissioner of Health to serve through the
Chief of Police, or other person designated by the Commissioner to do so, a
notice in writing upon the owner, agent, occupant or person in possession,
charge or control of any lot, building or premises in or upon which this bush
may be found, requiring them or either of them to remove, destroy and carry the
same away and off such premises within two days.
   (C)   If the person so notified shall refuse or neglect to comply with such
order within the time and in the manner specified, the Commissioner of Health,
by the Chief of Police or other police officer of the city, shall cause the
abatement of the nuisance at the expense of the party or parties responsible
for or permitting the same.
(Prior Code, § 95.35) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.056 BARBED WIRE FENCES PROHIBITED; REMOVAL.
   (A)   No person shall build, construct, use or maintain any fence or barrier
consisting or made of barbed wire or of which barbed wire is a part within the
city, along the line of or in or upon any street, alley or public walk or drive
or through, along or around any public park or in and about or along any land
or lots or park owned or controlled by the city.
   (B)   Wherever in the city in, along or through any public street, alley or
park, barbed wire is found in use, in part or in whole, for a fence or barrier,
the same shall forthwith be removed by the Superintendent of Streets.
(Prior Code, § 95.36) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.057 PONDS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY A NUISANCE.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, the term POND shall be considered to
mean any exposed surface of water not less than 100 square feet in area which
has accumulated either by natural or artificial means in any depression or
connected series of depressions or excavations, whether existing naturally or
created artificially.
   (B)   Allowing water to accumulate and remain in a pond or ponds, either
wholly or partly within the limits of any private property, for a period of
more than ten consecutive days is declared to be a nuisance and shall be abated
as such.
(Prior Code, § 95.37) (Ord. 1519, passed 4-13-1942) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.058 DEPOSITING FOUL OR NOXIOUS SUBSTANCES.
   In order to suppress disease and to protect and promote the public health,
it is declared to be a public nuisance for any person who owns, rents, controls
occupies or possesses any land or lot within the city or within one-half mile
of the city corporate limits:
   (A)   To cause or suffer the carcass of any animal or any offal, filth or
noisome substance to be collected, deposited or to remain in any such place to
the prejudice of others; and/or
   (B)   To erect or continue or use any building or other place for the
exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture which, by occasioning noxious
exhalations, offensive smells or otherwise, is offensive or dangerous to the
health of individuals or the public.
(Prior Code, § 95.38) (Ord. 1842, passed 7-24-1944) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.059 EXCESSIVE LIGHT.
   (A)   Excessive light endangers physical and emotional health and well-
being, interferes with legitimate business and recreational activities,
depresses property values, offends the senses, and in other respects reduces
the quality of the community and environment. As such, the following light
nuisances are declared and prohibited.
      (1)   No person shall permit exterior lighting on private property to
cause a reflection and/or glare of light in any manner which creates a nuisance
or safety hazard to operators of motor vehicles, pedestrians, or adjacent
neighboring property.
   (B)   Exterior lighting must comply with the following guidelines so as to
not create a nuisance:
       (1)   Pathways, sidewalks, and trails shall only be lighted with low-
level fixtures (less than 150 watt incandescent) that shall not exceed a
maximum height of seven feet above grade, including the top of the light
fixture.
      (2)   All exterior lighting on buildings for security or aesthetics shall
include glare controls, shall be shielded/shaded, and shall be directed
inwardly so that no direct light or glare from the fixture projects onto
adjacent property or the street.
      (3)   Floodlighting and spotlights will not be allowed for use in front
yards and are discouraged in other areas. For the purposes of this Section, the
front yard is the area between the front of the structure and the street. For
lots being bordered by multiple streets, each street side will be considered
the front yard and will end at the building line. If floodlighting and
spotlights are used in areas other than the front yard, they shall be on a
timer so as to shut down by 10:00 p.m. and will not be continuously lit again
until 7:00 a.m. Floodlighting and spotlights can be used with a censoring type
of device. The light sensor will have an activation time set so the light is on
not longer than ten minutes.
      (4)   “Wall Packs” on the exterior of the building shall be fully
shielded to direct the light downward, shall be mounted not more than seven
feet above grade, and the lighting element or “bulb” shall be 100 watts or
lower.
      (5)   This section does not apply to public street lighting or parking
lot lighting.
(Ord. 2023-020, passed 3-30-2023)
CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTIES
§ 95.070 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as “Chronic Nuisance Property Regulations”.
(Ord. 2021-29, passed 8-24-2021)
§ 95.071 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish the obligation of owners of
property to register so the city can advise such an owner whether there are
nuisances regarding the owner’s property that have become chronic and require
immediate abatement of those nuisances on and from that property and to
establish a registry for any property requiring certain inspections as a result
of being adjudged a chronic nuisance property in violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 2021-29, passed 8-24-2021)
§ 95.072 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY. Defined in §
95.075.
   CONTACT. Includes any communication made by an owner, tenant, guest,
neighbor or other individual to police or other emergency services.
   CONTROL. The ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract or govern
conduct that occurs on that property either directly or by intervention of any
governmental authority.
   DIRECTOR. The city’s Building Official.
   DISABILITY. With respect to a person:
      (1)   A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or
more of such person’s major life activities;
      (2)   A record of having such an impairment; or
      (3)   Being regarded as having such an impairment, but such term does not
include current illegal use of, or addiction to, a controlled substance, as
defined in the Federal Controlled Substance Act, 21 U.S.C. § 802.
   DOMESTIC VIOLENCE. Physical abuse, harassment, intimidation of a dependent,
interference with personal liberty or willful deprivation, but does not include
reasonable direction of a minor child by a parent or person in loco parentis.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms which are arranged, designed or used as
living quarters for a family, or for a community residence as a single
housekeeping unit. A DWELLING UNIT includes bathroom and kitchen facilities in
addition to sleeping and living areas.
   NUISANCE ACTIVITY or NUISANCE ACTIVITIES. Any City Building Code or Property
Maintenance Code violations; criminal activities, behaviors, or conduct, as
defined by federal or state law; including, but not limited to, the physical
conditions and criminal activities set forth in §
95.074(A) and (B), respectively, but excluding any activities set forth in §
95.074(C).
   OWNER.
      (1)   Any person, partnership, land trust or corporation having any legal
or equitable interest in the property.
      (2)   OWNER includes, but is not limited to:
         (a)   Mortgagee in whom is vested:
            1.   All or part of the legal title to the property;
            2.   All or part of the beneficial ownership and the rights to the
present use; and
            3.   A right to pursue foreclosure when mortgage is in default.
         (b)   An occupant who can control what occurs on the property; and
         (c)   Any person acting as an agent of an owner as defined herein.
   PERMIT. To suffer, allow, consent to, acquiesce by failure to prevent, or
attempt to prevent, or expressly assent or agree to the doing of an act.
   PERSON. Any natural person, association, partnership, corporation or other
entity capable of owning, occupying or using property in the city.
   PERSON IN CHARGE. Any person in actual or constructive possession of a
property, including, but not limited to, an owner, property manager, tenant or
occupant of the property in question under his or her ownership or control.
   PROPERTY. Any real property, including its land and that which is affixed,
incidental or pertinent to land, including, but not limited to. any premises,
room, house, building, or structure, or any separate part or portion thereof.
   SEXUAL VIOLENCE. Has the meaning provided under § 10 of the Safe Homes Act,
765 ILCS 750/10.
   TENANT. A person who has entered into an oral or written lease with an owner
whereby the person is the lessee under the lease.
(Ord. 2021-29, passed 8-24-2021)
§ 95.073 APPLICABILITY.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall limit or prohibit the authority of city
officers or employees from enforcing any other provision of the code of
ordinances or any state or federal law under their jurisdiction. None of the
inspection provisions shall prohibit, condition or otherwise limit any
inspection conducted under any other provision of this code of ordinances or
other applicable law.
(Ord. 2021-29, passed 8-24-2021)
§ 95.074 NUISANCE CONDITIONS.
   (A)   The following physical conditions, inside or outside the property,
shall constitute a nuisance:
      (1)   Two or more separate violations after disposition of a finding of
guilty by the Circuit Court of the county for those violations, or similar
finding of liability by the City Administrative Hearing Officer for violation
of the city’s Property Maintenance Code, Building Code, Residential Code,
Mechanical Code, Fuel Gas Code, Fire Code, Energy Conservation Code, Plumbing
Code, Electrical Code or Accessibility Code;
      (2)   Criminal housing management as defined in 720 ILCS 5/12-5.1;
      (3)   Structure unfit for human occupancy or unsafe structure as defined
in the Building Code or Property Maintenance Code as adopted by the city; and
      (4)   Unlawful structure as defined in the Building Code or Property
Maintenance Code as adopted by the city.
   (B)   The following criminal activity and events occurring on a property,
inside or outside the structure or dwelling unit, shall constitute a nuisance:
      (1)   Any offense defined and prohibited by Act 5 of the Illinois
Criminal Code of 2012, 720ILCS 1-1 et seq.;
      (2)   Any offense defined and prohibited by the Cannabis Control Act, 720
ILCS 550/1 et seq.;
      (3)   Any offense defined and prohibited by the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act, 720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.; or any offense defined and prohibited
by the Methamphetamine Control and Community Protection Act, 720 ILCS 646/1 et
seq.;
      (4)   Any offense defined and prohibited by § 6-16 (prohibited sales and
possession) or § 6-20 (purchase or acceptance of gift of liquor by persons
under age 21) of the Liquor Control Act of 1934, 235 ILCS 5/6-16 and 5/6-20;
      (5)   Illegal consumption or possession of alcohol as defined in 235 ILCS
5/1 et seq.; and
      (6)   Failure to pay property taxes and other fees owed the city.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions set forth in division (B)
above, pursuant to § 1-2-1.5 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.5,
the following activities, behavior or conduct are hereby excluded as being
nuisance activities:
      (1)   Contact made to police or other emergency services, if:
         (a)   The contact was made with the intent to prevent or respond to
domestic violence or sexual violence;
         (b)   The intervention of emergency assistance was needed to respond
to or prevent domestic violence or sexual violence; and
         (c)   The contact was made by, on behalf of, or otherwise concerns an
individual with a disability and the purpose of the contact was related to that
individual’s disability.
      (2)   An incident or incidents of actual or threatened domestic violence
or sexual violence against an owner, tenant, household member, guest or other
party occurring on the property within the city; or
      (3)   Criminal activity or a local ordinance violation occurring on the
property that is directly relating to domestic violence or sexual violence
engaged in by an owner, a tenant, member of a tenant’s household, guest or
other party, and against an owner, a tenant, household member, guest or other
party.
   (D)   Notwithstanding the exclusions set forth in division C(1)(a), (C)(1)
(b) and/or (C)(1)(c) above, nothing set forth therein limits the enforcement
of:
      (1)   Section 15.2 of the Emergency Telephone System Act, 50 ILCS 750/15/
2;
      (2)   Article 26 of the Criminal Code of 2012, 720 ILCS 5/26-1 et seq.;
      (3)   Article X of the Code of Civil Procedure, 735 ILCS 5/10-101 et
seq.;
      (4)   Prohibits the city from enacting or enforcing ordinances to impose
penalties on the basis of the underlying criminal activity or local ordinance
violation not covered by division C(1)(a), (C)(1)(b) and/or (C)(1)(c) of this
section to the extent otherwise permitted by state and federal laws; or
      (5)   Limits or prohibits the eviction of or imposition of penalties on
the perpetrator of the domestic violence or other criminal activity.
(Ord. 2021-29, passed 8-24-2021) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.075 CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY.
   (A)   CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY means any property upon which three or more
nuisance activities within a six-month period have occurred as a result of any
three separate factual events that have been independently investigated and
verified by any law enforcement agency or the Building Department and the owner
has failed to correct within the time period provided for compliance or they
have reoccurred; or three or more citations for offenses defined as nuisance
activities within a six-month period, which have been adjudicated and findings
of liable or findings of guilty have been entered either by the city’s
administrative Adjudication Hearing Officer or a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   (B)   A chronic nuisance property is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any residential property within the city to
become or remain a chronic nuisance property in violation of this chapter.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, owner representative or tenant in
possession to:
      (1)   Encourage, aid, abet or permit a property to become a chronic
nuisance property; or
      (2)   Allow a property to continue as a chronic nuisance property after
receipt of notice to abate the nuisance activity.
   (E)   Each day that a violation of this section continues shall be
considered a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. 2021-29, passed 8-24-2021) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.076 OUTCOME OF CHRONIC NUISANCE DETERMINATION; NUISANCE PROPERTY
REGISTRATION.
   The city hereby creates a nuisance property registry, and a property that is
determined to be a chronic nuisance property shall be placed on that registry.
(Ord. 2021-29, passed 8-24-2021)
§ 95.077 INSPECTION; REINSPECTION.
   (A)   Generally. Upon a property being placed on the nuisance property
registry, it shall be subject to a health and safety or nuisance inspection
limited to but covering all the relevant nuisance activities. A property shall
be placed on the nuisance property registry for 12 months until its end of the
registry period performance evaluation is performed as provided in this
chapter.
   (B)   Notice of inspection. The Building Department shall serve written
notice of the date and time of any inspection to be conducted under this
chapter, by mailing such notice by first-class mail at least 14 calendar days
prior to the date of inspection to the owner at the address of the property and
to the taxpayer of record at the address shown on the county tax rolls. If the
property has been rented, the Building Department shall also mail the notice to
the occupants of each rental dwelling unit, the owner and the owner
representative (if applicable). The Building Department shall also post
official notice of the inspection in a conspicuous area upon the property. In
the case of multiple owners of the same property, notice to any one of the
owners shall comply with the notice requirement under this section.
   (C)   Entry.
      (1)   The owner shall provide the Inspector from the Building Department
with access to the property.
      (2)   If the property is rented, the owner is responsible for obtaining
the consent of the tenant of any rental dwelling unit to permit entry. If the
tenant does not consent to the entry for inspection, the Building Department is
authorized to seek an inspection warrant from a court of competent
jurisdiction. If a tenant or occupant of a rental dwelling unit refuses to
allow the inspection, the owner is not in violation of this section.
      (3)   If the Inspector is prevented from inspecting the property and has
reasonable cause to believe that the property is so hazardous, unsafe or
dangerous as to require immediate inspection to safeguard the public health or
safety, the Inspector shall have the right to immediately enter and inspect the
property and may use any reasonable means required to effect the entry and make
an inspection.
   (D)   Results of inspection.
      (1)   If the Inspector finds no code violations, the Inspector shall
issue a notice of compliance that shall state in plain language that the
property is in compliance with all applicable laws in the same manner as the
notice of inspection provided for in this section.
      (2)   If, upon inspection, the Inspector discovers one or more code
violations and any other applicable law, the Inspector shall cause to be issued
a notice and order to the owner to correct the violations. The order shall
state in plain language the violations of law found and the sections of law
with which the property is not in compliance.
         (a)   The order shall also state that failure to correct the
violations may result in additional inspection fees and other enforcement
actions. The Inspector shall mail the notice in the same manner as the notice
of inspection provided for in division (B) above and order to the occupants of
each dwelling unit, the owner and the owner representative to the addresses
provided on the registration application.
      (3)   If the Inspector determines that the conditions pose a present,
imminent, extreme and immediate hazard to health or safety, he or she shall
order abatement of the conditions within 48 hours. Within 24 hours after the
time to abate, the Building Department shall conduct a reinspection of the
property to determine compliance with the order. If the condition has not been
abated, the Building Department is authorized to make the necessary repairs to
ensure immediate repair of dangerous, life-threatening conditions.
      (4)   Except as provided in division (D)(3) above, the Building
Department shall specify a reasonable time period for correction of the
violations, depending on the severity of the condition, between 48 hours and 30
days from receipt of the order to correct the violations and schedule a
reinspection of the property. A fee for the additional inspection required
under this division (D)(4) shall be imposed. The city may also commence any
other enforcement actions.
      (5)   Except for conditions specified in division (D)(3) above, if the
violation has not been corrected by the compliance date, but the owner has made
significant progress in correcting the violation since the prior inspection,
the Building Department may grant a single extension of time not to exceed 30
days. In determining whether to grant the extension of time, the Building
Department shall consider the frequency of prior inspections, the current
condition of the property, prior code violations and whether the owner has
other property with code violations.
   (E)   Inspection. After being added to the nuisance property registry and
having an initial inspection, the property shall also be required to have a
subsequent inspection six months after being placed on the registry.
(Ord. 2021-29, passed 8-24-2021)
§ 95.078 ANNUAL PERFORMANCE EVALUATION.
   (A)   At the end of the eleventh month on the nuisance property registry,
the Building Department shall do a review of the status of the property to
determine if the property should be removed from the registry or be required to
remain on the registry for an additional 12-month registry period.
   (B)   Those owners who have resolved the issue(s) that caused their property
to be placed on the nuisance property registry and have had no or few
violations will be removed from the registry while those who have properties
that continue to have violations shall remain on the registry.
(Ord. 2021-29, passed 8-24-2021)
§ 95.079 FEES ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   Inspection fee. An owner of property determined to be a chronic
nuisance property shall pay a fee of $150 per building, plus an additional $50
for each dwelling unit above two dwelling units. This inspection fee shall
cover the initial inspection, first reinspection at six months and the annual
performance evaluation provided for in §
95.078.
   (B)   An owner shall pay a fee of $150 for any additional inspection not
provided for in division (A) above.
   (C)   The fee for rescheduling an inspection shall be $50.
(Ord. 2021-29, passed 8-24-2021)
§ 95.080 ALTERNATIVE CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Whenever the Chief of Police of the city receives one or more police
reports documenting the occurrence of a nuisance activity, as herein defined,
on or within a property, the Chief of Police shall independently review such
reports and any other relevant facts or evidence to determine whether criminal
activity, nuisance activity or other prohibited conduct as provided in this
chapter has occurred at the property in question. Upon a finding that the
complained of activity has occurred, the Chief of Police may notify the owner,
in writing, that the property is in danger of becoming a chronic nuisance
property.
   (B)   The notice shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The street address and property index number sufficient for
identification of the property;
      (2)   A statement that the Police Department has information that the
property may be a chronic nuisance property, with a concise description of the
criminal or nuisance activity(ies) that may exist or that has occurred;
      (3)   Service of notice shall be provided by either personal delivery or
by first-class mail postage prepaid, addressed to the owner at the address of
the property believed to be a chronic nuisance property, or such other place
which is likely to give notice of the determination by the Chief of Police;
      (4)   A copy of the notice shall also be served on the taxpayer of record
at such address as shown on the tax rolls of the county and/or the occupant, at
the address of the property, if these persons are different from the owner and
shall be made either personally or by first-class mail, postage prepaid; and
      (5)   Demand that the owner respond and meet with the Chief of Police
within 20 days of receipt of the notice. Refusal of receipt of the notice by
any party to whom notice is sent shall be deemed receipt of the notice for
purposes of this section.
(Ord. 2021-29, passed 8-24-2021)
§ 95.081 CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY PROCEDURE FOR ADDRESSING NUISANCE PROPERTY.
   (A)   At the meeting, the Chief of Police may request that the owner
implement a reasonable abatement plan designed to alleviate and prevent future
occurrences of criminal activity or nuisance activity upon the property. The
mitigation or abatement plan shall be reasonable under the circumstances in its
objective, cost and scope, and shall be implemented within 60 days of the
meeting with the Chief of Police or such longer period if not practically
feasible to do so within 60 days.
   (B)   If the criminal activity or nuisance activity complained of has or is
being conducted by a tenant leasing the property, and such activity is a
violation of the material terms of a lease agreement, the Chief of Police may
request that the owner evict the tenant and further request that future tenants
execute a “crime free lease addendum”. If eviction is requested, the owner
shall proceed with such an action in good faith. The city shall assist in the
eviction action by reasonably cooperating with the owner, manager(s) or person
(s) in charge of the property, including, but not limited to, providing law
enforcement officers or other municipal employees as witnesses regarding the
nuisance activity if relevant.
   (C)   When any party affected by this section responds and meets with the
Chief of Police as required above, no statements made in connection with the
furnishing of that response or in a meeting shall constitute or be used in any
judicial or quasijudicial proceeding as an admission that any nuisance activity
has or is occurring at or on the property. This division (C) does not require
the exclusion of any other evidence which is otherwise admissible and offered
for any other purpose than an admission by a person affected by this section.
(Ord. 2021-29, passed 8-24-2021)
§ 95.082 CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY ABATEMENT; ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION
HEARING.
   (A)   At any hearing before the Administrative Adjudication Hearing Officer
held in accordance with
Chapter 11 of this code of ordinances to determine whether the property in
question is a chronic nuisance property, the city shall have the initial burden
of proof to show, by a preponderance of evidence, that the property in question
is a chronic nuisance property. Notice of the hearing shall be provided to all
persons or entities that may be adversely affected by a decision declaring the
property to be a chronic nuisance property.
   (B)   The city’s representative shall present evidence in support of its
claim that the property is a chronic nuisance property. The owner shall be
permitted to rebut such evidence.
   (C)   No continuances shall be authorized by the Administrative Hearing
Officer in proceedings under this section unless for good cause shown or except
where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of any party
to the proceeding. Lack of preparedness shall not be grounds for a continuance.
   (D)   At any time prior to the hearing date, the Administrative Hearing
Officer may, at the request of either party(ies), direct witnesses to appear
and give testimony at the hearing. The formal rules of evidence will not apply
at the hearing and hearsay evidence including police reports shall be
admissible only if it is the type commonly relied upon by reasonable, prudent
persons in the conduct of their affairs.
(Ord. 2021-29, passed 8-24-2021)
§ 95.083 CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY ALTERNATIVE ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Nuisance abatement. The city, as an alternative to administrative
adjudication, may commence an action in the Circuit Court of the county for a
determination that the property is a chronic nuisance property and/or to abate
a chronic nuisance property.
   (B)   Enforcement; claims. Nothing with respect to this section:
      (1)   Limits enforcement pursuant to 50 ILCS 750/15.2 against any person
calling the number “911” for the purpose of making a false alarm or complaint
and reporting false information, from being charged with disorderly conduct as
defined in 720 ILCS 5/26-1 or a similar ordinance of this code;
      (2)   Prohibits claims made pursuant to 735 ILCS 5/9-1 et seq., of the
forcible entry and detainer statute, except where the tenant, lessee or
household member who was the victim of domestic violence, sexual violence,
stalking or dating violence did not knowingly consent to the barred person
entering the premises or a valid court order permitted the barred person’s
entry onto the premises;
      (3)   Prohibits the city from enacting or enforcing ordinances to impose
penalties on the basis of the underlying criminal activity or local ordinance
violation to the extent otherwise permitted by existing state and federal law;
      (4)   Shall prevent the owner or city from seeking possession solely
against a tenant, household member or lessee of the premises who perpetrated
the domestic violence, sexual violence or other criminal activity; or
      (5)   Shall prevent the owner or city from seeking possession against a
tenant, lessee or household member who is a victim of domestic violence, dating
violence and stalking, sexual violence, or has a disability, if that tenant,
lessee or household member has committed the nuisance activity on which the
demand for possession is based.
(Ord. 2021-29, passed 8-24-2021)
PUBLIC CAMPING
§ 95.090 PUBLIC CAMPING AS A NUISANCE.
   Public camping, as the term is defined in §
95.093, is hereby declared to be a nuisance within the City of Blue Island,
Cook County, Illinois, for the reasons identified in Ord. 2024-035.
(Ord. 2024-035, 8-27-2024)
§ 95.091 REGULATION OF PUBLIC CAMPING NECESSARY TO PROMOTE PUBLIC HEALTH.
   In an effort to address the public health concerns identified in Ord. 2024-
35, the Mayor and the Aldermen of the City of Blue Island, Cook County,
Illinois hereby declare it necessary or expedient for the promotion of health
or the suppression of diseases, to regulate public camping, as that term is
defined in §
95.093, within the city’s corporate limits.
(Ord. 2024-035, 8-27-2024)
§ 95.092 PUBLIC CAMPING NOT INTENDED USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   Except for those parcels of property specifically designated by the city in
any subsequent ordinance, the city hereby declares that none of its property is
permitted nor intended to be used for public camping, as the term is defined in
§
95.093.
(Ord. 2024-035, 8-27-2024)
§ 95.093 DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions apply to this subchapter:
   BEDDING. A sleeping bag, or any other material, used for bedding purposes.
   CAMPSITE. Any physical space that is not within an established structure,
where bedding or any stove or fire is placed, established or maintained for the
purpose of maintaining a temporary place to live, whether or not such place
incorporates the use of any tent, lean-to, shack or any other structure, or any
vehicle or part thereof.
   EXEMPT PERSONAL PROPERTY. Items which would otherwise constitute personal
property under the terms of this subchapter, but which: (i) has no apparent
utility or monetary value; (ii) personal property which is unsanitary to store
or otherwise maintain; (iii) any weapon possessed illegally; (iv) drug
paraphernalia; (v) items appearing to be stolen or otherwise appearing to be
evidence of a crime; (vi) items which the person cannot demonstrate the
requisite lawful authority to possess; and (vii) any items of food which can
reasonably be expected to spoil or otherwise perish within the next 30 days.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Any item reasonably recognizable as belonging to a person
and having apparent utility or monetary value, except for exempt personal
property.
   PUBLIC CAMPING. To cause or participate in the establishment of, or the act
of remaining in or at, a campsite.
(Ord. 2024-035, 8-27-2024)
§ 95.094 PUBLIC CAMPING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person may sleep, nor otherwise engage in public camping, on a
public sidewalk, street, alley, lane, other public right-of-way, park, bench,
or any other publicly owned property, nor on or under any bridge or viaduct, at
any time.
   (B)   No person may sleep, nor otherwise engage in public camping, in any
pedestrian or vehicular entrance to public or private property abutting a
public right-of-way.
   (C)   No person may sleep, nor otherwise engage in public camping, on any
real property owned or otherwise maintained by the City of Blue Island.
   (D)   No person may park a vehicle overnight within the city for the purpose
of sleeping or otherwise engaging in public camping in said vehicle.
   (E)   For the purposes of this section, the act of parking or leaving a
vehicle parked for two consecutive hours, and/or remaining within a public
vehicle on any property under the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of
public camping, for two consecutive hours without permission from the Mayor and
the Aldermen of the City of Blue Island, Cook County, Illinois between the
hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., shall be considered a violation of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 2024-035, 8-27-2024)
§ 95.095 EXCEPTIONS TO PROHIBITION.
   Notwithstanding the foregoing, it shall not be a violation to engage in
public camping when done: (i) in a manner specifically authorized by this Code;
(ii) after a formal declaration of the City of Blue Island, Cook County,
Illinois in emergency circumstances; or (iii) upon resolution of the Mayor and
the Aldermen of the City of Blue Island, Cook County, Illinois, the same may
exempt a special event from the prohibitions of this section, if the Mayor and
the Aldermen of the City of Blue Island, Cook County, Illinois finds such
exemption to be in the public interest and consistent with the goals and
objectives of the Mayor and the Aldermen of the City of Blue Island, Cook
County, Illinois, and with such conditions imposed as the Mayor and the
Aldermen of the City of Blue Island, Cook County, Illinois, deem necessary. Any
conditions imposed will include a condition requiring that the applicant
provide evidence of adequate insurance coverage and agree to indemnify the City
of Blue Island for any liability, damage or expense incurred by the city as a
result of the activities of the applicant. Any findings by the Mayor and the
Aldermen of the City of Blue Island, Cook County, Illinois, shall specify the
exact dates and location covered by the exemption.
(Ord. 2024-035, 8-27-2024)
§ 95.096 REMOVAL OF CAMPSITE.
   Removal of a campsite in violation of this subchapter may occur under the
following circumstances:
   (A)   Prior to removing a campsite, the city shall post a notice, 24-hours
in advance of the removal, unless immediate removal of the campsite is deemed
to be necessary for one of the reasons in divisions (1) through (4) below. If
such immediate removal is undertaken, the basis for causing the immediate
removal of such campsite should be adequately documented by the appropriate
person(s) identifying the for which immediate removal is necessary, such as:
      (1)   Immediate removal of the campsite is necessary to maintain access
to a property;
      (2)   Immediate removal of the campsite is necessary to maintain the
sanitary condition of a property;
      (3)   Immediate removal of the campsite is necessary because the campsite
is an obstruction to any public right-of-way; or
      (4)   Immediate removal of the campsite is necessary because the campsite
poses a risk to the health and safety of the city and its residents.
   (B)   Upon any action pursuant to division (A) of this section, the person
causing such action to be taken shall inform an appropriate agency delivering
social services to homeless individuals in the city, of the location of the
campsite and the persons found to be in violation of this subchapter, so said
agency may determine whether or not it would be appropriate to offer its
services to those persons.
   (C)   If a 24-hour notice has been posted, and the 24-hour notice period has
passed, then the campsite, as well as all personal property thereon, shall be
removed by the appropriate person(s) acting on behalf of the city.
   (D)   No portion of this section shall be construed to prohibit any person
found to be engaging in public camping from removing their personal property
from the campsite; however, such personal property that constitutes exempt
personal property and which a reasonably prudent law enforcement officer,
exercising the applicable constitutional standard, would conclude that said
exempt personal property constitutes items appearing to be stolen or otherwise
appearing to be evidence of a crime, and/or items which the person cannot
demonstrate the requisite lawful authority to possess, may be retained and
stored as evidence.
(Ord. 2024-035, 8-27-2024)
§ 95.097 DISPOSITION AND RELEASE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   All personal property removed from any campsite which is not exempt
personal property shall be stored by the appropriate law enforcement agency of
the city, for a minimum of 30 days, during which time it shall be reasonably
available for and released to an individual confirming ownership.
   (B)   All exempt personal property may be disposed of or retained as
evidence by the appropriate law enforcement agency of the city.
(Ord. 2024-035, 8-27-2024)
§ 95.098 PENALTY; MITIGATION.
   (A)   The penalty for any person's first violation of this subchapter within
a rolling 24-month period shall be $50.
   (B)   The penalty for any person's second violation of this subchapter
within a rolling 24-month period shall be $100.
   (C)   The penalty for any person's third violation of this subchapter within
a rolling 24-month period shall be $200.
   (D)   The penalty for any person's fourth violation of this subchapter
within a rolling 24-month period shall be $300.
   (E)   The penalty for any person's fifth violation of this subchapter within
a rolling 24-month period shall be $500.
   (F)   The penalty for any person's sixth or subsequent violation of this
subchapter within a rolling 24-month period may be a monetary penalty of $750
or incarceration for a period not exceeding the maximum time allowed pursuant
to 65 ILCS 5/1-2-9.
   (G)   The city is hereby empowered to exercise all powers afforded to it, at
law or in equity, to collect any fines assessed against a person pursuant to
this subchapter, including but not limited to seeking incarceration of said
person for a period of time that conforms with 65 ILCS 5/1-2-9.
   (H)   In the imposition of any penalty pursuant to this section, the penalty
shall be mitigated by whether or not the person immediately removed all
personal property and litter, including but not limited to bottles, cans, and
garbage, from the campsite after the person was informed that the person was in
violation of this subchapter.
   (I)   A separate offense of this subchapter shall be deemed committed on
each day on which a violation occurs or continues.
   (J)   In addition to any other remedy provided by law or this subchapter,
any person found in violation of this section may be immediately removed from
the premises where the campsite is located.
(Ord. 2024-035, 8-27-2024)
CHAPTER 96: RECREATION AND LEISURE
Section
Seasonal Lights, Decorations and Ornaments
   
96.001   Title
   
96.002   Purpose and intent
   
96.003   Permitted use; removal
Block Parties
   
96.015   Guidelines and restrictions
   
96.016   Application, petition and checklist
   
96.017   Grant of application
   
96.018   Administration
Parks
   
96.030   Closing hours of public parks
   
96.031   Signs to be erected
   
96.032   Unlawful for person to be present in park during closing hours
Library
   
96.045   Library property; injury prohibited
   
96.046   Library materials; injury prohibited
   
96.047   Failure to return library materials
   
96.048   Service charge
   
96.049   Rules and regulations
Outdoor Special Events
   
96.060   Definitions
   
96.061   Permit required; property owner responsibilities
   
96.062   Permit application; processing fee
   
96.063   Application review process
   
96.064   Permit issuance conditions
   
96.065   Conflicting applications for permits
   
96.066   Submission of required licenses
   
96.067   Representative required at event
   
96.068   Permit revocation
   
96.069   Insurance requirements
   
96.070   Hold harmless agreement
   
96.071   Cleanup and repair required
   
96.072   Clear path for emergency vehicles
   
96.073   Vendor licenses; fines
   
96.074   Citation for violations
   
96.075   Publication not required for Department rules, regulations
 
   
96.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Animals, see
Ch. 90
   Fireworks, see §§
93.01 through
93.07
   Pyrotechnic displays, see §§
93.01 through
93.07
SEASONAL LIGHTS, DECORATIONS
AND ORNAMENTS
§ 96.001 TITLE.
   The ordinance from which the provisions of this subchapter derive shall be
known as and may be cited as the “Blue Island Christmas-Seasonal Lights,
Decorations and Ornaments Ordinance” of the city.
(Prior Code, § 96.01) (Ord. 09-047, passed 1-13-2009; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017)
§ 96.002 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is the purpose and intent of this subchapter to regulate the placement of
Christmas-seasonal lighting, decorations and ornaments within the corporate
limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 96.02) (Ord. 09-047, passed 1-13-2009; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017)
§ 96.003 PERMITTED USE; REMOVAL.
   Christmas-seasonal lighting, decorations and ornaments shall be permitted
during the period October 15 to the following February 1 unless otherwise
extended by City Council or the Mayor. All Christmas-seasonal lighting,
decorations and ornaments must be removed by the following February 1 by the
owner, lessor and/or occupant of the subject property where such lighting,
decorations and ornaments are located in order to protect the public safety,
health and welfare.
(Prior Code, § 96.03) (Ord. 09-047, passed 1-13-2009; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017) Penalty, see §
96.999
BLOCK PARTIES
§ 96.015 GUIDELINES AND RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   The guidelines and restrictions, as more fully set forth in division
(B) below are hereby adopted as the official guidelines, procedures and
regulations for all block parties to be held in the city.
   (B)   (1)   Block party applications can be obtained at the City Clerk’s
office. Applications should be returned to the City Clerk’s office at least
three weeks prior to the day of the block party. Block parties must be approved
by the City Council.
      (2)   (a)   At least two representatives of the block must be listed on
the application.
         (b)   The two representatives must reside in different households.
      (3)   (a)   A petition listing the signatures of at least 75% of the
residents of the block in which the block party will be held is required and
must be submitted along with the application.
         (b)   A petition form is provided with the application.
         (c)   Accommodations for people who do not wish to participate should
be attempted during the course of the block party.
      (4)   (a)   The Alderman of the ward the block party is to be held in
must be notified of the planned block party before the application is returned
to the City Clerk’s office.
         (b)   A listing of the Alderman’s telephone numbers is included in the
packet.
         (c)   If anyone is not certain which ward the block party is to be
held in, he or she shall contact the City Clerk’s office.
      (5)   A non-refundable fee payment as set forth in the city fee and fine
schedule is required with the submission of the application. Checks are to be
made out to “The City of Blue Island”.
      (6)   (a)   The City Clerk’s office will contact the block party
representative by letter with written permission to hold the party and all
other city services will be notified by the Clerk’s Office.
         (b)   From time to time, the city may have to limit the number of
block parties on any given weekend because of other city commitments. We regret
any inconvenience this may cause.
         (c)   The representative will be contacted if, for any reason, it is
necessary to deny permission and the fee will be refunded.
      (7)   Parties can start at 10:00 a.m., but must not continue past 10:00
p.m. and noise levels must not disturb residents at any time.
      (8)   (a)   So that emergency vehicles can have passage, be sure all
tables, chairs and the like placed in the street do not project more than six
feet from the curb.
         (b)   A good guideline is to keep within the area next to the curb
that is used for parking.
         (c)   No large vehicles, entertainment, music boxes or bands should be
blocking the street.
         (d)   The applicants have the responsibility of ascertaining that the
street is not blocked in such a manner as to cause a delay in the performance
of emergency duties by the Police Department, Fire Department, ambulance or
Public Works Department.
      (9)   (a)   The street should be blocked with the removable barricades
provided by the city.
         (b)   Using a parked vehicle as a barricade is prohibited.
         (c)   A designated person must be responsible for the removal of any
barricade in case of an emergency.
      (10)   (a)   Barricades will be delivered to the representative by the
city on the last working day preceding the block party and will be picked up on
the first working day following the block party.
         (b)   They are to be left at the same location for pick up.
      (11)   One or two block parties may be held each year, not on consecutive
days.
      (12)   (a)   If requested, a police officer and/or a firefighter and fire
truck may stop by for a friendly visit just to get acquainted if scheduling and
availability allow.
         (b)   This request can be made by completing the appropriate area of
the block party application.
      (13)   (a)   Block parties are allowed for only those residents of the
block attending.
         (b)   Block parties are a time to get to know your neighbors, which
will facilitate looking out for each other when suspicious circumstances may
occur in your neighborhood.
         (c)   Private parties celebrating birthdays, graduations,
anniversaries and the like do not fall within these guidelines and would cause
traffic problems with cars of visitors parking in the surrounding area.
      (14)   Applicants are required to clean up immediately after the block
party.
      (15)   (a)   In the event of citizens complaints the applicants are
responsible for maintaining order and obedience to city, county and state laws.
         (b)   The applicants are responsible for any injury, damage to
property or illegal actions during the block party.
         (c)   In the event that there should be a directive, written or oral,
from the Police Department to discontinue the party for proper reasons, then
the applicants must comply.
(Prior Code, § 96.20) (Ord. 07-087, passed 6-26-2007; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.016 APPLICATION, PETITION AND CHECKLIST.
   The City Clerk shall provide block party applications, block party petitions
and block party checklists which must all be completed by the applicant with
respect to any block party to be held in the city.
(Prior Code, § 96.21) (Ord. 07-087, passed 6-26-2007; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017)
§ 96.017 GRANT OF APPLICATION.
   No block party application shall be granted unless the procedures and
regulations are followed and all required forms are completed with accurate
information and are signed by the appropriate block party representatives.
(Prior Code, § 96.22) (Ord. 07-087, passed 6-26-2007; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017)
§ 96.018 ADMINISTRATION.
   The office of the City Clerk shall administer this subchapter and will
provide copies of this chapter to all persons applying for permission to hold a
block party.
(Prior Code, § 96.23) (Ord. 07-087, passed 6-26-2007; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017)
PARKS
§ 96.030 CLOSING HOURS OF PUBLIC PARKS.
   The public parks operated by the city as part of the city’s recreation
system shall be open to the public from 8:00 a.m. to dusk on each and every day
of the week.
(Prior Code, § 96.35) (Ord. 02-401, passed 6-25-2002; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017)
§ 96.031 SIGNS TO BE ERECTED.
   Appropriate signs shall be erected at the entrances to every public park
that is operated by the city informing the public of the opening and closing
hours.
(Prior Code, § 96.36) (Ord. 02-401, passed 6-25-2002; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017)
§ 96.032 UNLAWFUL FOR PERSON TO BE PRESENT IN PARK DURING CLOSING HOURS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to occupy or be present in
any public park operated by the city any hours in which the park is not open to
the public.
(Prior Code, § 96.37) (Ord. 02-401, passed 6-25-2002; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017) Penalty, see §
96.999
LIBRARY
§ 96.045 LIBRARY PROPERTY; INJURY PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to commit any
injury to or deface the grounds, building, furniture, fixtures, equipment or
other property owned by or in the possession and control of Blue Island Public
Library without the consent of the Board of Library Directors or any director
or the librarian thereof.
(Prior Code, § 96.50) (Ord.2150, passed 6-14-1971; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-
2017) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.046 LIBRARY MATERIALS; INJURY PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to willfully or
maliciously cut, write upon, deface, injure, tear or destroy any books,
periodicals, pamphlets, newspapers, monographs, film, slides, transparencies,
recordings, records, maps, globes, charts, posters or other library materials
including, but not limited to, recording devices and film projectors or
screens, owned by or in the possession and control of the Blue Island Public
Library.
(Prior Code, § 96.51) (Ord.2150, passed 6-14-1971; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-
2017) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.047 FAILURE TO RETURN LIBRARY MATERIALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to return any book,
periodical or any other library material listed in §
96.046 of this chapter contrary to and in violation of the rules and
regulations made and adopted by the Board of Library Directors for the
government of said library.
(Prior Code, § 96.52) (Ord.2150, passed 6-14-1971; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-
2017) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.048 SERVICE CHARGE.
   In addition to any other penalty provided, any person, firm or corporation
failing to return any book, periodical or any other library material set forth
in §
96.047 of this chapter, contrary to and in violation of the rules and
regulations, shall be subject to and shall pay a daily service charge as
provided in the rules and regulations.
(Prior Code, § 96.53) (Ord.2150, passed 6-14-1971; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-
2017) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.049 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Board of Library Directors shall make and adopt reasonable rules and
regulations for its own guidance and for the government of the library as may
be expedient, not inconsistent with the provisions of the statutes of the state
and file a copy of these rules and regulations so adopted with the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 96.54) (Ord.2150, passed 6-14-1971; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-
2017)
OUTDOOR SPECIAL EVENTS
§ 96.060 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly implies or requires a different meaning.
   DEPARTMENT. The City Mayor or his or her designee.
   PUBLIC PLACE. The public way and any other location open to the public,
whether publicly or privately owned.
   SPECIAL EVENT.
      (1)   A planned temporary aggregation of attractions and/or persons for
picnics, fundraisers and/or public or private gatherings that may include
public entertainment, sales of souvenirs or other merchandise, food and
beverage service facilities or similar attractions that are: (a) conducted on
the public way; or (b) conducted primarily outdoors on property open to the
public other than the public way, or in a public place, and which:
         (a)   Includes activities that require the issuance of a city
temporary food establishment license or a special event liquor license;
         (b)   Includes persons, groups or organizations conducting or
participating in any march, assembly, meeting, parade or gathering; or
         (c)   Requires special city services including, but not limited to,
any of the following: street closures; provisions of barricades, garbage cans,
stages, special no-parking signs or traffic control; special electrical
services; attendees parking on the public way; special police protection;
police staffing requirements in excess of the general budgeted daily police
staffing for the city and additional non-budgeted expenditures by the city for
any city service required by the event.
      (2)   SPECIAL EVENT does not include a parade or a city-wide festival.
   SPONSOR OF THE EVENT. The entity who is conducting the special event or in
whose name or for whose support the proposed special event will be presented.
(Ord. 2022-022, passed 3-22-2022)
§ 96.061 PERMIT REQUIRED; PROPERTY OWNER RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   No person shall conduct a special event unless the sponsor of the
event obtains a special event permit from the city.
   (B)   Where the sponsor of the event is not the owner of the property where
the outdoor special event will be held, the property owner must provide to the
sponsor proper written authorization to hold an event.
   (C)   Once authorization is obtained, the owner of the property must inform
the sponsor in writing regarding this subchapter and the city’s requirements
for special event permits for outdoor special events.
   (D)   If proper written notice is not provided by the property owner to the
sponsor of the outdoor special event, the sponsor of the event and the property
owner will be jointly and severely liable to the city to pay any and all
expenses incurred by the city relating to the special event and any application
fees, interest, penalties or fines that would have been owed to the city if
proper written notice were provided.
   (E)   The failure of the property owner, if the property owner is not the
sponsor of the event, to provide written notice of the requirements of this
subchapter to the sponsor of the event does not relieve the sponsor’s duty to
comply with this subchapter, nor of their joint and several liability to pay
any damages incurred by the city relating to the special outdoor event or of
any application fees, interest, penalties or fines.
   (F)   A property owner, if the property owner is not the sponsor of the
event, shall require in all of its agreements or permits with the sponsor of
the event a provision that will obligate the sponsor to comply with the
regulations set forth in this subchapter.
(Ord. 2022-022, passed 3-22-2022) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.062 PERMIT APPLICATION; PROCESSING FEE.
   (A)   Unless the special event is to be conducted in January or February,
applications must be filed in the calendar year in which the event is to take
place. If the event is to take place in January or February, the application
must be filed not earlier than one year prior to the event.
   (B)   Each application submitted by the sponsor of an outdoor special event
shall be accompanied by a non-refundable processing fee of:
      (1)   If the application is submitted more than 60 days prior to the
event: $50;
      (2)   If the application is submitted between 59 and 45 days prior to the
event: $100;
      (3)   If the application is submitted between 44 and 30 days prior to the
event: $150; and
      (4)   If the application is submitted between 29 and 15 days prior to the
event: $500.
   (C)   No application for a special event permit shall be accepted less than
seven days prior to the special event.
   (D)   The application shall include all information required on the
application, including, but not limited to, the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the sponsor of the event, and the name,
address and telephone number of an authorized and responsible agent of the
organization;
      (2)   The name of the owner of the property where the event will be held;
the name, address and telephone number of an authorized and responsible agent
of the property owner;
      (3)   A description of the special event that will be conducted;
      (4)   The dates and times of the special event, including any requests
for street closures, parking on the public way, a site plan and the estimated
attendance for the special event;
      (5)   Whether food, alcoholic beverages or merchandise will be sold at
the event;
      (6)   Whether music will be played at the event, and if so, whether such
music will be electronically amplified;
      (7)   Plans for event security, including the number, hours and location
of deployment of personnel and equipment that will be provided by the
applicant;
      (8)   What special city services, if any, the special event may require;
      (9)   The proof of insurance and agreement to indemnify, defend and hold
harmless required by §§
96.069 and
96.070 of this code, respectively;
      (10)   The number of all food vendors, alcoholic beverage vendors and/or
itinerant merchants who will be participating in the special event; and
      (11)   Such other information that may be reasonably necessary to
determine compliance with this subchapter.
   (E)   All information provided on the application shall be complete and
truthful. If, prior to the event, the sponsor of the event changes any of the
information required by this section that would necessitate additional city
services or would require approval from any city department, the sponsor of the
event must submit an amended application to the Department not later than seven
days prior to the date the event is scheduled to begin.
(Ord. 2022-022, passed 3-22-2022) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.063 APPLICATION REVIEW PROCESS.
   (A)   The Department shall promptly send copies of all applications for a
special event permit to the following entities and individuals for the purpose
of obtaining input on the factors set forth in §
96.064 of this code:
      (1)   The Police Department;
      (2)   The Fire Department;
      (3)   The Public Works Department;
      (4)   The City Administrator; and
      (5)   Health Inspector.
   (B)   If any of the above-listed entities or individuals has any information
that the proposed special event does not meet the standards set forth in §
96.064 of this code, written objections must be sent to the Department within
20 days or the Department will presume there are no objections.
   (C)   (1)   Within 20 days of receipt of the application, the Police
Department shall review the applicant’s security plan, including provisions
made for private security personnel and for handling emergencies, and shall
determine whether the applicant has planned for and provided sufficient
personnel and equipment to protect public safety at the event or whether the
city will need to provide additional city police and traffic control personnel
and equipment. The determination of the need for additional city police
services shall be based on the expected pedestrian and vehicular traffic and
congestion considering the following factors:
         (a)   Estimated attendance;
         (b)   Density of area;
         (c)   Size of area; and
         (d)   Number of street closures and affected intersections.
      (2)   If the Police Department determines that the city will be required
to provide additional city police, the Department may, in addition to the other
requirements of this subchapter, require the applicant holder to post a bond in
an amount sufficient to cover the cost of protecting public safety at the
event. Such bond shall be approved by and filed with the City Clerk.
(Ord. 2022-022, passed 3-22-2022; Ord. 2023-041, passed 10-24-2023)
§ 96.064 PERMIT ISSUANCE CONDITIONS.
   (A)   The Department will issue a permit for the special event, or a
conditional permit pursuant to division (B) below, if, after considering any
relevant written recommendations or objections per §
96.063 of this code, it determines that:
      (1)   The applicant has complied with all of the requirements of this
subchapter and any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder;
      (2)   The sponsor of the event, the property owner and/or the attendees
of the event were not found guilty of four or more code violations or criminal
acts at the same event during that year or the previous year and have not been
found guilty of six or more code violations or criminal acts within a 180 day
period;
      (3)   The proposed special event will not substantially or unnecessarily
interfere with traffic in the area;
      (4)   The proposed special event will not substantially or unnecessarily
interfere with any publicly managed infrastructure project;
      (5)   There is available at the time of the special event a sufficient
number of peace officers to police and protect lawful participants at the
event;
      (6)   The concentration of persons or things at the event will not
prevent proper fire and police protection or ambulance service;
      (7)   The event is not being conducted for an unlawful purpose;
      (8)   The event will not subject the surrounding neighborhood to an
unreasonable degree of noise, littering or parking difficulties in light of the
character of the neighborhood;
      (9)   The event will not conflict with a parade, carnival or other event
which has been previously scheduled; and
      (10)   The special event will not require city services that cannot be
reasonably made available.
   (B)   The Department shall inform an applicant for a special event permit
whether the application is approved or disapproved within five business days
after the application and any amendments are received by the Department.
      (1)   If the Department approves the application, it shall either:
         (a)   Issue a conditional special event permit pursuant to §
96.066 of this code until all necessary licenses are issued, required plans
approved, fees paid and costs prepaid or bonds posted; or
         (b)   If all necessary licenses have been issued, required plans
approved, fees paid and costs prepaid or bonds posted, issue a special events
permit.
      (2)   If the Department disapproves the application, it shall provide
written notice of its action within such time stating the specific facts and
conclusions that are the basis for its denial of the permit.
   (C)   If the permit is for a special event that will require the closing of
a street, the applicant shall pay an additional fee of $50 per block per day
for each day the street will be closed.
(Ord. 2022-022, passed 3-22-2022)
§ 96.065 CONFLICTING APPLICATIONS FOR PERMITS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, preference among
conflicting applications for special event permits shall be given to the
application filed earliest.
   (B)   (1)   However, during the first ten business days of each calendar
year, the Department shall accept applications without giving preference to
applications filed earliest. Any conflict among applications filed during that
period shall be resolved by a lottery, to be conducted by the Department.
      (2)   The Department shall notify each such applicant in writing of the
existence of the conflict and of the date, place and time of the lottery.
Within seven days after the lottery, the applicants not chosen may submit
alternative preferences to the Department. Any conflicts arising among the
alternative preferences shall be resolved in accordance with the lottery
procedures set forth in this section.
(Ord. 2022-022, passed 3-22-2022)
§ 96.066 SUBMISSION OF REQUIRED LICENSES.
   (A)   Not later than 20 days prior to the date the event is scheduled to
begin, the sponsor of the event shall submit all applications for any necessary
licenses, including alcoholic beverage, food and/or itinerant merchant
licenses. If the Department previously has issued a conditional permit, then
within five days after the appropriate licenses have been issued and are
received by the Department and all required plans are approved, fees paid and
costs prepaid or bonds posted, or sooner if the event will occur sooner and
doing so is reasonably practicable, the Department shall issue the special
event permit.
   (B)   If no conditional permit has been issued, then the procedure set forth
in §
96.064(B) and (C) of this code shall apply.
(Ord. 2022-022, passed 3-22-2022)
§ 96.067 REPRESENTATIVE REQUIRED AT EVENT.
   The sponsor of the event shall have a representative present at all times
during the event who shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with all
applicable ordinances and regulations and for accepting all notices of
violations and closure orders.
(Ord. 2022-022, passed 3-22-2022) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.068 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Department may at any time revoke a special event permit if the
operation of the event is in violation of this subchapter or any other
applicable law, or if such revocation is necessary to preserve the health or
safety of the public. Written notice of the revocation with the reasons
therefor shall be mailed to or served upon the sponsor of the event at the time
of revocation. Unless the permit will expire by its own terms before a hearing
can be reasonably scheduled, no such revocation will take effect until the
sponsor of the event has been given notice and an opportunity to be heard in
accordance with rules and regulations issued by the Department. When necessary
to prevent an immediate threat to the health or safety of the public, the
Department shall order the sponsor of the event to cease operation of the
special event pending the outcome of the hearing.
   (B)   For any violation of the special event permit or the rules and
regulations promulgated under this subchapter which endangers the health or
safety of the public, no new special event permits shall be issued to the
sponsor of the event for the remainder of the year of that event and for the
following calendar year.
(Ord. 2022-022, passed 3-22-2022)
§ 96.069 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No permit shall be issued until the applicant has supplied to the
Department proof of insurance evidencing commercial general liability insurance
with limits of not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury,
personal injury and property damage, naming the city as an additional insured
on a primary, non-contributory basis for any liability arising directly or
indirectly from the permittee’s operations.
   (B)   Each insurance policy required by this section shall include a
provision to the effect that it shall not be subject to cancellation, reduction
in the amounts of its liabilities or other material changes until notice
thereof has been received in writing by the Office of Risk Management and the
Department not less than 60 days prior to such action.
   (C)   Each applicant shall maintain the insurance required by this section
in full force and effect for the duration of the permit period. Failure of the
sponsor of the event to maintain such insurance during the periods indicated
above shall result in automatic expiration of the permit. For the purposes of
this section, the permit shall include the time required for construction and
removal of all materials and equipment provided for the conduct of the special
event until the public way has been cleared and restored as provided in §
96.071 of this code.
(Ord. 2022-022, passed 3-22-2022)
§ 96.070 HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT.
   In addition to the requirements stated above, and apart from and separate
from any insurance requirement under this subchapter, the applicant shall agree
in writing to indemnify, defend and hold the city and its assignees and
employees harmless from all losses, damages, injuries, claims, demands and
expenses arising out of the operation of the special event or the condition,
maintenance and use of public property.
(Ord. 2022-022, passed 3-22-2022)
§ 96.071 CLEANUP AND REPAIR REQUIRED.
   (A)   During the conduct of the special event, the sponsor of the event
shall keep the public way clean and free from paper, debris or refuse, and upon
termination of the permit by lapse of time or otherwise, the sponsor of the
event shall remove all materials and equipment and clean the street.
   (B)   If the public way has been damaged, the sponsor of the event shall
repair and restore it to the condition it was in prior to the special event.
(Ord. 2022-022, passed 3-22-2022) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.072 CLEAR PATH FOR EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   Whenever a special permit requires the closure of a street, a clear path of
not less than ten feet must be maintained at all times to provide for the
passage of emergency vehicles.
(Ord. 2022-022, passed 3-22-2022) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.073 VENDOR LICENSES; FINES.
   The sponsor of the event shall be responsible for ensuring a health
inspection of each vendor participating in the event to ensure that each vendor
has the proper licenses. The cost of the inspection will be $50 per vendor
inspected. In the event that an unlicensed or improperly licensed vendor is
found at the event, the sponsor of the event shall be fined pursuant to §
96.999 of this code for each unlicensed or improperly licensed vendor. This
shall be in addition to any fines and/or penalties which may be issued to the
individual vendor.
(Ord. 2022-022, passed 3-22-2022; Ord. 2023-041, passed 10-24-2023) Penalty,
see §
96.999
§ 96.074 CITATION FOR VIOLATIONS.
   In addition to any other appropriate department, the Department is
authorized to inspect the special event and may issue citations for any
violation of this subchapter or any regulations pertaining to the operation of
the special event, except for provisions currently enforced by the Department
of Public Health.
(Ord. 2022-022, passed 3-22-2022) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.075 PUBLICATION NOT REQUIRED FOR DEPARTMENT RULES, REGULATIONS.
   The Department shall have the authority to promulgate such rules and
regulations that it determines are necessary or desirable for the
implementation of this subchapter. The rules and regulations need not be
published in a newspaper but shall be made available for inspection by the
public at no charge.
(Ord. 2022-022, passed 3-22-2022)
§ 96.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   For any violation of a special event permit or the rules and
regulations promulgated under §§
96.060 through
96.075 of this code, including the failure to amend a permit pursuant to §
96.062 of this code, the sponsor of the event shall be fined not less than $500
nor more than $750 for each violation. The city may, if timing permits, order
the sponsor of the event or property owner where the event is held to cease and
desist from holding the event for any violation of the special event permit of
§§
96.060 through
96.075 of this code. The city may seek an injunction or temporary restraining
order, an abatement or other appropriate action to enjoin, abate or stop any
outdoor special event violation of §§
96.060 through
96.075 of this code.
      (2)   The city’s administrative staff as well as its Police Department
are authorized to enforce §§
96.060 through
96.075 of this code. The sponsor of the event and the owner of the property
where the outdoor special event is held will be jointly and severely liable to
the city for any violation of §§
96.060 through
96.075 of this code and for any costs or expenses incurred by the city for
violations of §§
96.060 through
96.075 of this code.
      (3)   If the sponsor of the event, the property owner and/or the
attendees of the event are found guilty of four or more code violations or
criminal acts at the same event or six or more code violations or criminal acts
within a 180-day period, no new special event permits shall be issued to the
sponsor of the event for the remainder of the year of that event and for the
following calendar year.
(Ord. 2022-022, passed 3-22-2022)
CHAPTER 97: ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
   
97.01   Authority
   
97.02   Findings and intent
   
97.03   Definitions
   
97.04   Application for alarm systems; permit requirements
   
97.05   False alarm prevention; suspension or revocation of permits
   
97.06   False alarms subject to service and surcharges
   
97.07   Alarm system standards
   
97.08   Testing of equipment; false alarm
   
97.09   Local alarms
   
97.10   Automatic dialing devices
   
97.11   Responsibility of city
   
97.12   Acceptance of permit; operations and maintenance
   
97.13   Inspections
 
   
97.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Fire Department provisions, see
Ch. 33
   Police Department provisions, see
Ch. 33
   Uniform Fire Code adopted, see
Ch. 150
§ 97.01 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to authority given by certain provisions of
the Illinois Municipal Code, including, but not limited to: 65 ILCS 5/11-60-
2 granting authority to define, prevent and abate nuisances; and 65 ILCS 5/11-
30-4 granting authority to prescribe the strength and manner of constructing
all buildings, structures and their accessories.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 97.02 FINDINGS AND INTENT.
   (A)   This chapter is adopted for the purpose of regulating and permitting
alarm systems to which the Police or Fire Department is expected to respond;
defining and abating nuisances which are detrimental to the safety and public
welfare of the city; and addressing the effect of false alarms.
   (B)   A false alarm or false fire alarm as defined herein is declared a
public nuisance endangering the public health, safety and welfare, in that
nuisance (false) alarms:
      (1)   Generate calls to the Police and Fire Departments that are false in
the sense that no actual or attempted illegal entry to the building protected
by the alarm has actually occurred or that no fire or threat of fire exists,
and such alarms divert emergency responders away from legitimate emergencies or
actual threats to public health and safety which could lead to loss of life;
      (2)   Cause occupants unnecessary panic or cause occupants to develop
alarm fatigue whereby such alarms are ignored under the mistaken belief that
such alarm is a false alarm thereby increasing the risk of loss of life in a
real emergency;
      (3)   Unduly disturb the peace and comfort of neighboring persons or
property by their audible signal; and
      (4)   Disturb the peace by causing the Police or Fire Department to
respond with lights and sirens, thereby unnecessarily disturbing neighboring
persons and property and increasing the risk of accidents to the motoring
public.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 97.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM. Any system or signaling device designed to detect and signal, by the
transmission of an electrical impulse or any signal of any kind to a bell,
siren, horn or any audible annunciation on the premises or to a remote
monitoring location, the occurrence of any emergency at a premises to which the
Police or Fire Department are expected to respond, except alarm systems on
motor vehicles. Such alarm systems include: burglary systems or such systems to
protect a premises from unauthorized entry; holdup or panic alarms to allow
notification to the Police Department; smoke or fire alarms to allow
notification to the Fire Department regarding emanation of smoke or presence of
fire.
   ALARM BUSINESS. Any person engaged in the business of installing and
monitoring alarms.
   ALARM USER. Any person, including current lessee, on whose premises an alarm
system is utilized within the city.
   AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICES. Any alarm system which automatically sends, over
regular telephone lines or by radio waves, a signal or prerecorded voice
message indicating the existence of an emergency situation such as a fire.
   CHIEF. The Fire Chief or designee with respect to any alarm generated by an
alarm system or portion thereof arranged to signal the occurrence of a fire or
medical emergency, and the Chief of Police or designee with respect to all
other alarms.
   EMERGENCY CALL OUT LIST. A list supplied to the City Fire Department by the
alarm user that contains current names, addresses and telephone numbers of a
minimum of two persons who can respond to the premises when there is an alarm
activation.
   FALSE ALARM.
      (1)   An alarm system activated in the absence of an emergency whether
willfully, by system design or by inadvertence, negligence or unintentional
act, including any mechanical or electrical malfunction of the alarm system, to
which the Department of Police is alerted for a response.
      (2)   FALSE ALARM shall not include an alarm activation:
         (a)   By testing or repairing of telephone or electrical lines or
equipment outside the premises if prior notice of the testing or repair is
given to the Department of Police;
         (b)   By unusually violent conditions of nature;
         (c)   By an illegal entry, theft or robbery, or an attempt thereof;
         (d)   By an observable act of vandalism, where evidence of such
activity exists; or
         (e)   Canceled by an alarm monitoring service, as identified on the
alarm application, prior to arrival of the police.
   FALSE FIRE ALARM.
      (1)   The activation of an alarm system, by any cause, that alerts the
City Fire Department that a fire is in progress in a protected premises, or
alerts the Fire Department of an emergency situation, when, in fact, there is
no evidence of any such fire detected by responding firefighters or no such
emergency.
       (2)   FALSE FIRE ALARM shall not include alarms resulting from any of
the following:
         (a)   Fire, causing structural damage to the protected premises, as
verified by the Fire Department;
         (b)   Earthquake, causing structural damage to the protected premises;
         (c)   Tornado or hurricane winds, causing structural damage to the
protected premises;
         (d)   Flooding of the protected premises due to overflow of natural
drainage;
         (e)   Lightning, causing physical damage to the protected premises;
         (f)   Telephone line malfunction, verified to the Fire Department by
an authorized telephone company supervisor within seven days of the occurrence;
         (g)   Electrical service interruption, verified to the Fire Department
by the local power company manager within seven days of the occurrence; and
         (h)   Plumbing or electrical malfunctions, unrelated to the fire
protection system.
   LOCAL ALARM. Any electrically operated instrument composed of sensory
apparatus and related hardware which automatically emits an alarm, such as a
siren, bell, horn or tone, which is audible beyond the premises being
protected, upon receipt of a stimulus from a sensor that has detected a
physical force or condition characteristic of an unauthorized entry.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, limited
liability company or organization of any kind.
   PREMISES. Any building, structure or facility where an alarm system is
installed or area intended to be protected by an alarm system.
   PRIMARY TRUNK LINE. A telephone line leading directly into the communication
center of the Fire Department.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 97.04 APPLICATION FOR ALARM SYSTEMS; PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Permit required. Every alarm user shall apply for and obtain an alarm
system permit annually for the use of its alarm system. Every alarm business
that has a service line connected to the 9-1-1 Communication Center shall apply
for and obtain a permit annually and pay any annual permit fee set forth in the
city’s fee and fine schedule. No person shall be allowed to have an alarm
system in any building, place or premises within the city without having first
obtained a permit.
   (B)   Application for permit. The applicant shall state on the application
form, to be prepared by the Fire Department, his or her name, the address of
the residence or business or businesses in or upon which the alarm system has
been or will be installed, his or her telephone number, the type of alarm
system, the alarm business or businesses selling, installing monitoring,
inspecting, responding to or maintaining the alarm system and the name and
telephone number of at least two other persons (in the case of a corporate or
limited liability company alarm user applicant, at least three persons) who can
be reached at any time, day or night, who are authorized to respond to an alarm
and can open the premises in which the system is installed.
   (C)   Application disclaimer required. The application shall contain a
provision that the city shall not be liable for any failure of service or any
damages, including damages resulting from break-in to gain entrance, that might
result from the installation or operation of the alarm system.
   (D)   Permit term. All permits issued shall expire on December 31 of each
year. All permits shall be renewed annually and shall be effective for a 12-
month period to begin on January 1 of each year.
   (E)   Confidentiality of alarm system application. The information contained
in an alarm system application required by this section, and other information
received by the Chief through correspondence or communications with an alarm
user, shall be securely maintained and restricted to inspection only by the
Chief or certain officers or city employees specifically assigned the
responsibility for handling and processing alarm user permit applications in
the course of official duties. The Chief or any employee of the city who is
found to have knowingly or willfully revealed information contained in an alarm
user application or in correspondence or communications with an alarm user to
any person for any purpose not related to this section or official law
enforcement matters without the express written consent of the alarm user shall
be subject to dismissal from the service of the city in the manner provided by
law.
   (F)   Exception to permit requirement. Alarms which are designed to detect
the products of combustion and which sound an alarm which is not audible
outside the protected area, such as a smoke detector, which is installed in
single-family or multi-family residential structures and which is not connected
to any outside communication line shall be exempt from the provisions of this
section.
   (G)   Non-transferability of permit. Permits are not transferable and a
change of ownership or occupancy of the premises shall be cause for a new
permit application to be filed with the city.
   (H)   Permit denial. An application for an alarm user permit shall be denied
if:
      (1)   The applicant has failed to pay false alarm fees or fines required
by this chapter for a different alarm system under the applicant’s ownership or
control; or
      (2)   The applicant has failed to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter or other ordinances of the city, including nonpayment of any fine
for false alarms for the alarm system for which the permit is sought.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 97.05 FALSE ALARM PREVENTION; SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   (A)   After the Police or Fire Department has recorded two false alarms
within any 30-day period or four in any 365-day period for any alarm user, the
Department shall notify the alarm user and the alarm business providing service
or inspection to the alarm user, in writing by first class mail, of such fact
and require that the alarm user or the alarm business servicing the alarm user
submit a report to the respective Chief within seven days after the mailing of
the notice, which report shall describe efforts taken to discover and eliminate
the cause or causes of the false alarms. Failure to submit such report within
seven days shall constitute cause for revocation of the alarm system permit. If
the Chief revokes the alarm system permit, then the Chief shall give a written
notice by first class mail to the alarm user and the alarm business servicing
the alarm user advising of such revocation.
   (B)   If the report required by this section fails to show that reasonable
steps have been taken to eliminate or reduce false alarms, then the Chief may
revoke the alarm system permit and shall give written notice of such revocation
as provided for in this section of the chapter.
   (C)   An alarm user whose alarm system permit has been revoked is not
precluded from applying for a new alarm system permit. The Chief, however, is
not required to issue a new alarm system permit unless he or she is satisfied
the alarm user’s system has been properly serviced and its deficiencies
corrected. The Chief may impose reasonable restrictions and conditions upon the
issuance of a new alarm system permit to an alarm user with respect to the
particular system for which the alarm system permit was revoked.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 97.06 FALSE ALARMS SUBJECT TO SERVICE AND SURCHARGES.
   (A)   A fire alarm user shall be charged a service charge as set forth in
the fine schedule below for each false alarm if such false fire alarm is:
      (1)   Given intentionally;
      (2)   Due or caused by a lack of required maintenance as specified in the
National Fire Protection Association Code § 72; or
      (3)   Resulting from any test, repair, alteration or addition to the fire
protection system without prior notification thereof to the Fire Department.
   (B)   A fire alarm user shall be charged for a false alarm in the following
manner:
      (1)   For the first and second false alarms in a 365-day period, such
period beginning on the date of the first fire alarm and ending 365 days
thereafter, a warning letter will be issued; and
      (2)   For each additional and subsequent false alarm in a 365 day period,
as defined in division (1) above, a service charge of $500 will be assessed.
   (C)   Payment of surcharge: all permit fee surcharges assessed pursuant to
division (B) above and as specified from time to time in the city’s fee and
fine schedule shall be paid by the alarm user within 30 days after billing. No
permits shall be renewed or reissued for police or for fire alarms unless and
until all prior permit fee surcharges have been paid.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017; Ord. 2023-003, passed 1-10-2023)
§ 97.07 ALARM SYSTEM STANDARDS.
   Only alarm systems which are equivalent to or exceed the minimum applicable
standards, as listed in the National Fire Protection Association Life Safety
Code § 72 (NFPA 72), shall be authorized. The equipment or hardware used and
the manner of installation of alarm systems shall correspond to the applicable
standards contained in the NFPA § 72 for each of the foregoing alarm systems.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 97.08 TESTING OF EQUIPMENT; FALSE ALARM.
   No alarm system designed to transmit emergency messages directly to the Fire
or Police Department shall be tested or demonstrated without first obtaining
permission from the Chief. Failure to notify the Chief prior to testing an
alarm system shall constitute a false alarm.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 97.09 LOCAL ALARMS.
   (A)   No person shall be allowed to have a local alarm on any building,
place or premises within the city without first having obtained, authorization
from the Chief.
   (B)   Local alarms may be in addition to other alarm systems. Local alarms
shall not make a sound similar to that of a siren or emergency vehicle or of
ESDA warning systems.
   (C)   Owners of said local alarms will be responsible to maintain said
alarms and to turn the audible signal off at the request of the Fire Department
or an officer thereof. The continued sounding of such local alarms for more
than ten minutes after the appropriate agency has responded is hereby declared
to be a violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 97.10 AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICES.
   No automatic telephone dialers shall transmit a recorded message on any
primary trunk line to the Police Department, Fire Department or 9-1-
1 Communication Center after February 22, 2000.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 97.11 RESPONSIBILITY OF CITY.
   Neither the city, nor any of its officials, officers or representatives,
shall be responsible for the functioning or malfunctioning of any alarm system,
nor shall the city, nor any of its officials, officers or representatives, be
responsible for the failure of the Fire or Police Department to respond to any
alarm.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 97.12 ACCEPTANCE OF PERMIT; OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   By acceptance of an alarm system permit, each alarm user shall agree
to be governed by the terms of this subchapter and to pay any fees assessed
against such alarm users as provided for in this chapter.
   (B)   An alarm user shall:
      (1)   Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a manner that will
minimize or eliminate false alarm dispatches; and
      (2)   Make every reasonable effort to respond or cause a representative
to respond to the alarm system’s location within one hour when notified by the
county to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system to provide access to the
premises or to provide security for the premises, and not manually activate an
alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system
was intended to report.
   (C)   An alarm user shall adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be
adjusted so that an alarm signal audible on the exterior of an alarm site will
sound for no longer than 15 minutes after being activated.
   (D)   An alarm user shall have a properly licensed alarm business inspect
his or her alarm system after two false alarm dispatches in a one-year period.
After three false alarm dispatches in a one-year period the alarm user must
have a properly licensed alarm business modify the alarm system to be more
false-alarm resistant or provide additional user training as appropriate.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 97.13 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Every alarm user authorized under this section shall be required to
have his or her alarm system inspected at least once a year by a licensed alarm
business and post a certificate of such inspection on the premises in plain
view where the alarm system is maintained.
   (B)   For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the Chief
shall have the authority, at reasonable times and upon reasonable oral notice,
to enter any premises in the city in or upon which the alarm systems subject to
this chapter are located, to inspect the operation of such alarm systems.
   (C)   If such inspection reveals any violations of the provisions of this
chapter, a written report detailing such violations shall be promptly sent to
the owner, occupant or lessee responsible for the alarm system. Such report
shall require the correction within 30 days after receipt of a notice of the
violations discovered, and shall state that a failure to comply may result in
the revocation of the annual permit to operate. The responsible owner, occupant
or lessee shall be granted a reasonable extension of time to correct such
violations, upon good cause shown.
   (D)   The Chief shall have the authority to revoke or suspend the operation
of an alarm system if an inspection, as provided in this chapter, reveals
violations of this chapter, which violations are not corrected.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017)
§ 97.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any alarm user to install, modify or repair
an alarm system without first notifying the Chief. It shall further be a
violation of this subchapter for an alarm user to permit any false alarm as a
result of such installation, modification or repair.
   (B)   Any alarm user who does not have a valid alarm user permit will be
assessed a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $750. Each day during which
a violation continues or is permitted to exist shall be considered a separate
and distinct offense.
(Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017; Ord. 2023-003, passed 1-10-2023)
CHAPTER 98: TREES
Section
General Provisions
   
98.001   Title
   
98.002   Purpose and intent
   
98.003   Definitions
   
98.004   Public tree care
   
98.005   Arborists; license and bond
Required and Prohibited Actions
   
98.006   Protection of trees during building operations; removal of protective
device
   
98.007   Pruning corner clearance
   
98.008   Spacing
   
98.009   Distance from street corners and fireplugs
   
98.010   Utilities
   
98.011   Removal of stumps
   
98.012   Tree topping
   
98.013   Street tree species approved
   
98.014   Prohibited trees
Public Nuisances
   
98.060   Definition
   
98.061   Right to inspect
   
98.062   Abatement
   
98.063   Emergency tree services
   
98.064   Violation and penalty
   
98.065   Appeals of decisions
Urban Forestry Board
   
98.075   Establishment
   
98.076   Composition
   
98.077   Appointment of members
   
98.078   Expiration or vacation of terms
   
98.079   Duties
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 98.001 TITLE.
   The ordinance from which the provisions of this chapter derive shall be
known as and may be cited as the “Blue Island Tree Ordinance”.
(Prior Code, § 98.001) (Ord. 94-301, passed 8-9-1994; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017; Ord. 2023-039, passed 9-26-2023)
§ 98.002 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   It is the purpose of this chapter to recognize the services and
function that trees provide as part of the infrastructure to the entire
community and to state the goals of the city with respect to the protection,
preservation, care and planting of trees on public lands. It is also the
purpose of this chapter to make the residents of the city more aware and
concerned about trees and to promote and protect the public health, safety and
general welfare by providing for the regulation of the planting, maintenance
and removal of trees, shrubs and other plants within the city. Furthermore,
this chapter seeks to educate and promote the esthetic benefits of trees in the
citv in addition to the economic benefits, including but not limited to
retention of rain water, reduction of' flooding, reduction in the cost of air
conditioning, blocking of ultraviolet light to sustain pavement life, increased
property value, and clean air.
      (2)   Blue Islanders have a long and proud history of beautiful tree
lined streets and landscaped homes. Every fall and spring, the trees in the
city add to the charm of the community. They also add financial value to
property in the city. This chapter is necessary to ensure that the city
protects one of its most valuable commodities.
   (B)   Intent. It is the intent of the City Council that the terms of this
chapter shall be construed so as to promote:
      (1)   The planting, maintenance, restoration and survival of desirable
trees, shrubs and other plants within the city; and
      (2)   The protection of the city from damage caused or threatened by the
improper planting, maintenance or removal of trees, shrubs or other plants
located within the community.
(Prior Code, § 98.002) (Ord. 94-301, passed 8-9-1994; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017; Ord. 2023-039, passed 9-26-2023)
§ 98.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. An owner of a lot, parcel or tract of land for which an
application has been filed for a permit, subdivision, or any activity requiring
the issuance of a permit. A contractor is an agent, acting on behalf of an
APPLICANT - the landowner.
   AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARDS INSTITUTE (Hereinafter called ANSI).  The
primary organization for fostering the development of workplace standards in
the United States.
   ARBORIST. Any individual experienced in the profession of forestry or a
related field and is licensed or certified in forestry by an accredited
forestry industry body, e.g. International Society of Arboriculture.
   BUCKTHORN. An undesirable exotic invasive ornamental shrub introduced to
North America. This species inhabits woodlands and savannas where it dominates
the landscape prohibiting the development of native trees and plants. There are
six species of buckthorn listed in the Illinois Exotic Weed Act, which
prohibits the sale, distribution, or planting of this species, Rhamnus
cathartica, frangula, argula, utilis and japonica.
   BUILDING ACTIVITY AREA. The portion of a property within which development
activity, including grading, excavation, storage of materials, construction
access and construction of both main building and unattached structures.
   CANOPY. The upper portion of a tree is sometimes called the crown. This
section of the tree usually contains branches and leaves.
   CITY ARBORIST. Either a designated employee of the Department of Public
Works certified as an arborist a certified arborist hired by the city or any
person, contractor, or firm in the occupation or business of consulting,
interacting, or in any way impacting trees on city property that has a
certified arborist on staff in order to undertake any activity on trees,
including but not limited to pruning, planting, treating, or removing any tree.
   CITY COUNCIL. The Mayor and Alderman of the City of Blue Island, Cook
County, Illinois.
   CITY PROPERTY. Land lying between private property lines, or within the
lines of either side of all streets, avenues, boulevards, lanes, squares,
courts, cul-de-sacs, alleys, or other public rights-of-way or grounds,
including but not limited to parkways, sidewalks, and curbs, or any other
village owned land.
   CRITICAL ROOT ZONE. An area on the ground extending out from the trunk of
the tree in all directions a distance of at least one foot for every inch DBH.
   CUTTING. Felling or removal of a tree, or any procedure that results in the
death or substantial destruction of a tree. CUTTING does not include normal
pruning or trimming of trees consistent with good forestry practices.
   DECIDUOUS TREE. A deciduous tree is one that loses most or all of its leaves
for part of the year.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any proposed change in the use or character of land, including,
but not limited to the replacement of any structure or site improvements, e.g.
irrigation installation, driveway replacement, installation of a retaining wall
among others. When appropriate to the context, development may refer to the
receipt or necessity of any building, tree or site work permit.
   DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT. The diameter of the trunk of the tree measured in
inches at a point 4.5 feet above ground line. This forestry standard
measurement is used for established and mature trees and is referred to as
“DBH”. All reference to diameter size shall be to the DBH.
   INFRASTRUCTURE. The basic underlying framework or features that provide
collective services, including but not limited to roads, waterlines, storm
sewers, bioswales, and trees.
   INVASIVE SPECIES. An introduced or exotic species that significantly
modifies or disrupts the ecosystem in which it colonizes (e.g., buckthorn).
   LANDSCAPE CONTRACTOR. A company or individual contracted to perform
landscape services.
   NUISANCE TREES. Nuisance trees are trees that may provide potential impacts
to other trees, people or structures. This would include, but not be limited
to, diseased, infested, structurally unsound trees or known invasive species.
   PARCEL. A single parcel shall mean any lot of record, zoning lot or any
grouping of adjacent lots under single ownership, serving a principal structure
or use.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The record owner or contract purchaser of any parcel of
land.
   PUBLIC WORKS SUPERINTENDENT. The person responsible for the operation of the
Department of Public Works in the City of Blue Island, Illinois and who is
responsible in the first instance to enforce the terms and provisions of this
chapter.
   REAR YARD. As used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as ascribed
to in the Zoning Code.
   REGULATED ARTICLES. Any insects at any living stage of development, any
quarantined materials such as wood products including, but not limited to
chips, limbs, lumber, firewood, contaminated soils, or any other product or
means of conveyance which may be determined by Federal or State departments of
agriculture to pose a risk of spread of any infestation or infection.
   SIMPLE TREE REMOVAL.  Removal of a tree without other associated site
impacts or other site improvements.
   SITE. That parcel of land for which a permit for landscaping or tree removal
is sought.
   STREET TREE REMOVAL. Any tree located on or within the public right-of-way
easement.
   TRANSPLANTING.  The removal of any tree for replanting elsewhere.
   TREE. Any self-supporting woody plant, together with its root system, trunk
and canopy; growing upon the earth usually with one trunk, or a multi-stemmed
trunk system, supporting a definitely formed crown.
   TREE REMOVAL. The cutting down, destruction, removal or relocation of any
tree, including damaging by poison or other direct or indirect action.
   TREES, SHRUBS AND OTHER PLANTS.  All vegetation, woody, or otherwise, except
lawn grass and flowers less than 24 inches in height.
   URBAN FOREST MANAGEMENT PLAN. A detailed plan developed and approved by the
Mayor and Aldermen of the city under the direction of the City Arborist which
protects this valuable infrastructure and outlines thoughtful strategies for
tree planting, selection, care and preservation for the city and complies with
recognized national standards.
   VIABLE. A tree, which in the judgment of the Public Works Department, is
capable of sustaining its own life processes, unaided by man, for a reasonable
period of time.
(Prior Code, § 98.003) (Ord. 94-301, passed 8-9-1994; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017; Ord. 2023-039, passed 9-26-2023)
§ 98.004 PUBLIC TREE CARE.
   (A)   The city hereby adopts the most current ANSI A300 Standards as
guidelines for the care, maintenance, pruning, and planting of trees. The city
shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and
shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, public grounds,
as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the
symmetry and beautv of such public grounds.
   (B)   The Public Works Superintendent and/or City Arborist shall be
responsible for the implementation of this chapter. The Public Works Director,
upon the advice of the City Arborist, has the responsibility to analyze and
determine where trees should be added, pruned or removed and may remove or
cause or order to be removed, any tree, or part thereof, which:
      (1)   Is in an unsafe condition or which, by reason of its nature, is
injurious to public sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or
other public improvements or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect, or
other pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by
adjacent property owners providing that the selection and location of said
trees is in accordance with this chapter.
      (2)   Crippled, deformed, and physically damaged trees shall be removed
and replaced, if the City Arborist or the city's third party contractor opines
that recovery and normal development cannot be expected;
      (3)   Infected with an incurable disease that will result in either:
         (a)   Deformation;
         (b)   Death; or
         (c)   Infection of other trees; or
      (4)   Determined to present a potential for endangering life or property
because of its condition or location.
      (5)   The tree is diseased, dead or dying;
      (6)   The tree is damaged or injured to the extent that it is likely to
die or become diseased, or such that it constitutes a hazard;
      (7)   Removal of the tree is consistent with good forestry practices,
that is, consideration is given to the species of the tree, location,
conditions, age, safety, historic and aesthetic value of the tree to be
removed; or
      (8)   Reasonable efforts have been undertaken in the architectural layout
and design of a private improvement or development to minimize tree removal.
      (9)   Any tree authorized for removal by the Public Works Superintendent
that is not on the Prohibited Trees List and is in good condition, as
determined by the City Arborist, shall be replaced by a tree identified on the
Preferred Species List. The applicant shall incur all costs to remove and
replace the tree. All replacement trees shall be located appropriately as
confirmed by the City Arborist and as approved by the Public Works
Superintendent. If the property where a removal has taken place does not have
adequate space to plant a replacement tree, then the applicant shall be
required to pay the city a dollar amount equal to the cost of purchasing and
planting a new tree at an alternative location on city property.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, contractor, or firm to perform
any of the following acts without first obtaining from the Building Department,
after approval by the Public Works Superintendent, a permit, for which no fee
shall be charged and nothing in this section shall be construed to exempt any
person from the requirements of obtaining any additional permits as are
required by law:
      (1)   Plant on city owned property or treat, prune, remove or otherwise
disturb any tree, shrub or other plant located on city owned property, except
that this provision shall not be construed to prohibit owners of property
adjacent to city owned property from watering or fertilizing, without a permit,
any tree, shrub or other plant located on such city owned property;
      (2)   Trim, prune or remove any tree or portions thereof. Specifically, a
permit shall be required to be obtained from the city prior to removal of any
tree whether located on public or private property;
      (3)   Place on city owned property, either above or below ground level, a
permanent container for trees, shrubs or other plants;
      (4)   Damage, cut, tap, carve or transplant any tree, shrub or other
plant;
      (5)   Attach any rope, wire, nail, sign, poster or any other human-made
object to any tree, shrub or other plant located on city owned property;
      (6)   Dig a tunnel or trench on city-owned property;
      (7)   Place, maintain or allow to be placed upon a parkway or median any
asphalt, cement, stone, lumber or other substance. In determining whether to
grant such a permit, the Public Works Superintendent shall consider the nature
of the substance, the quality of the substance, the length of time during which
the substance will remain on the parkway or median its effect on trees, shrubs
and other plant material on the parkway or median, the purpose of placing or
maintaining the substance on the parkway or median and the alternatives that
may be available to the applicant; and
   (D)   Any permitted removal of a tree must be consistent with good forestry
practices, that is, with consideration to the species of the tree, location,
conditions, age, safety, and the historic and aesthetic value of the tree to be
removed. The city may, at the discretion of the Public Works Superintendent,
incentive the retention of historic and/or legacy trees on private property.
(Prior Code, § 98.006) (Ord. 94-301, passed 8-9-1994; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017; Ord. 2023-039, passed 9-26-2023) Penalty, see §
98.064
§ 98.005 ARBORIST TO PERFORM WORK ON TREES.
   Any person, contractor, or firm in the occupation or business of consulting,
interacting, or in any way impacting trees on city property must be a certified
arborist or must have a certified arborist on staff in order to undertake any
activity on trees, including but not limited to pruning, planting, treating, or
removing any tree. It shall be unlawful for any person, contractor, or firm,
other than city staff, to engage in such work unless said party first applies
for and procures a license from the city. This license shall be in addition to
any other license required by this code. The license fee shall be $10 annually
in advance; provided, however, that no license shall be required of any city
employee doing such work on behalf of the village. Before any license shall be
issued, each applicant shall first file evidence of possession of liability
insurance in the minimum amounts of $500,000 for bodily injury to any person or
party injured, and $250,000 for property damage resulting from the pursuit of
such endeavors, as herein described, and such insurance policies shall name the
City of Blue Island as an additional insured. In addition, the applicant must
show proof of adequate workman's compensation insurance as customarily required
for such endeavors or at such minimums as provided by statute.
(Ord. 2023-039, passed 9-26-2023)
REQUIRED AND PROHIBITED ACTIONS
§ 98.006 PROTECTION OF TREES DURING BUILDING OPERATIONS; REMOVAL OF PROTECTIVE
DEVICE.
   (A)   Protection of trees during building operations. 
      (1)   Unless otherwise authorized by the Public Works Superintendent, no
soil is to be removed or added within the critical root zone area of any tree.
Unless otherwise authorized by the Public Works Superintendent, no construction
activity, movement and/or placement of equipment, vehicles, material, spoils,
excess soil, additional fill, liquids, or construction debris shall be placed
within the critical root zone. During the erection, alteration, repair,
demolition or removal of any building or structure, or excavation in connection
therewith, the owner of the affected property shall place or cause to be placed
around each nearby public tree protective fencing sufficient to prevent injury
to the trunk, crown and root system of each such tree. Appropriate protective
fencing shall be temporarily installed at the periphery of the tree’s critical
root zone. All fencing must be secured to metal posts driven into the ground no
further than ten feet apart. The entire parkway must be fenced and maintained
for the period of the construction.
      (2)   No fencing may be installed without permission from the Public
Works Superintendent or the Building Department based on best practices or the
advice of the City Arborist, who shall first determine that the devices will
not injure the tree. Such permission shall specify the manner of erecting or
installing protective fencing.
   (B)   Removal of protective fencing. No person shall remove any permitted
fencing intended for the support or protection of a public tree without a
permit issued by the Building Department.
(Prior Code, § 98.020) (Ord. 94-301, passed 8-9-1994; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017; Ord. 2023-039, passed 9-26-2023) Penalty, see§
98.064
§ 98.007 PRUNING CORNER CLEARANCE.
   (A)   The owner of any tree overhanging any corner or right-of-way within
the city shall prune the branches so that such branches will not obstruct the
light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and
so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the
street or sidewalk.
   (B)   (1)   Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees
or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a hazard to the safety of the
public.
      (2)   The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private
property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street
from a street light or interferes with visibility of any traffic-control device
or sign.
      (3)   Prior to entry on to private property, the city shall obtain the
consent of the owner to prune the tree or shrub within a specified time period
or the city will provide the service at the homeowner’s cost.
(Prior Code, § 98.021) (Ord. 94-301, passed 8-9-1994; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017; Ord. 2023-039, passed 9-26-2023) Penalty, see§
98.064
§ 98.008 SPACING.
   No trees on city property may be planted closer together than the following:
small trees - 20 feet; medium trees - 30 feet; and large trees - 40 feet;
except in special plantings approved by the Public Works Superintendent. The
designation of small, medium, and large trees is defined in the Preferred
Species List located in the Urban Forest Management Plan.
(Prior Code, § 98.022) (Ord. 94-301, passed 8-9-1994; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017; Ord. 2023-039, passed 9-26-2023) Penalty, see §
98.064
§ 98.009 DISTANCE FROM STREET CORNERS AND FIREPLUGS.
   No tree shall be planted within 25 feet of any street comer, measured from
the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curb lines. No tree shall be planted
closer than ten feet from any fireplug.
(Prior Code, § 98.024) (Ord. 94-301, passed 8-9-1994; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017; Ord. 2023-039, passed 9-26-2023) Penalty, see §
98.064
§ 98.010 UTILITIES.
   Only small street trees may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of
any overhead utility wire or over or within five lateral feet of any
underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility.
(Prior Code, § 98.025) (Ord. 94-301, passed 8-9-1994; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017; Ord. 2023-039, passed 9-26-2023) Penalty, see §
98.064
§ 98.011 REMOVAL OF STUMPS.
   All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of
the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of
the ground. This requirement shall also apply on private property if said tree
had an infectious disease.
(Prior Code, § 98.026) (Ord. 94-301, passed 8-9-1994; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017; Ord. 2023-039, passed 9-26-2023) Penalty, see§
98.064
§ 98.012 TREE TOPPING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or city
department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property.
   (B)   TOPPING is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger
than one inch in diameter within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as to
remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
   (C)   Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes or certain trees
under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are
impractical may be exempted from this section at the determination of the
Public Works Superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 98.027) (Ord. 94-301, passed 8-9-1994; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017; Ord. 2023-039, passed 9-26-2023) Penalty, see §
98.064 
§ 98.013 STREET TREE SPECIESAPPROVED.
   No species, other than those included in the list of Preferred Species List
located in the Urban Forest Management Plan may be planted as street trees
without written permission of the Superintendent of Public Works. All trees
shall be selected from Certified Nurseries and in accordance the most recent
edition of the American Standards for Nursery Stock (ANSI Z60.1).
(Prior Code, § 98.028) (Ord. 94-301, passed 8-9-1994; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017; Ord. 2023-039, passed 9-26-2023) Penalty, see §
98.064 
§ 98.014 PROHIBITED TREES.
   The following trees are prohibited and shall not be planted on city property
due to commonly acknowledged high maintenance and undesirable characteristics
(such as, but not limited to, brittle wood, cavity prone, excessive deadwood,
susceptibility to disease) associated therewith:
Latin Name Common Name or Type
Latin Name                 Common Name or Type
Acer campestre             Hedge maple
Acer negundo               Box elder
Acer saccharinum           Silver maple
Ailanthus glandulosa       Tree of heaven
Ginkgo biloba (female)     Ginkgo
Morus - all species        Mulberry
Populus - all species 1/   Poplars
Pyrus calleryana cultivars Callery pear
Salix - all species        Willows
Ulmus americana 2/         American elm
Ulmus pumila               Siberian elm
Fraxinus                   Ash
                          All types of fruit trees producing fruit typically
                           for human consumption
 
(Ord. 2023-039, passed 9-26-2023) Penalty, see §
98.064
PUBLIC NUISANCES
§ 98.060 DEFINITION.
   The following are hereby declared PUBLIC NUISANCES under this chapter:
   (A)   Any dead or dying tree, shrub or other plant, whether located on city
owned property or on private property;
   (B)   Any tree, shrub or other plant, or portion thereof, whether located on
city owned property or on private property, which by reason of location or
condition constitutes an imminent danger to the health, safety or welfare of
the general public;
   (C)   Any tree, shrub or other plant, or portion thereof, whether located on
city owned property or on private property which obstructs the free passage of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic or which obstructs a street sign on city
property; and
   (D)   Any tree shrub or other plant, or portion thereof, whether located on
city owned property or on private property which dangerously obstructs the view
as such may be determined by the UF Manager pursuant to this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 98.060) (Ord. 94-301, passed 8-9-1994; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017; Ord. 2023-039, passed 9-26-2023)
§ 98.061 RIGHT TO INSPECT.
   The Building Commissioner and Public Works Superintendent or designated city
employee of the city have the authority to enter onto private property whereon
there is located a tree, shrub, plant or plant part that is suspected to be a
public nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 98.061) (Ord. 94-301, passed 8-9-1994; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017; Ord. 2023-039, passed 9-26-2023)
§ 98.062 ABATEMENT.
   The following are the prescribed means of abating public nuisances under
this subchapter:
   (A)   Any public nuisance under this chapter which is located on city owned
property adjacent to privately owned property shall be pruned, removed or
otherwise treated by the property owner, or his or her agent, in whatever
fashion is required to cause the abatement of the nuisance within 30 days after
its notification.
   (B)   Any public nuisance under this subchapter which is located on private
owned property shall be pruned, removed or otherwise treated by the property
owner, or his or her agent, in whatever fashion is required to cause the
abatement of the nuisance. No property owner may be found guilty of violating
this provision unless and until the following requirements of notice have been
satisfied.
      (1)   The Superintendent of Public Works shall cause a written notice to
be personally served or sent, by registered mail, to the person to whom was
sent the tax bill for the general taxes for the last preceding year.
      (2)   Such notice shall describe the kind of tree, shrub or other
nuisance, its location on the property and the reason for declaring it a
nuisance.
      (3)   Such notice shall describe, by legal description or by common
description, the premises.
      (4)   Such notice shall state the actions that the property owner may
undertake to abate the nuisance.
      (5)   Such notice will require the elimination of the nuisance no less
than 30 days after the notice is delivered or sent to the person to whom was
sent the tax bill for the general taxes for the last preceding year.
   (C)   In the event that the nuisance is not abated within 30 days following
receipt of notice by the property owner or within any further time period
allowed, the Public Works Superintendent or designee is authorized to cause the
abatement of said nuisance, and the reasonable cost of such abatement to be
billed to the property owner and completely paid by the property owner. If the
property owner fails to timely pay, the Public Works Superintendent or
designee, is hereby authorized to file the reasonable cost of such abatement as
a lien against the property on which the nuisance was located, and the property
owner of the property upon which the nuisance is located shall be subject to
prosecution as provided in this chapter.
   (D)   The Superintendent of Public Works is empowered to seek the immediate
abatement of any public nuisance provided that the nuisance is determined by
the Superintendent of Public Works to be an immediate threat to any person or
property.
   (E)   The Superintendent of Public Works or designee is hereby empowered to
seek from any court of competent jurisdiction an order directing the immediate
abatement of any public nuisance under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 98.062) (Ord. 94-301, passed 8-9-1994; Ord. 06-042, passed 7-25-
2006; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017; Ord. 2023-039, passed 9-26-2023)
§ 98.063 EMERGENCY TREE SERVICES.
   The city or its contractor with prior verbal authorization from the city,
have the right to perform emergency tree services on city property or on
private property in the event of any disaster or such occurrence that
constitutes an immediate hazard to person, property, or any safety issues.
(Ord. 2023-039, passed 9-26-2023)
§ 98.064 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, contractor, or firm who violates any provision of this
chapter or who fails to comply with any written notice issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, upon being found guilty of violation, shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $100, nor more than $750 for each separate
offense.
   (B)   If, as the result of the violation of any provision of this chapter,
the injury, mutilation, or death of a tree on city property is caused, the cost
of repair or replacement of such shall be borne by the person, contractor, or
firm found in violation thereof. The replacement value of a tree shall be
determined in accordance with the latest version of A Guide to the Professional
Evaluation of Landscape Trees, Specimen Shrubs and Evergreens, as published by
the International Society of Arboriculture, and shall be payable to the city
within 30 days of the issuance of a decision.
   (C)   It is required that tree replacement species come from the Preferred
Species List. The Preferred Species List is provided in the Urban Forest
Management Plan.
(Prior Code, § 98.999) (Ord. 94-301, passed 8-9-1994; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017; Ord. 2023-039, passed 9-26-2023)
§ 98.065 APPEALS OF DECISIONS.
   Should any person or entity dispute in whole or in part, any decision of the
Public Works Superintendent made pursuant to the terms of this chapter, he or
she may appeal the decision within 30 days to the City Administrator. The
decision of the City Administrator shall be binding upon the person making the
appeal and the Public Works Superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 98.005) (Ord. 94-301, passed 8-9-1994; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017; Ord. 2023-039, passed 9-26-2023)
URBAN FORESTRY BOARD
§ 98.075 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The City Urban Forestry Board (hereinafter “Forestry Board”) is hereby
established. Its functions and duties are limited to those set forth in this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 98.075) (Ord. 94-301, passed 8-9-1994; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017; Ord. 2023-039, passed 9-26-2023)
§ 98.076 COMPOSITION.
   The Forestry Board shall be composed of five Commissioners. Five
Commissioners shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City
Council. These five Commissioners shall serve without pay and shall reside
within the corporate limits of the city. Any additional Commissioners shall be
ex officio and shall not vote.
(Prior Code, § 98.076) (Ord. 94-301, passed 8-9-1994; Ord. 06-042, passed 7-25-
2006; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017; Ord. 2023-039, passed 9-26-2023)
§ 98.077 APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.
   Two of the five Commissioners initially appointed to the Forestry Board
shall serve for a term of one year and three of the five Commissioners
initially appointed shall serve for a term of three years. The terms shall
start on a common date. The Mayor shall designate the Chairperson of the
Forestry Board.
(Prior Code, § 98.077) (Ord, 94-301, passed 8-9-1994; Ord. 06-042, passed 7-25-
2006; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-27-2017; Ord. 2023-039, passed 9-26-2023)
§ 98.078 EXPIRATION OR VACATION OF TERMS.
   (A)   Within 30 days following the expiration of the term of any appointed
Commissioner, a successor shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of
the City Council and the successor shall serve for a term of three years.
   (B)   Should any Commissioner resign or be removed from the Forestry Board,
a successor shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City
Council and shall serve for the unexpired period of the vacated term. A member
of the Forestry Board may be removed by the Mayor with the approval of a
majority of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 98.078) (Ord. 94-301, passed 8-9-1994; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017; Ord. 2023-039, passed 9-26-2023)
§ 98.079 DUTIES.
   Members of the Urban Forestry Board shall act in an advisory role. The
Public Works Superintendent shall serve without compensation as a liaison
between the Urban Foresty Board and the City Council to promote and preserve
trees in the village.
(Prior Code, § 98.079) (Ord. 94-301, passed 8-9-1994; Ord. 2017-005, passed 2-
27-2017; Ord. 2023-039, passed 9-26-2023)
CHAPTER 99: PORTABLE STORAGE AND SHIPPING CONTAINERS
Section
   
99.01   Purpose of chapter
   
99.02   General regulations
   
99.03   Enforcement
 
   
99.99   Penalty
§ 99.01 PURPOSE OF CHAPTER.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the public health, safety and
general welfare of the city and its residents through the establishment of
regulations to ensure that portable storage and portable shipping containers as
defined herein are used for the short term, temporary storage and transport of
personal property, are not used as accessory buildings and do not impede
vehicular access, traffic flow or circulation, or create public safety hazards.
It is the intent of this chapter that portable storage and portable shipping
containers be placed on private property unless space is not available, in
which case placement within a public right of way will only be allowed if a
right-of-way permit is issued, by the city’s Building Department.
(Ord. 2018-032, passed 5-22-2018)
§ 99.02 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Definition. For the purposes of this chapter, PORTABLE STORAGE AND
PORTABLE SHIPPING CONTAINERS are defined as any container not permanently
attached to a building and designed to store or ship personal property.
Portable containers are typically rented to owners or occupants of residences
and intended to be delivered, temporarily used, and then removed from the
premises.
   (B)   Use regulations. Notwithstanding any provision of any city ordinance
or regulation, or relevant provisions of the International Building Code or
International Property Maintenance Code which may allow use as a component of a
principal residential use, portable storage and portable shipping containers
located outside of a fully enclosed building or structure shall be regulated in
all residential and commercial zoning districts in accordance with the
following provisions.
      (1)   Permit requirements for placing containers on private property or
public right-of-way.
         (a)   Before any portable storage or portable shipping container is
placed for use on private property a portable storage unit permit must be
obtained by the property owner or the owner’s authorized designee from the
city’s Building Department. Before any portable storage or portable shipping
container is placed for use on public property, a right-of-way permit must be
obtained from the city’s Building Department.
         (b)   The applicant for the permit shall submit a completed
application form and such information as required by the city’s Building
Department at least 15 days in advance of the date of the intended use of the
portable container. The application shall contain the following information:
            1.   The name, address, telephone number and email address of the
applicant;
            2.   The date, location and beginning and ending dates of the
proposed placement of the portable container; and
            3.   The name, address and phone number of the person or entity
supplying the portable container.
         (c)   The permit fee is $25 for a permit allowing the portable
container to remain on the property for 30 consecutive days and an additional
$25 if it is necessary to have the portable container remain on the property
for an additional 15 days.
      (2)   Maximum number and time limits allowed for portable containers to
be on property.
         (a)   In all residential zoning districts and all commercial zoning
districts, a maximum of one portable storage or portable shipping container
will be allowed not more than two times within any 12-month period for any
property or parcel of real estate for which a permit is issued. No portable
storage or portable shipping container for which a permit is issued will be
allowed to remain on any property or on any parcel of real estate for a period
greater than 30 consecutive days within any 12 month period. An extension may
be granted by the City for an additional 15 days.
         (b)   Portable storage or portable shipping containers remaining on
the property in excess of the permitted time period will be considered in
violation of this chapter and the property owner will be subject to a fine of
$750 per day for each day the portable container remains on the property after
expiration of the permitted time period.
      (3)   Location or placement of portable containers. In all residential
zoning districts and all commercial zoning districts, portable storage and
portable shipping containers shall be placed on a paved surface in a driveway
or, if permitted by the city, in an off-street parking space, and shall meet
all minimum setback requirements of the zoning district unless otherwise
allowed by the permit when issued. If a driveway or off-street parking space is
not available on property, not more than one portable storage or portable
shipping container may be placed in a public right-of-way in a legal parking
space only with the prior approval of the city as set forth and described in
the right-of-way permit issued by the city.
      (4)   Dimensions of portable container. No portable storage container or
shipping container located in any residential zoning district or any commercial
zoning district shall have dimensions greater than 20 feet in length, eight
feet in width and eight feet in height.
      (5)   Signs. Except for the city permit(s) and container ownership
identification affixed to the container, no advertising sign shall be attached
to a portable storage or portable shipping container.
      (6)   Maintenance of portable container. All portable storage and
portable shipping containers shall be maintained in a condition free from rust,
peeling paint and other visible forms of deterioration.
(Ord. 2018-032, passed 5-22-2018)
§ 99.03 ENFORCEMENT.
   Proceedings to enforce violations of this chapter may be initiated and
conducted in accordance with and pursuant to the provisions of the city
ordinances providing for administrative adjudication of code violations or by
any other means provided by law.
(Ord. 2018-032, passed 5-22-2018)
§ 99.99 PENALTY.
   A person, firm, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or any
other entity failing to obtain a permit prior to placement of any portable
storage container or portable shipping container on private property or in the
public right-of-way, or violating any other provision of this chapter shall be
subject to a mandatory fine of not less than $750 for each violation thereof.
Each day a violation is determined to exist shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense and violation of this chapter and will be subject to a
separate fine of $750.
(Ord. 2018-032, passed 5-22-2018)
CHAPTER 100: SHORT TERM RENTAL UNITS
Section
   
100.01   Purpose
   
100.02   Definitions
   
100.03   Nuisance declared
   
100.04   Business license required
 
   
100.99   Penalty
§ 100.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect and preserve the quiet enjoyment
of residential properties and neighborhoods within the city and to mitigate or
eliminate adverse secondary effects the city and its residents may experience
by reason of short term rentals of residential structures in the city,
including, but not limited to, excessive noise, litter, and light pollution;
traffic congestion; overcrowded parking: and criminal activity.
(Ord. 2023-035, passed 8-22-2023)
§ 100.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   SHORT TERM RENTAL UNIT. All or part of a residential building or dwelling
unit located in any zoning district, being leased, rented, offered for rent,
hired out, licensed, or otherwise let as an accessory use or occupancy to a
person or persons other than the owner of the subject property or a family
member of the owner thereof for a period or term that is less than 30
consecutive days. The term SHORT TERM RENTAL UNIT shall also include a dwelling
unit or accessory building, or part thereof, used for overnight accommodation
that is available for rent by transient  guests for a period or term that is
less than 30 consecutive days.
(Ord. 2023-035, passed 8-22-2023)
§ 100.03 NUISANCE DECLARED.
   Short term rental units may be declared nuisance properties in conformance
with Chapter 95 of the City Code.
(Ord. 2023-035, passed 8-22-2023)
§ 100.04 BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Short term rental units are required to obtain business licensure from the
city in order to operate within the city. It will be unlawful for any person to
operate a short-term rental business within the city without first obtaining a
business license.
(Ord. 2023-035, passed 8-22-2023)
§ 100.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Notwithstanding anything otherwise provided in this code to the
contrary, any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be fined in an amount not less than $100 per day, nor more than
$750 per day. Unless exempted by this chapter, each day a residential building,
dwelling unit, or any accessory building. or part thereof, is offered for rent
as a short-term rental unit; is leased, rented, hired out, licensed, or let as
a short-term rental unit; or is occupied as a short term rental unit shall
constitute a separate violation of this chapter. Without any limitation on the
foregoing, each day a violation of this chapter occurs or continues shall be a
separate offense, and each such offense shall be subject to not less than the
minimum daily fine.
   (B)   The restrictions contained in this chapter shall be interpreted as
minimum standards, and shall be in addition to any other applicable city
ordinances and requirements that apply to short term rental units or the
properties on which they are located.
(Ord. 2023-035, passed 8-22-2023)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
      
111.   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR
      
112.   TOBACCO
      
113.   AMUSEMENTS AND RECREATION
      
114.   ADVERTISING AND BILL POSTING; NEWSRACKS
      
115.   FOOD AND FOOD DEALERS
      
116.   JUNK AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
      
117.   LAUNDRIES AND DRY CLEANING
      
118.   CONTRACTORS AND BUILDERS; CONSTRUCTION
      
119.   VEHICLES; PARKING LOTS; FILLING STATIONS
      
120.   TAXICABS
      
121.   SCAVENGERS, PEDDLERS AND MERCHANTS
      
122.   CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICES
      
123.   OTHER STORES AND SERVICES
      
124.   CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
110.01   Scope and purpose
   
110.02   Definitions
   
110.03   Home occupations
   
110.04   Junk dealers; scavengers
   
110.05   Cottage food operations
   
110.06   Signage and awnings
   
110.07   Effective date
   
110.08   Conflicts with certain home rules ordinances of the county
   
110.09   Banquet hall/rental facility
License Procedures; Rules of Operation
   
110.20   Applications
   
110.21   Investigation
   
110.22   Approvals and denials of license
   
110.23   Inspections and duty to cooperate
   
110.24   Limitations
   
110.25   Nuisances, unsafe or unhealthful business
   
110.26   Refuse disposal
   
110.27   Activities excluded
   
110.28   License requirements, restrictions and terms
   
110.29   Compliance with governing law
   
110.30   Transfer of license
   
110.31   Communications with authorized agents
   
110.32   Combined business operations in single location
   
110.33   Separate locations
Enforcement and Administration
   
110.45   General enforcement
   
110.46   Suspension of business license
   
110.47   Revocation or denial of business license
   
110.48   Multiple or continuous violations
   
110.49   Hearing procedures for denials, suspensions or revocations
   
110.50   Hearing determination; appeal
 
   
110.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 SCOPE AND PURPOSE.
   Because each commercial or non-profit establishment located in the city is a
basic part of and affects the physical and economic well-being of the city,
necessitating services from the city in the form of fire, health, police and
other services, such commercial and non-profit establishments shall be in all
respects in full compliance with the provisions hereinafter contained in this
chapter. This chapter is designed to promote, protect and safeguard the public
safety, health and welfare of the citizens of the city and to enable the
effecting of an accurate record of commercial and non-profit establishments
located and carrying on commercial activities or commerce within the city.
(Prior Code, § 110.01) (Ord. 2014-001, passed 1-14-2014; Ord. 2024-033, passed
8-13-2024)
§ 110.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY. Any business activity, retail, service, manufacturing,
wholesale and/or storage, which is conducted by a commercial or non-profit
establishment within the city, whose principal place of business may or may not
be located within the city.
   CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE. A certificate issued by a city department
evidencing that a proposed business, commercial, or non-profit establishment
has been found to be in compliance with all applicable regulations, ordinances
and laws.
   COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. Any person, company, firm, partnership,
corporation or other legal entity chartered, licensed, incorporated or declared
to be in existence for the purpose of making a profit from their activities.
   COMMERCIAL SOLICITING. The selling or offering for sale of property for
future delivery.
   COTTAGE FOOD OPERATION. A person who produces or packages non-potentially
hazardous food in a kitchen of that person’s primary domestic residence for
direct sale by the owner or family member, stored in the residence where the
food is made, or as otherwise defined under 410 ILCS 625/4 and 410 ILCS 650/11
and any amendments thereto.
   FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. Any place where food that is intended for
individual service and consumption is routinely provided completely prepared.
The term includes any such place, regardless of whether consumption is in, on
or off the premises and regardless of whether there is a charge for the food.
The term does not include a private home where food is prepared for individual
family consumption and it does not include the location of food vending
machines or a retail food store that does not cook or combine ready-to-eat
potentially hazardous foods for human consumption.
   FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT, TEMPORARY. Any food service establishment which
operates for a temporary period of time not to exceed two weeks in connection
with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition or similar transitory
gatherings.
   HOME OCCUPATION BUSINESS CERTIFICATE. The city is not opposed to the
development of a business which starts as a small home occupation providing
that the home occupation does not impinge upon the rights and privileges of the
abutting and adjoining homeowners and, further, that the home occupation is
conducted in such manner that it does not change in any way the neighborhood
atmosphere of an R-1, R-2 or R-3 Residential District. Such home occupations
must comply with the applicable provisions of Ch. 165 of this code of
ordinances. A HOME OCCUPATION BUSINESS CERTIFICATE is required and the fee is
as set forth in the fee schedule.
   JUNK DEALER, SCAVENGERS. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or other
entity who collects, procures and/or obtains items whether by a motor vehicle
or by a push cart which have been discarded, thrown away or set out for
collection by the city’s Public Works Department or any other trash collection
service.
   NON-PROFIT ESTABLISHMENT. A legal entity that is incorporated to operate for
purposes other than making a profit, for example, charitable, educational,
fraternal or religious establishments that allow the use of their space by
individuals outside of their congregation or membership. Licensure is not
required for non-profit entities that do not engage in renting their space to
non-members and is not required for regular religious activities.
   NUISANCE. Conduct, activity or condition that is harmful or annoying to
others (e.g., indecent conduct, a rubbish heap or a smoking chimney) or the
harm caused by such conduct, activity or condition (e.g., loud noises or
objectionable odors); any conduct, activity or condition which constitutes a
threat to public health, safety or welfare; conduct, activity or condition
which devalues surrounding property or otherwise disrupts other owners’
enjoyment of the same as evidenced by citizen complaints or other violations of
applicable nuisance ordinances.
   OFFICE. Any service performed or rendered, whether for profit, control or
non-profit. Any multiple use of the same OFFICE facilities will require an
individual registration for each separate use. Accounting records will be used
to determine if separate or multiple uses are being conducted in the same
OFFICE facilities.
   OWNER. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust or
any other legal entity  having sufficient proprietary interest in a commercial
establishment to maintain and manage its operation.
   PART 406. Title 89, Social Services, Ch. III, Department of Children and
Family Services, Subchapter Re: Requirements of Licensure, part 406, Licensing
Standards for Day Care Homes, being 89 Ill. Adm. Code 406.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust
or any other legal entity.
   SERVICE BUSINESSES. Any service performed or rendered for a price or fee
whether or not a commodity is worked upon or exchanged.
(Prior Code, § 110.02) (Ord. 2014-001, passed 1-14-2014; Ord. 2024-033, passed
8-13-2024)
§ 110.03 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   (A)   Home occupations shall be permitted only within a single-dwelling unit
or accessory building and only by the person or persons maintaining a dwelling
therein. Not more than one non-resident person shall be employed in the home
occupation. One sign having an area of not more than two square feet shall be
permitted. Home occupations shall not utilize more than 25% of the gross floor
area of the dwelling unit.
   (B)   The following are examples of uses that can be conducted as home
occupations. This list is intended to be illustrative rather than finite and at
all times such occupations shall comply with the applicable zoning ordinances,
requirements and restrictions. Residents may apply for a special use permit to
seek approval of a home occupation not listed here and not expressly
prohibited. Such permitted home occupations include:
      (1)   Services provided by clergy, professionals (e.g., lawyer,
accountant, graphic designer), consultant or other service provider with regard
to a common personal or business issue, topic, project, problem, objective or
need;
      (2)   Sewing and tailoring;
      (3)   Hairstyling, barbering and manicurists, artist, sculptor or writer;
provided, only one client is present;
      (4)   Instructors providing one-on-one or small group instruction,
including, but not limited to, academic tutoring, musical instrument or vocal
performance lessons; provided that, a single session is limited to no more than
two pupils at one time;
      (5)   Day care home for no more than eight children registered and duly
licensed by all applicable government agencies; and
      (6)   Cottage food operations as defined under applicable state law
including the State Food Handling Regulation Enforcement Act (410 ILCS 625) and
State Sanitary Food Preparation Act (410 ILCS 650).
   (C)   The following uses and activities are expressly prohibited as home
occupations, in addition to those uses not allowable under the applicable
zoning ordinances, regulations and restrictions:
      (1)   Any type of repair or assembly of vehicles or equipment with
internal combustion engines (such as autos, motorcycles, scooters, snowmobiles,
outboard marine engines, lawn mowers, chainsaws and other small engines) or of
large appliances (such as washing machines, dryers and refrigerators) or any
other work related to automobiles and their parts;
      (2)   Dispatch centers or other businesses where employees come to the
site and are dispatched to other locations;
      (3)   Rental businesses other than real property;
      (4)   Tow truck services;
      (5)   Material or equipment storage businesses;
      (6)   Restaurants and bars;
      (7)   Funeral or interment services; and
      (8)   Animal boarding businesses.
(Prior Code, § 110.03) (Ord. 2014-001, passed 1-14-2014)
§ 110.04 JUNK DEALERS; SCAVENGERS.
   (A)   (1)   Application for a scavenger’s license shall be made upon a form
provided by the City Clerk’s office. Every person, firm, corporation,
partnership or other entity shall truthfully state in full the information
requested on the application. The application shall be investigated by the
Police Department to verify the requested information. Upon verification of the
requested information and upon payment of the yearly license fee of $100, a
non-transferrable license shall be issued within 14 days of the application.
      (2)   A placard or sticker will be issued to the licensee showing the
expiration date of the license which must be displayed in the vehicle’s front
window or attached to the cart when the licensee is engaged in scavenging or
junk dealing activities.
   (B)   The following restrictions shall apply when a licensee is engaged in
scavenging or junk dealing activities.
      (1)   No licensee shall collect, obtain, possess or pick up any item or
items placed in a recyclable bin.
      (2)   No licensee shall trespass on private property.
      (3)   No licensee shall operate a vehicle where the load protrudes more
than 18 inches over the bed of the vehicle.
      (4)   No licensee shall operate a motor vehicle without covering and
securing the load.
      (5)   No licensee shall park a vehicle with scavenged goods on any city
street or city parking lots.
      (6)   No licensee shall engage in scavenging or junk dealing activities
between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 110.04) (Ord. 2014-001, passed 1-14-2014)
§ 110.05 COTTAGE FOOD OPERATIONS.
   Cottage food operations shall be governed by the State Food Handling
Regulation Enforcement Act (410 ILCS 625) and State Sanitary Food Preparation
Act (410 ILCS 650), including any amendments, and any other state or federal
law governing said operations.
(Prior Code, § 110.05) (Ord. 2014-001, passed 1-14-2014)
§ 110.06 SIGNAGE AND AWNINGS.
   Signage and awnings for buildings must comply with the applicable codes and
ordinances as established by the city. Any deviation or violation of these
codes and ordinances may result in the levying of fines as established.
(Prior Code, § 110.06) (Ord. 2014-001, passed 1-14-2014)
§ 110.07 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval and publication according to law.
(Prior Code, § 110.07) (Ord. 2014-001, passed 1-14-2014)
§ 110.08 CONFLICTS WITH CERTAIN HOME RULES ORDINANCES OF THE COUNTY.
   (A)   Conflicts with certain home rules ordinances of the county.
      (1)   Employers located within the city shall comply with all applicable
federal and/or state laws and regulations as such laws and regulation may exist
from time to time with regard to both the payment of minimum hourly wages and
paid sick leave and employees eligibility for paid sick leave and minimum
hourly wages shall also be in compliance with all applicable federal and/or
state laws and regulations as such laws and regulations may exist from time to
time.
      (2)   No additional obligations with regard to paid sick leave, or
minimum hourly wages, including, without limitation, any additional obligations
by ordinance adopted by the County Board of Commissions, shall apply to
employers located within the city, except those required by federal and/or
state laws and regulations as such laws and regulations may exist from time to
time.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CITY. Refers to the City of Blue Island, Cook County, Illinois.
      EMPLOYEE. Any individual person permitted and/or hired to work by an
employer regardless of the number of persons the employer employs.
      EMPLOYER.
         (a)   Any person, firm or corporation employing one or more employees,
or seeking to employ one or more employees, if the employer has its principal
place of business within the city or does business within the city.
         (b)   EMPLOYER does not mean or include:
            1.   The government of the United States or a corporation wholly
owned by the government of the United States;
            2.   An Indian tribe or a corporation wholly owned by an Indian
tribe; or
            3.   The government of the state or any agency or department
thereof.
(Ord. 2017-027, passed 6-27-2017)
§ 110.09 BANQUET HALL/RENTAL FACILITY.
   A building or portion thereof, whether operated by a commercial or non-
profit establishment, used for events which are hosted for one-time, special or
occasional events. Typical examples of such one-time, special or occasional
events include: banquets, luncheons, receptions, weddings, birthdays,
retirements, anniversaries and similar celebrations and commemorations; fashion
and other artistic demonstrations; educational seminars, classes and
conferences. Such facilities may include: (1) kitchen facilities for the
preparation of catering of food; and (2) the provision of alcoholic beverages
for on-premises consumption, but only for patrons attending any such scheduled
events and provided any licenses required by the city have been obtained in
advance.
   (A)   (1)   Application for a banquet hall/rental business license shall be
made upon a form provided by the City Clerk's office annually. Every person,
firm, corporation, partnership commercial or non-profit entity engaging in this
type of business activity shall truthfully state in full the information
requested on the application. The application shall be investigated in the same
manner as other business license applications. Non-profit establishments will
not be required to pay the application fee.
      (2)   A placard or sticker will be issued to the licensee showing the
expiration date of the license which must be displayed in the business office.
   (B)   The following restrictions shall apply when a licensee is engaged in
banquet hall/rental space activity at a non-profit establishment:
      (1)   Rental facilities/banquet halls must obtain occupancy certification
from the Fire Department. No party can exceed the occupancy limitations, once
established.
      (2)   Any banquet hall/rental facility must be in compliance with the
Zoning Code and any parking requirements mandated therein.
      (3)   No licensee shall allow alcoholic beverages on its premises by any
person renting its facilities unless the proper city liquor licensing has been
obtained.
      (4)   Licensee must inform the City Clerk and the Police Department
regarding any gatherings of more than 50 people, so that the city may gauge the
need for city services.
      (5)   No licensee shall allow the rental of its facility to more than XXX
persons without armed, licensed, bonded and insured security staff present.
      (6)   All licensees must submit annual security plans detailing the
approach, responsibilities and resources applied to managing security risks at
the facility when facilities are being rented or used as banquet halls on an
annual basis.
(Ord. 2024-033, passed 8-13-2024)
LICENSE PROCEDURES; RULES
OF OPERATION
§ 110.20 APPLICATIONS.
   Applications for all licenses and permits required by this chapter shall be
made in writing to the City Clerk. Each application shall state the name of the
applicant, license desired and the location to be used. Each application shall
contain such additional information as may be needed for the proper guidance of
the corporate authorities for the evaluation and determination in the issuing
of the permit or license. Subject to the terms and provisions of this chapter,
the City Clerk or his or her designee shall cause to be issued the license or
permit after investigations by all applicable city departments to permit the
operation of the commercial establishment in the city for a period of one year.
(Prior Code, § 110.20) (Ord. 2014-001, passed 1-14-2014)
§ 110.21 INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   (1)   Where this chapter authorizes or necessitates an investigation
or inspection by any department or official of the city before the issuance of
a license, and requires the approval by such department or official regarding
the proper location or condition of the premises in which the business,
occupation or activity for which a license is applied is to be managed,
conducted, operated or carried on, or regarding the condition and nature of the
equipment and methods intended to be used by the applicant in uch business,
occupation or activity, then the City Clerk shall transmit to the appropriate
official or department such information necessary for the required
investigation or inspection.
      (2)   The applicant shall be responsible for initiating contact with the
appropriate city departments and arranging for the necessary inspections,
inquiries or examinations.
   (B)   (1)   At the request of the applicant, the designated official or
department shall make all necessary investigations and inspections, and the
results thereof shall be reported in writing in a certificate of compliance
designating whether the applicant has met all necessary requirements for the
issuance of the certificate.
      (2)   Such certificate shall indicate a recommendation for the approval
or disapproval of the application and, in the event of disapproval, shall
indicate the deficiencies.
   (C)   (1)   Required health inspections, in the quantity required by the
city code based on the business being licensed, i.e. annual, semi-annual,
quarterly, and fees for such inspections shall be paid at the same time as the
annual or initial business license fee is paid. Once paid, the city health
inspector will schedule the required health inspections with the applicant, and
the results thereof shall be reported in writing, as described in Chapter 94 of
the city code.
      (2)   All businesses not specifically delineated below are subject to an
annual health inspection, at a cost of $100, which must be paid at the same
time as the initial business license application or upon the annual renewal for
a business license.
      (3)   If multiple re-inspections are required after an annual inspection,
there will be an escalated fee of $150 for the second re-inspection, $250 for
the third re-inspection, and $350 for the fourth re-inspection. These fees will
be paid at the time of the re-inspection.
   (D)   Health inspection fees.
      (1)   Category I - Tri-Annual Inspection Required: $300 per inspection
and $900 annually.
         (a)   Retail/food service establishments.
         (b)   Multi-department grocery stores > 15,000 sq. ft.
         (c)   Full-service food establishment.
         (d)   Liquor establishment.
         (e)   Daycare (child and adult).
      (2)   Category II - Bi-Annual Inspection Required: $300 per inspection
and $600 annually.
         (a)   Schools.
         (b)   Mobile food vendors/food trucks.
         (c)   Seasonal (operates six months or less) food vendors.
         (d)   Shared kitchens.
         (e)   Bakeries.
      (3)   Category III - Annual Inspections Required: $100 per inspection and
$100 annually.
         (a)   Daycares/schools with milk and/or prepackaged meals only.
         (b)   Retail/food service establishment with coffee only and/or three
coolers of the same product such as pre-packaged ice cream.
         (c)   Vending machines.
         (d)   Barber shops.
         (e)   Beauty shops.
         (f)   Nail salons.
         (g)   Tattoo parlors.
         (h)   Mobile food vendors and mobile food vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 110.21) (Ord. 2014-001, passed 1-14-2014; Ord. 2023-041, passed
10-24-2023)
§ 110.22 APPROVALS AND DENIALS OF LICENSE.
   (A)   If, after due consideration of the information contained within the
application and related investigative and inspection reports, the City Clerk or
designee finds all steps were completed and executed certificates of compliance
were submitted, the Clerk shall issue the business license/permit only after
payment of all necessary fees.
   (B)   If, after due consideration of the information contained within the
application and related investigative and inspection reports and certificates
of compliance, the City Clerk or his or her designee determines that matters
concerning the application are unsatisfactory, he or she shall disapprove the
application, indicating the reasons therefor.
   (C)   Thereupon, the City Clerk shall notify the applicant that the
application has not been approved, that no license or permit will be issued and
that it shall be unlawful to engage in, maintain, operate, carry on or manage
any business, occupation, activity or establishment.
   (D)   No business license shall be issued pursuant to this chapter until the
applicant for such license has first obtained commercial general liability
insurance and has presented to the City Clerk proof of such insurance against
any liability, loss or claim arising in any way from the issuance of the
license or activities conducted pursuant to the license. Such insurance shall:
(1) be issued by an insurer authorized to insure in Illinois; (2) be in an
amount no less than $1,000,000 per occurrence for general liability and the
statutory minimum for Workers Compensation; and (3) name the City of Blue
Island, its officers, employees and agents as additional insured on a primary,
noncontributory basis for any liability arising directly or indirectly from the
licensee’s operations. The insurance policy shall provide for 30 days’ written
notice to the City Clerk prior to any lapse, cancellation or change in
coverage. The insurance shall be maintained in effect at all times during the
term of the license.
(Prior Code, § 110.22) (Ord. 2014-001, passed 1-14-2014; Ord. 2025-031, passed
6-24-2025)
§ 110.23 INSPECTIONS AND DUTY TO COOPERATE.
   (A)   Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with
the operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or required
by this chapter, or any ordinance, or are reasonably necessary to assure
compliance with the provisions of any ordinance or regulation of the city, or
to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee or the
person in charge of the premises to admit thereto for the purpose of making the
inspection any officer or employee of the city who is duly authorized to make
such inspection at any reasonable time that such admission or entry is
requested. Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably
necessary to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or of any
ordinance or regulations, or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty
of the licensee or the person in charge of the premises to give to any duly
authorized officer or employee of the city requesting the same sufficient
samples of such material or commodity for such analysis upon official request.
   (B)   In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the Mayor or
his or her designee may suspend or revoke under the provisions of this chapter
the license of any owner or operator of a licensed business in the city who
refuses to permit any duly authorized officer or employee to make such
inspection or to take an adequate sample of said commodity, or who interferes
with such officer or employee while in the performance of his or her duties.
   (C)   The following departments and/or persons are hereby authorized to
perform any and all inspections necessary or required under this chapter or
other applicable ordinances pertaining to the issuance and maintenance of a
business license or permit.
      (1)   Building Department. The members of the Building Department shall
make all investigations reasonably necessary to the enforcement of this chapter
and any other applicable ordinances, laws, rules or regulations.
      (2)   Health Inspector. The members of the Health Department, or
designated Inspector, shall make all investigations reasonably necessary to the
enforcement of any applicable ordinances, standards, laws or regulations
governing health, safety and sanitation applicable to any business operation
sought under this chapter.
      (3)   Police Department. The City Police Department shall inspect and
examine businesses located within its respective jurisdictions to enforce
compliance with this chapter and any other applicable ordinances, laws, rules
or regulations and assess any threats to health and public safety or nuisance.
      (4)   Fire Department. The City Fire Department shall inspect and examine
businesses located within its respective jurisdictions to enforce compliance
with this chapter and any other applicable ordinances, laws, rules or
regulations.
   (D)   All persons authorized in this section to inspect licensees and
businesses shall have the authority to enter, with or without search warrant,
at all reasonable times, the following premises:
      (1)   Those for which a license is required;
      (2)   Those for which a license was issued and which, at the time of
inspection, are operating under such license; and
      (3)   Those for which the license has been revoked or suspended.
(Prior Code, § 110.23) (Ord. 2014-001, passed 1-14-2014)
§ 110.24 LIMITATIONS.
   No license for the operation of a commercial establishment in the city shall
be issued if one or more of the following conditions are determined by the
Mayor, or such other officer as may be designated by the Mayor to exist:
   (A)   The building or premises of the commercial establishment does not
comply with the provisions and terms of the Building Code, zoning ordinance,
fire regulations, health regulations or with all ordinances and regulations of
the city;
   (B)   The building or premises of the commercial establishment are in a
condition of being unsanitary or unsafe so as to endanger the public health,
safety or welfare of the people; or
   (C)   The owner of the commercial establishment or such legal entity
comprising the commercial establishment is indebted to the city.
(Prior Code, § 110.24) (Ord. 2014-001, passed 1-14-2014)
§ 110.25 NUISANCES, UNSAFE OR UNHEALTHFUL BUSINESS.
   (A)   No business or establishment, whether or not licensed, shall be so
conducted or operated as to constitute a nuisance as defined herein; and no
building, vehicle, structure, yard, lot, premises or part thereof shall be
used, kept, maintained or operated in connection with any business or
establishment so as to occasion any nuisance, or so as to be dangerous to life
or detrimental to health. Any charge of conducting or operating a nuisance may
be made under this chapter or any other ordinance prohibiting nuisances
generally.
   (B)   No building or structure, utilized, constructed or maintained in
connection with any business or occupation, shall evidence an unsanitary,
unsafe or dangerous condition. No substance, matter or thing of any kind
whatsoever, which is dangerous or detrimental to health, shall be allowed to
exist in connection with any business or occupation, or be used in any work or
labor performed in the city.
(Prior Code, § 110.25) (Ord. 2014-001, passed 1-14-2014) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.26 REFUSE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   The standard refuse container required by this chapter shall be a
receptacle of not less than 20 gallons capacity, or constructed of impervious
and sturdy material, with a tight-fitting cover and equipped with handles
properly placed to facilitate handling. All refuse which is placed for
collection service outside any building or structure must be kept in standard
refuse containers unless another type of container is approved by the
Environmental and Health Commissioner due to the unusual nature of the refuse
produced by the business.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the occupant of every building, structure or
premises used or maintained in connection with any business or occupation to
cause to be removed, at his or her own cost and expense, at least once each
week all refuse produced therein.
   (C)   Every person owning or controlling any hotel, restaurant, café, retail
food establishment or other business or occupation shall cause all substances
deposited in such containers to be removed as often as shall be necessary,
including daily removal from his or her premises, to ensure the healthful
environment surrounding such establishment. Such removal shall be at the
owner’s expense.
(Prior Code, § 110.26) (Ord. 2014-001, passed 1-14-2014) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.27 ACTIVITIES EXCLUDED.
   The terms and provisions of this chapter shall not be made applicable to any
activity carried on or operated by a governmental institution or jurisdiction,
or by any business or commercial establishment, the regulation or licensing of
which is pre-empted by a law or statute of the state. The provisions of this
chapter may be waived or suspended for eleemosynary institutions or
organizations upon approval by City Council or its designated committee.
(Prior Code, § 110.27) (Ord. 2014-001, passed 1-14-2014)
§ 110.28 LICENSE REQUIREMENTS, RESTRICTIONS AND TERMS.
   (A)   Whenever a license is required for the operation or conduct of any
business or establishment, or for doing business or engaging in any activity or
occupation, any person, firm or corporation shall be subject to the
requirement, if: by himself or herself or itself, or through an agent, employee
or partner, he or she or it is held forth as being engaged in the business,
activity or occupation; or if he or she or it solicits patronage therefor,
actively or passively; or if he or she or it performs or attempts to perform
any part of such business, activity or occupation in the city. It shall be
unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, except manufacturing, to conduct,
engage in, maintain, operate, carry on or manage any business, occupation,
activity or establishment, either by himself or herself or itself, or through
an agent, employee or partner without first having obtained a license/permit
for such business, occupation, activity or establishment from the City Clerk.
   (B)   All licenses shall be operative and the license year for the city
shall commence on May 1 of each year. No license shall be granted for a period
longer than one year. Except where otherwise provided herein, every license
shall expire on April 30 following the date of issuance. The City Clerk shall
endeavor to notify each annual licensee of the expiration of time of the
license held by the licensee at least 30 days prior to such expiration date;
provided, however, that, a failure to make such notification or the licensee’s
failure to receive it shall not exclude the licensee from the obligation to
obtain a new license or a renewal. Except as otherwise provided herein, each
license may be renewed upon proper application and payment of the required fee.
The requirements and procedures for granting and issuing a license renewal
shall be the same as the requirements and procedures for granting a new
license.
   (C)   A grace period of 30 days begins on May 1 of each year for the renewal
of business licenses. If a commercial establishment fails to renew its business
license by June 1 of each year, an additional fee equal to 25% of the base fee
shall be charged for each month after June 1. Delinquency may also result in
suspension and/or revocation of the right to conduct commercial activities
within the city.
   (D)   Licenses shall be posted in a prominent place on the premises used for
such business. The location of any licensed or permitted business or occupation
may be changed provided ten days’ notice thereof is given to the City Clerk.
Compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the city at its
new location is required.
   (E)   In the event a commercial establishment moves its place of operation
from one location in the city to another location in the city, charge for a new
regulatory certificate shall be for the established prevailing rate for the new
location, with due credit given for the charge for the original effective
document.
(Prior Code, § 110.28) (Ord. 2014-001, passed 1-14-2014)
§ 110.29 COMPLIANCE WITH GOVERNING LAW.
   Each business operation permitted under this chapter shall ascertain and at
all times comply with all laws and regulations applicable to such licensed
business. Violators of any of the provisions of this chapter or any other law
and regulation shall be subject to fines and penalties including suspension and
revocation of licenses or permits.
(Prior Code, § 110.29) (Ord. 2014-001, passed 1-14-2014) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.30 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   In the event a business is sold or transferred to another ownership, an
unexpired business license may be transferred to the new ownership; however, a
new application must be executed and properly processed. The various
inspections may be waived by City Council or its designated committee; provided
that, no significant change has occurred since the last business license was
issued.
(Prior Code, § 110.30) (Ord. 2014-001, passed 1-14-2014)
§ 110.31 COMMUNICATIONS WITH AUTHORIZED AGENTS.
   Any and all communications related to or regarding the business operations
or license will be directly solely to the authorized agent of the business and/
or business owner as identified in the application for business license or
permit.
(Prior Code, § 110.31) (Ord. 2014-001, passed 1-14-2014)
§ 110.32 COMBINED BUSINESS OPERATIONS IN SINGLE LOCATION.
   The business owner or licensee of the business located at the physical
address as indicated on the business license or permit application shall be
responsible for compliance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations of
the city, the county, the state and federal laws regardless of the operations
of multiple businesses or accessory businesses at the same location. Any uses
and operations which are accessory to the primary business shall be identified
in the application and shall be limited to such. Uses or operations which are
unrelated to the primary business for which the license or permit was approved
are prohibited and shall require prior approval by the city.
(Prior Code, § 110.32) (Ord. 2014-001, passed 1-14-2014)
§ 110.33 SEPARATE LOCATIONS.
   No license for the operation of a licensed establishment in the city shall
be construed by any person to permit the operation of a licensed establishment
in more than one location in the city. A separate license shall be required for
each location. For the purposes of this chapter, the determination of one
location shall be construed that all buildings containing the principal or
accessory uses shall be connected or on the same lot or parcel, be operated and
managed by the same person or owner, and be an establishment with the same
classification; provided, however, that, two or more buildings separated by one
or more dedicated public rights-of-way or by one or more buildings or vacant
lots or parcels shall not be considered as one location.
(Prior Code, § 110.33) (Ord. 2014-001, passed 1-14-2014) Penalty, see §
110.99
ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
§ 110.45 GENERAL ENFORCEMENT.
   Any license issued to any person or entity or any pending application for a
license to be reviewed according to this chapter may be denied, suspended or
revoked because of any violation of this chapter, or of any other ordinance of
the city, or of any state or federal law, or whenever the registrant or
applicant shall cease to meet the standards and requirements as set forth in
this chapter. Additional penalties or remedies which may be imposed include
modification of the license terms or permitted business operations, fines and
other remedies appropriate and tailored to addressing or correcting the
violations.
(Prior Code, § 110.45) (Ord. 2014-001, passed 1-14-2014; Ord. 2022-011, passed
2-22-2022)
§ 110.46 SUSPENSION OF BUSINESS LICENSE.
   (A)   A license or permit may be suspended by the Mayor or designee, where
any of the conditions listed in this section exist. A commercial establishment
whose license or permits has been suspended for any of the enumerated reasons
herein shall not be allowed to continue business operations or commercial
activities and shall cease all business operations until the following dangers
or conditions no longer exist:
      (1)   Where the conduct or operation of any business, occupation,
activity or establishment, whether licensed or unlicensed, shall constitute a
nuisance or a clear and present danger to the public health, safety or general
welfare;
      (2)   Where the holder of any license or permit shall have refused to
allow an inspection of the license or permit holder’s premises;
      (3)   Where the holder of any license or permit has refused a sample of
the license or permit holder’s goods for testing;
      (4)   Where there has been a violation of the licensing provisions; or
      (5)   Where there has been a violation of the zoning regulations or
management and safety plan pertaining to the premises.
   (B)   (1)   Notice of the suspension, with the reasons therefor, shall be
delivered to the business owner or operator at the business address via
personal service.
      (2)   In the event an agent is unavailable to accept service, posting of
the same in a conspicuous place shall be deemed sufficient notice to the
business owner or operator.
   (C)   The hearing and appeal procedures set forth in §§
110.49 and
110.50 of this chapter shall apply to suspensions pursuant to this section.
(Prior Code, § 110.46) (Ord. 2014-001, passed 1-14-2014)
§ 110.47 REVOCATION OR DENIAL OF BUSINESS LICENSE.
   (A)   Licenses issued by the city may be revoked or pending applications for
licenses may be denied by the Mayor or his or her designee upon the
recommendation of city officials for any of the following causes:
      (1)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application or renewal application for the license;
      (2)   Any violation by the licensee of the provisions relating to the
license, the subject matter of the license or to the premises occupied;
      (3)   Conviction of the licensee of any felony or of a misdemeanor when
such conviction indicates an inability to operate a safe, honest or legitimate
business operation;
      (4)   Failure of the licensee to pay any fine or penalty owing to the
city;
      (5)   Failure of the licensee to pay any amount owing to the city, other
than a fine or a penalty, within 120 days of its due date;
      (6)   Refusal to permit inspection or investigation or take sample or
interference with an authorized city officer or employee while making
inspection or investigations;
      (7)   When the conduct of the business constitutes a nuisance or a clear
and present danger to the public health, safety or general welfare;
      (8)   More than three violations of the zoning regulations or management
and safety plan pertaining to the premises; and/or
      (9)   For other good and sufficient cause shown including, but not
limited to, repeated failures to comply with this or other applicable
ordinances or multiple violations of the same.
   (B)   Any revocation or denial shall not preclude prosecution and imposition
of any other penalties for the violation of other city ordinances.
   (C)   No person whose license has been denied or revoked shall be eligible
for a new license for a period of 12 months.
(Prior Code, § 110.47) (Ord. 2014-001, passed 1-14-2014; Ord. 2022-011, passed
2-22-2022)
§ 110.48 MULTIPLE OR CONTINUOUS VIOLATIONS.
   If the commercial establishment is in violation of the standards of this
chapter three or more times within the fiscal year or fails to procure a
required renewed license within three months after the renewal date, the
license shall be subject to suspension or revocation upon a finding by the
Mayor or designee that such violation has occurred.
(Prior Code, § 110.48) (Ord. 2014-001, passed 1-14-2014)
§ 110.49 HEARING PROCEDURES FOR DENIALS, SUSPENSIONS OR REVOCATIONS.
   (A)   Upon written request by the applicant or licensee to the City Clerk,
the Mayor or designee shall hold a hearing within five business days after
receipt of such request for the purposes of determining whether or not the
license or permit shall be revoked or remain suspended or denied and what fines
or penalties, if any, shall be imposed.
   (B)   Notice of the hearing for denial, suspension or revocation of a
license shall be given in writing, setting forth the grounds of the complaint
and the time and place of the hearing. The method of such notice shall be
either by:
      (1)   Mailing at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing by
certified mail with return receipt to the licensee at the licensee’s last known
address or business address;
      (2)   Delivery by personal service to the business operator or authorized
agent; or
      (3)   Posting of the notice in a conspicuous place at the business
address for which the license was obtained.
   (C)   The hearing shall be heard and presided over by the Mayor or designee.
The suspension or revocation hearing proceedings shall be transcribed by an
official court reporter or audio recorded. Rules of evidence and privileges
applied in civil cases in the circuit courts of the state may be followed.
Evidence not admissible under those rules of evidence may be admitted,
including hearsay, if it is the type commonly relied upon by reasonable prudent
persons in the conduct of their affairs. Notice may be taken of matters in
which the circuit courts of this state may take judicial notice. In addition,
notice may be taken of generally recognized technical or scientific facts and
facts within the Mayor’s or designee’s specialized knowledge. The Mayor or
designee may enter an oral ruling at the conclusion of the hearing. However,
the Mayor or designee shall issue a written order which contains findings of
fact. A copy of the written order shall be provided within two business days by
the methods of notice contained in this section.
(Prior Code, § 110.49) (Ord. 2014-001, passed 1-14-2014; Ord. 2018-029, passed
5-8-2018; Ord. 2022-011, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 110.50 HEARING DETERMINATION; APPEAL.
   (A)   (1)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Mayor, his or her
designee or City Clerk in regard to the denial of the application or in
connection with the suspension or revocation of a license or permit shall have
the right to appeal to the City Council or its designated committee.
      (2)   Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the City Clerk a written
statement under oath specifically setting forth the grounds for appeal within
ten days after notice of a denial of an application or an order providing for
fines and penalties or suspension or revocation of license or permit.
   (B)   The City Council or its designated committee shall thereupon set the
time and place for a hearing on such appeal. The appeal hearing shall be held
within ten business days after receipt of an appeal for the purposes of
determining whether the decision of the Mayor or designee shall be upheld or
overturned. Appeals to the City Council concerning business license suspension
or revocations shall be limited to a review of the official record of
proceedings before the Mayor or designee. Notice of such hearing shall be given
to the applicant or licensee as provided in §
110.49 of this chapter.
   (C)   The decision of the City Council or designated committee on such
appeal shall be final. During the appeal, the business shall remain closed. The
City Council or its designated committee shall not overturn the suspension or
revocation of the business license except by a favorable vote of the majority
of all members of the City Council or its designated committee present at the
hearing.
   (D)   The order of the Mayor or designee shall not be reversed unless it is
demonstrated by clear and convincing evidence that the previous ruling was
invalid because it was made on unreasonable grounds or was unsupported by the
evidence.
(Prior Code, § 110.50) (Ord. 2014-001, passed 1-14-2014; Ord. 2018-029, passed
5-8-2018)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this
chapter for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be fined an amount
not less than $100, and no more than $750, for each offense; and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during which a violation occurs
or continues.
   (B)   Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision of §
110.04 of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than
$50, nor more than $250, for each offense.
(Prior Code, § 110.99) (Ord. 2014-001, passed 1-14-2014)
CHAPTER 111: ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR
Section
General Provisions
   
111.01   Title
   
111.02   Definitions
   
111.03   Liquor Control Commissioner
   
111.04   Inspections
   
111.05   Signs
   
111.06   Non-conforming uses
   
111.07   Effective date
Prohibited Conduct; Operations
   
111.20   Underage drinking and violations; minors
   
111.21   Consumption or possession on public way, parking lot
   
111.22   Consumption or possession; false identification; employment of
underage person
   
111.23   Teen dances
   
111.24   Violation of state, federal or municipal law
   
111.25   Report of violations
   
111.26   Hours of operation
   
111.27   Prohibited conduct
   
111.28   Furnishing intoxicants to persons under the influence
   
111.29   Soliciting drinks and prostitution
   
111.30   Obscene acts and entertainment
   
111.31   Live entertainment on licensed premises
   
111.32   Disorderly persons and conduct; report
   
111.33   Attire of employees, agents or workers
   
111.34   Sanitary conditions
   
111.35   Diseased employees
   
111.36   Gambling prohibited
   
111.37   Open containers; removal
   
111.38   Closing hours
   
111.39   “Happy Hour”; reduced drink prices
   
111.40   Limitation on drinks
   
111.41   Nuisance activity
Licenses
   
111.50   License required
   
111.51   License limitations
   
111.52   Imposition of conditions, restrictions on license
   
111.53   Changes in personnel
   
111.54   Application generally
   
111.55   Fingerprinting of licensed applicants
   
111.56   Persons ineligible to be licensed
   
111.57   Location of place of sale
   
111.58   License classifications and fees
   
111.59   Temporary licenses
   
111.60   Payment of license fee
   
111.61   Licenses to be displayed
   
111.62   License for dwelling house and the like prohibited
   
111.63   Original issuance or transfer
   
111.64   Suspension or revocation
   
111.65   Cost of hearing, records and the like
   
111.66   Record review
 
   
111.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Liquor Control Ordinance of the City of
Blue Island”.
(Prior Code, § 111.01) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999)
§ 111.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOL. The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether
rectified or diluted, whatever may be the original thereof, and includes
synthetic ethyl alcohol. It does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Includes alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid
or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and
capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being. The provisions of
this chapter shall not apply to alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured
alcohol produced in accordance with acts of Congress and regulations
promulgated thereunder, nor to any liquid or solid containing 0.5% or less, of
alcohol by volume.
   BEER. A beverage obtained by alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley, or other grain, malt and hops, in water, and includes,
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.
   CLUB.
      (1)   A group of persons or a corporation organized under the laws of the
state, not for pecuniary profit, or organized solely for the promotion of some
common object other than the sale of or consumption of alcoholic liquors, which
is kept, used and maintained by its members and owns, hires or leases a
building or space in a building of such extent and character as may be suitable
and adequate for reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its
members and their guests and is provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and
dining room space and equipment.
      (2)   However, such a CLUB shall file with the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner at the time of its application for an original license or renewal
thereof, a list of the names, resident addresses and phone numbers of its
officer and members.
   CONSUMPTION SALES. The sale or offering for sale at retail of any alcoholic
liquor for consumption on the premises where sold.
   LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY (L.L.C.). Has simultaneously the business
organization law benefit of limited liability for all owners and tax benefit of
partnership federal income taxation. It will be treated as a corporation for
purposes of this chapter.
   ORIGINAL PACKAGE. Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead
or other receptacle or container whatsoever used, corked, capped, sealed and
labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to contain and to convey any
alcoholic liquor.
   PATRON. Any customer, attendee or visitor of a licensed establishment who is
not an employee of the establishment.
   RESTAURANT. Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out
to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals are actually
and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such space being
provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and
capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees
to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests.
   RETAILER. A person, group of persons, partnership or corporation who sells
or offers for sale, alcoholic liquor for use or consumption and not for resale
in any form.
   SALE. Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner, or by any means
whatsoever, including the transfer of alcoholic liquors by and through the
transfer or negotiations of warehouse receipts or certificates, and includes
and means all sales made by any person, whether principal, proprietor, agent,
servant or employee.
   SELL AT RETAIL and SALE AT RETAIL. Sales for use or consumption and not for
resale in any form.
   SPIRITS. Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed
with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey,
gin, vodka or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors when rectified,
blended or otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
   TO SELL. Includes to keep or expose for sale and to keep with intent to
sell.
   WINE. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits, or vegetables, containing sugar, including such beverages
when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits, as defined above.
(Prior Code, § 111.02) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999)
§ 111.03 LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER.
   (A)   Local Liquor Control Commissioner. The Mayor shall be the Local Liquor
Commissioner. He or she shall receive such salary as determined by the City
Council. He or she may make such rules and regulations to govern the conduct of
licensees as are consistent with this chapter and state law.
   (B)   Powers of Local Liquor Commissioner. The Local Liquor Commissioner
shall have the following powers, functions and duties with respect to licenses,
other than licenses to manufacturers, importing distributors, distributors,
foreign importers, non-resident dealers, non-beverage users, brokers,
railroads, airplanes and boats:
      (1)   To grant and or suspend for not more than 30 days or revoke for
cause all local licenses issued to persons for premises within his or her
jurisdiction;
      (2)   To enter or to authorize any law enforcement officer to enter at
any time upon any premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the
provisions of this chapter or the State Liquor Control Act, 235 ILCS 5, or any
rules or regulations adopted by him or her or by the State Commission have been
or are being violated, and at such time to examine said premises of said
licensee in connection therewith;
      (3)   To notify the Secretary of State where a club incorporated under
the General Not for Profit Corporation Act of 1986, 805 ILCS 105, or a foreign
corporation functioning as a club in the state under a certificate of authority
issued under the Act has violated the Act by selling or offering for sale at
retail alcoholic liquors without a retailer’s license;
      (4)   To receive complaint from any citizen within his or her
jurisdiction that any of the provisions of the Act, or any rules or regulations
adopted pursuant hereto, have been or are being violated and to act upon such
complaints, as provided;
      (5)   To receive local license fees and pay the same forthwith to the
City Treasurer as the case may be;
      (6)   To levy fines; and
      (7)   To appoint a person or persons to assist him or her in the exercise
of the powers and the performance of duties herein provided for such Local
Liquor Control Commissioner.
(Prior Code, § 111.03) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999)
Statutory reference:
   Local Liquor Control Commissioners, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
§ 111.04 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Police officers are authorized to check all liquor establishments for
possible violations.
   (B)   Fire, Health and Building Inspectors shall make inspections for
compliance as required, to protect public safety and health, with applicable
Fire, Health and Building Codes and regulations and submit a written report
thereof to the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 111.04) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999)
§ 111.05 SIGNS.
   (A)   Display signs. No display or advertisement signs, located either
inside or outside of the licensed premises, shall be illuminated or otherwise
lighted during the closing hours as provided for in this chapter.
   (B)   Display of birth defects warning signs. Every holder of a retail
license, whether the licensee sells or offers for sale alcoholic liquors for
use or consumption on or off the licensed premises, shall cause a sign with the
message “GOVERNMENT WARNING: ACCORDING TO THE SURGEON GENERAL, WOMEN SHOULD NOT
DRINK ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES DURING PREGNANCY BECAUSE OF THE RISK OF BIRTH
DEFECTS” to be framed and hung in plain view. These signs shall be a minimum of
eight and one-half inches by 11 inches.
(Prior Code, § 111.05) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999)
§ 111.06 NON-CONFORMING USES.
   (A)   It is the intent of this section to provide for the regulation of non-
conforming uses under this chapter and to specify those circumstances and
conditions under which non-conforming uses shall be accepted or shall gradually
be eliminated.
   (B)   Any business which existed lawfully at the time of the adoption of
this chapter and which remains or becomes non-conforming upon the adoption of
this chapter, or any subsequent amendment thereto, may continue only in
accordance with the following regulations.
      (1)   Repairs and alterations. Ordinary repairs and alterations may be
made to non-conforming use business; provided that, no structural alterations
shall be made to the premises, except those required by law, or except to make
the premises or structure and use thereof conform to the regulations of the
zoning district in which it is located. Any other alterations or repairs are
subject to approval of the City Council.
      (2)   Reolcation. Relocation of the business to another location must
conform to this chapter at the new location as well as the previous non-
conforming location.
      (3)   Abandonment. Abandonment of the business will occur if the current
licensee fails to renew such license as prescribed hereunder and may only
reapply for such license that conforms to the regulations of this chapter.
      (4)   Conviction. Conviction of any offense, by any agency or court
having legal jurisdiction, that would cause a license denial of a new applicant
by any owner, partner or their agents must conform to this chapter and renewal
of non-conforming use(s) shall not be allowed.
      (5)   Failure. Failure to comply with any other city ordinance or laws
applicable to the business will require conformity with this chapter no later
than the next renewal period.
(Prior Code, § 111.06) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999)
§ 111.07 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage
and publication as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 111.07) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999)
PROHIBITED CONDUCT; OPERATIONS
§ 111.20 UNDERAGE DRINKING AND VIOLATIONS; MINORS.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent or employee of any
premises to knowingly allow any person under the age of 21 years to violate any
provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to knowingly suffer
or permit any person under the age of 21 years of which he or she may be the
parent or guardian to violate any provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   No person under the age of 21 shall be permitted within the premises
of any liquor establishment licensed for the consumption of alcohol on the
premises, other than restaurants or banquet type facilities or, unless he or
she is with his or her parents or legal guardian.
(Prior Code, § 111.20) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999) Penalty, see §
111.99
Statutory reference:
   Sales to or any possession and the like by underage persons, 235 ILCS 5/6-16
through 235 ILCS 5/6-20
§ 111.21 CONSUMPTION OR POSSESSION ON PUBLIC WAY, PARKING LOT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drink, consume, transport, carry or
possess any alcoholic liquor, except in the original package and with the seal
unbroken, on a public street, sidewalk, parkway, public parking lot or semi-
public parking lot. The term SEMI-PUBLIC PARKING LOT shall include any area
wherein motor vehicles are parked by the public in conjunction with any
business, enterprise, commercial establishment or multi-family residence.
(Prior Code, § 111.21) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.22 CONSUMPTION OR POSSESSION; FALSE IDENTIFICATION; EMPLOYMENT OF
UNDERAGE PERSON.
   (A)   No person under the age of 21 years shall consume, purchase or accept
delivery of alcoholic liquor or have alcoholic liquor in his or her possession,
excepting the possession and dispensing or consumption by a person under the
age of 21 years of alcoholic liquor in the performance of a religious service
or ceremony, or the consumption by a person under the age of 21 years under the
direct supervision and approval of the parent(s) or guardian(s).
   (B)   No person shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to a person
under the age of 21 years, except as allowed in division (A) above.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to use
false identification or the identification of another in order to obtain
admittance to or obtain alcoholic liquor from any liquor establishment.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give or furnish any
person under the age of 21 years any identification which is used by any other
person for the purpose of gaining entrance into a liquor establishment of which
is used for the purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic
beverage.
   (E)   The licensee, each on-site manager and all sales, waitstaff and other
employees engaged in the selling, serving or delivery of alcoholic beverages to
customers, guests or patrons for consumption on or off the premises shall take
and successfully complete a Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers Education and
Training (BASSET) program that has been certified by the state in accordance
with state law.
(Prior Code, § 111.22) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999; Ord. 2022-024, passed
3-22-2022) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.23 TEEN DANCES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to conduct or allow a teen dance
on any part of a licensed premises at any time during the period for which a
liquor license is issued to those premises and alcohol is being served to other
patrons.
   (B)   This section shall not prohibit any teen dance operated by any unit of
government, any school or any religious organization whose church is located
within the city.
(Prior Code, § 111.23) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.24 VIOLATION OF STATE, FEDERAL OR MUNICIPAL LAW.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee in the conduct of the licensed
premises or upon the licensed premises to violate any law of the state, any law
of the United States or any rule of the State Liquor Control Commission.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee, in the conduct of his or
her business, to commit, suffer or permit, through himself or herself, agent,
servant or employee, a violation of a city ordinance.
      (2)   Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter, by an officer, director, shareholder,
associate, representative, agent or employee of any licensee, shall be deemed
and held to be an act of the employer or licensee and the employer or licensee
shall be punishable in the same manner as if the act or omission had been done
or omitted by him or her personally.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to suffer or permit a violation
of any rule or regulation of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
(Prior Code, § 111.24) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.25 REPORT OF VIOLATIONS.
   A licensee shall immediately report to the police a violation of any city
ordinance, state law or federal law occurring in the licensed premises, or
outside the licensed premises, and adjacent thereto, involving the conduct of
his or her business or patrons.
(Prior Code, § 111.25) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.26 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   It shall be unlawful to sell, or offer for sale, at retail any alcoholic
liquor in the city, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Monday
through Thursday. Friday and Saturday the hours shall be 3:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
Sunday the hours shall be 3:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m., except as provided herein.
A class A-1, A-1V, A-2, A-2V, C-1, C-IV, and M license may sell or offer for
sale at retail any alcoholic liquor in the city between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 12:00 p.m. on Sunday, only with prior authorization from the Local Liquor
Commissioner..
(Prior Code, § 111.26) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999; Ord. 2014-016, passed
4-8-2014; Ord. 2024-040, passed 10-8-2024; Ord. 2025-044, passed 8-26-2025)
Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.27 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   Every licensee under this subchapter engaged in the sale of alcoholic
beverages shall conduct his or her place of business in a quiet, decent and
respectable manner and shall eject therefrom or refuse to admit thereto all
persons rendering themselves objectionable or undesirable by reason of undue
noise or other acts disturbing the peace.
(Prior Code, § 111.27) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.28 FURNISHING INTOXICANTS TO PERSONS UNDER THE INFLUENCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any licensee, officer, associate, member, agent,
representative or employee of such licensee to give or deliver any alcoholic
liquor or intoxicating beverage to a person under the influence of alcohol or
drugs.
(Prior Code, § 111.28) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.29 SOLICITING DRINKS AND PROSTITUTION.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone to solicit another for a drink and
prostitution is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 111.29) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.30 OBSCENE ACTS AND ENTERTAINMENT.
   It shall be unlawful to permit the following conduct in licensed premises:
   (A)   Performance of acts, or simulated acts of sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or other sexual
acts;
   (B)   The actual or simulated touching, caressing fondling of the breasts,
buttocks, pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals;
   (C)   The actual or simulated display of the breasts, buttocks, pubic hair,
anus, vulva or genitals;
   (D)   Permitting any person to remain upon licensed premises who exposes to
the public view any portion of his or her breasts, buttocks, pubic hair,
genitals, vulva or anus;
   (E)   No fashion shows shall be permitted at which male or female
undergarments, bathing suits or lingerie is displayed on human bodies; and/or
   (F)    No person shall sell or offer for sale or offer, as a prize for a
raffle, any clothing that constitutes male or female undergarments, bathing
suits or lingerie.
(Prior Code, § 111.30) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.31 LIVE ENTERTAINMENT ON LICENSED PREMISES.
   Live entertainment shall only be allowed on premises where the proper
license is displayed.
(Prior Code, § 111.31) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.32 DISORDERLY PERSONS AND CONDUCT; REPORT.
   (A)   Every licensee shall immediately report to the police any act by any
person or patron rendering himself or herself objectionable, causing undue
noise or disturbance, breach of peace, unusual conduct or a person with a
firearm, knife, bludgeon or deadly instrument.
   (B)   No person licensed under the provisions of this subchapter shall
suffer any loud or boisterous talking, or obscene or profane language,
quarreling, singing, fighting or other disturbance of persons passing along any
street or public square in the vicinity thereof or to the disturbance of the
peace and quiet of persons doing business or residing in the neighborhood
thereof.
(Prior Code, § 111.32) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.33 ATTIRE OF EMPLOYEES, AGENTS OR WORKERS.
   (A)   All persons or employees working within a licensed establishment shall
be decently clothed.
   (B)   Topless, swimwear, lingerie or similar type of attire is hereby
prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 111.33) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.34 SANITARY CONDITIONS.
   All premises used for the retail of alcoholic liquor or for the storage of
such liquor for such sale shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and
shall be kept in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the
ordinance regulating the condition of premises used for the storage or sale of
food for human consumption.
(Prior Code, § 111.34) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.35 DISEASED EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with, or who is a carrier
of any contagious, infectious or venereal disease.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person who is afflicted with or carrier
of any such disease to work in or about any premises or to engage in any way in
the handling, preparation or distribution of such liquor.
(Prior Code, § 111.35) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.36 GAMBLING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to suffer or permit any species of
gambling in his or her premises or any part thereof or any place adjacent
thereto under his or her control unless authorized under state law and local
ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 111.36) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999; Ord. 12-186, passed 6-
12-2012; Ord. 2018-049, passed 9-25-2018) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.37 OPEN CONTAINERS; REMOVAL.
   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit alcoholic liquor, except in
the original package and with the seal unbroken, to be taken out of the
premises wherein it was sold, delivered or given.
(Prior Code, § 111.37) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.38 CLOSING HOURS.
   (A)   No licensee shall sell, offer for sale or deliver any alcoholic liquor
after the closing hour. After the closing hour, all doors directly opening into
or out of the licensed premises shall be securely locked and no patrons or
customers shall be allowed into the premises. All premises shall be vacated
within 20 minutes after the closing hour.
   (B)   The above prohibitions shall not apply to licensed premises wherein
the sale of alcoholic liquor is incidental to the sale or service of other
items therein, such as grocery stores or restaurants.
   (C)   All licensees shall be required to allow police officers into the
licensed premises after the closing hour in order to determine the compliance
with this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 111.38) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.39 “HAPPY HOUR”; REDUCED DRINK PRICES.
   (A)   All licensees shall maintain a schedule of the prices charged for all
drinks of alcoholic liquor to be served and consumed on the licensed premises
or in any room or part thereof. Whenever a hotel or multi-use establishment
which holds a valid retailer’s license operates on its premises more than one
establishment at which drinks of alcoholic liquor are sole at retail, the hotel
or multi-use establishment shall maintain at each such establishment a separate
schedule of the prices charged for such drinks at the establishment.
   (B)   No licensee or employee or agent of such licensee shall:
      (1)   Serve two or more drinks of alcoholic liquor at one time to one
person for consumption by that one person, except selling or delivering wine by
the bottle or carafe;
      (2)   Sell, offer to sell or serve to any person an unlimited number of
drinks of alcoholic liquor during any set period of time for a fixed price,
except at private functions not open to the general public;
      (3)   Sell, offer to sell or serve any drink of alcoholic liquor to any
person on any one date at a reduced price other than that charged other
purchasers of drinks on that day where such reduced price is a promotion to
encourage consumption of alcoholic liquor, except as authorized in division (C)
(7) below;
      (4)   Increase the volume of alcoholic liquor contained in a drink, or
the size of a drink of alcoholic liquor, without increasing proportionately the
price regularly charged for the drink on that day;
      (5)   Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or contest
which involves drinking alcoholic liquor or the awarding of drinks of alcoholic
liquor as prizes for such game or contest on the licensed premises; and/or
      (6)   Advertise or promote in any way, whether on or off the licensed
premises, any of the practices prohibited under divisions (B)(1) through (B)(5)
above.
   (C)   Nothing in division (B) above shall be construed to prohibit a
licensee from:
      (1)   Offering free food or entertainment at any time;
      (2)   Including drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a meal package;
      (3)   Including drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a hotel package;
      (4)   Negotiating drinks of alcoholic liquor as part of a contract
between a hotel or multi-use establishment and another group for the holding of
any function, meeting, convention or trade show;
      (5)   Providing room service to persons renting rooms at a hotel;
      (6)   Selling pitchers for equivalent, including, but not limited to,
buckets, carafes or bottles of alcoholic liquor which are customarily sold in
such manner and delivered to two or more persons at one time; and/or
      (7)   Increasing prices of drinks of alcoholic liquor in lieu of, in
whole or in part, a cover charge to offset the cost of special entertainment
not regularly scheduled.
(Prior Code, § 111.39) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.40  LIMITATION ON DRINKS.
   In the establishment of any licensee licensed for consumption of alcoholic
liquor on the premises where sold, no alcoholic drinks, spirits, or distilled
liquors shall be sold by the bottle or other original container. No bottle
service, defined as the sale of liquor by the bottle, will be permitted in any
licensed establishment within the city. This limitation does not apply to beer
or wine.
(Ord. 2023-006, passed 1-24-2023)
§ 111.41 NUISANCE ACTIVITY.
   Nuisance declared. Any premises, licensed or unlicensed, used to conduct the
sale of alcoholic liquors in violation of the Liquor Control Act of 1934 (235
ILCS 5/1-1. et seq.) or this chapter is declared a public nuisance per se, as
defined in Chapter 95 of the City Code. Nuisance properties or nuisance
activities are prohibited and cannot be engaged in by the licensee, licensee’s
ownership, staff or agents, or patrons of the licensee. Any acts of violence,
including but not limited to shootings and gunfire, outside the licensed
premise by the premise’s patrons will be considered a nuisance activity per se.
In addition, any acts disturbing the peace of the residents in the area
surrounding the licensed premises, by the premises patrons, ownership, staff or
agents, including but not limited to consistent littering, loitering, or noise
disturbances will be considered a nuisance per se.
(Ord. 2023-006, passed 1-24-2023)
LICENSES
§ 111.50 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the sale at retail of
any alcoholic beverage of any kind without first obtaining a license therefor
from the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business to, or
conduct a business where patrons are allowed to bottle, blend, deliver,
furnish, give, divide, distribute, barter, use, consume, possess or store
alcoholic liquors in any commercial establishment without first obtaining a
license therefore from the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to bottle, blend, deliver,
furnish, give, divide, distribute, barter, use, consume, possess or store
alcoholic liquors on any premises which has not been licensed by the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish containers, water or
other beverages for the mixture thereof for alcoholic liquors in any commercial
establishment which has not been licensed by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person, business, licensee, agent,
servant or employee to allow or permit any persons to commit any of the acts
prohibited in divisions (A), (B), (C) and (D) above.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of leasing
any premises to allow the use, sale, giving away or consumption on the premises
of alcoholic liquor, without first securing a license or without the lessee
first securing a license from the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
(Prior Code, § 111.50) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.51 LICENSE LIMITATIONS.
   Any license issued hereunder shall be purely a personal privilege to expire
no later than December 31 next after the issuance unless sooner revoked as
provided in this chapter, and such license shall not constitute property nor
shall it be subject to attachment garnishment or execution, nor shall it be
alienable.
(Prior Code, § 111.51) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999)
§ 111.52 IMPOSITION OF CONDITIONS, RESTRICTIONS ON LICENSE.
   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may, as a condition to the issuance of
any liquor license, impose such conditions and restrictions upon each license
as he or she may deem necessary to ensure that operation of the liquor
establishment shall not be harmful to the safety, morals and welfare of the
community.
(Prior Code, § 111.52) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999)
§ 111.53 CHANGES IN PERSONNEL.
   Any changes in partnership, officers, directors, persons holding directly,
beneficially or through any form of indirect or concealed ownership or control,
more than 5% of the stock or ownership interest, or managers of establishments
licensed under this chapter, shall be reported in writing to the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner within ten days of the change. All new personnel shall
meet all the standards of this chapter and must otherwise qualify to hold a
liquor license. All such changes in personnel shall be subject to review by the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
(Prior Code, § 111.53) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999)
§ 111.54 APPLICATION GENERALLY.
   (A)   Every person desiring to engage in the business of selling at retail
shall make application in writing on forms furnished by the city for a license,
stating his or her name, age, residence, length of time in business, whether he
or she then holds or has therefore held a license to conduct such business in
any other village or city in the state, whether he or she has ever been refused
such license by any municipality within the state and whether any license
theretofore granted to him or her for the conduct of such business has ever
been revoked. Such written application shall be verified. Such application
shall be filed with the Local Liquor Control Commission; and such application
shall, at the time of the filing of the same, pay to the City Clerk’s office in
cash the required application fee.
   (B)   (1)   All applications for license under this chapter shall be
delivered to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner to
investigate and consider the application.
      (3)   For this purpose, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may enlist
the aid of the Chief of Police and any other city officials or officers that he
or she deems necessary to complete the investigation. The investigation shall
include a background and credit check.
      (4)   Upon completion of the investigation, the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner shall approve or disapprove the issuance of a license based on the
application; provided, in case of approval, that there exists an available
license as set forth in this chapter.
   (C)   Before any action is taken upon any application as provided in this
chapter, the applicant shall pay to the city the sum of $75, no part of which
shall be refundable, to cover the city’s cost in reviewing and investigation
such applicant.
   (D)   As part of the application process, the applicant may be required to
execute a sufficient number of personal inquiry waiver forms so as to allow the
Liquor Commissioner to obtain information about the applicant, and information
about businesses located outside the city in which the applicant has an
interest, from other jurisdictions and law enforcement agencies.
   (E)   (1)   Except for applications for new licenses during the course of
the annual year, no application will be accepted or approved unless the
application is fully completed, the questions answered, properly signed and
verified.
      (2)   Failure to complete the application and to file the same within the
time limit prescribed herein shall be deemed grounds for refusal of the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner to review such license.
   (F)   The application shall contain such queries as shall intelligently
inform the Local Liquor Control Commissioner as to whether or not the applicant
is eligible for a license and complies with the applicable requirements of the
Liquor Control Act of 1934 (235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.) for retail liquor license.
   (G)   (1)   Applicants may be required to submit information as to sources
of funds for the purchase or operation of their businesses.
      (2)   The Commissioner may require such other information in writing or
an oral examination.
   (H)   Misstatements in the application shall be deemed grounds for refusal
to issue or renew the license and, if a license is issued, grounds for
revocation.
(Prior Code, § 111.54) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999)
Statutory reference:
   Licensee qualification, see 235 ILCS 5/4-1, 235 ILCS 5/6-12 and 235 ILCS 5/
6-25
§ 111.55 FINGERPRINTING OF LICENSED APPLICANTS.
   (A)   The applicant for a license under this chapter shall be fingerprinted
and a complete set of fingerprints maintained on file with the Police
Department.
   (B)   In case of corporations, the manager or person in charge shall also be
fingerprinted.
(Prior Code, § 111.55) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999)
§ 111.56 PERSONS INELIGIBLE TO BE LICENSED.
   No license required by this chapter shall be issued to:
   (A)   A person who is not a resident of the city;
   (B)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which he or she resides;
   (C)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States;
   (D)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state
law, if the Commissioner determined after the investigation that such person
has not been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust;
   (E)   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a
house of ill fame;
   (F)   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality;
   (G)   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked for
cause;
   (H)   A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license upon first
application;
   (I)   A co-partnership, unless all of the members of such co-partnership
shall be qualified to obtain a license;
   (J)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholders owning in aggregate more than 5% of the stock of such corporation,
would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than
citizenship and residence within the political subdivision;
   (K)   A corporation unless it is incorporated in the state, or unless it is
a foreign corporation which is qualified under the State Business Corporation
Act of 1983, 805 ILCS 5, to transact business in the state;
   (L)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent,
unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required by the
licensee;
   (M)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor,
subsequent to the passage of this section, or has forfeited his or her bond to
appear in court to answer charges for any such violation;
   (N)   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a
license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for
which the license is to be issued;
   (O)   Any law enforcing public official, including members of the Local
Liquor Control Commission, the Mayor of the city, any member of a City Council;
and no such official shall be interested in any way, either directly or
indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor;
   (P)   A person who is not beneficial owner of the business to be operated by
the licensee;
   (Q)   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense;
   (R)   A person to whom a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering
stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period;
   (S)   A co-partnership to which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period, or if any of the partners have been issued a federal gaming device
stamp or federal wagering stamp by the federal government for the current tax
period;
   (T)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 20% of the stock of such
corporation, has been issued a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp for the current tax period; and
   (U)   Any premises for which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period.
(Prior Code, § 111.56) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999)
§ 111.57 LOCATION OF PLACE OF SALE.
   (A)   No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic
liquor within 300 feet, as measured from property line to property line of any
church, school or home for the aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their
surviving spouses or children or any military or naval station; provided that,
this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant service,
regularly organized clubs or to restaurants where sale of alcoholic liquors is
not the principal business carried on.
   (B)   No alcoholic beverage shall be sold, offered for sale, kept for sale,
displayed or advertised for sale at retail or delivered to any person
purchasing same at retail, except at the location, place or premises described
in a liquor license.
(Prior Code, § 111.57) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.58 LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS AND FEES.
   Licenses issued under this chapter shall be divided into license classes.
The license classifications are as follows.
   (A)   Bar/tavern/saloon.
      (1)   Class A-1 (no packaged goods). A Class A-1 license shall authorize
the licensee to make sales at retail of alcoholic liquor for consumption only
on the premises where sold. Video gaming as defined under the Illinois Video
Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.) shall not be allowed in a Class A-1 licensed
premises. The license fee for a Class A-1 license shall be $1,000 per annum
plus an amount based on occupancy load as set forth in division (A)(6) below.
The license fee shall be payable on January 1 of each year.
      (2)   Class A-1V (no packaged goods - video gaming). A Class A-1V license
shall authorize the licensee to make sales at retail of alcoholic liquor for
consumption only on the premises where sold. This class shall permit video
gaming terminals on the property subject to licensee having a video gaming
license issued by the Illinois Gaming Board in accordance with the Illinois
Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.). The license fee for a Class A-1V
license shall be $1,500 per annum plus an amount based on occupancy load as set
forth in division (A)(6) below. The license fee shall be payable on January 1
of each year.
      (3)   Class A-2 (premises-packaged goods). A Class A-2 license shall
authorize the licensee to make sales at retail of alcoholic liquor for use or
consumption on or off the premises where sold; provided that any alcoholic
liquor sold to go off premises must be in its original sealed container. Video
gaming as defined under the Illinois Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.)
shall not be allowed in a Class A-2 licensed premises. The license fee for a
Class A-2 license shall be $1,250 per annum plus an amount based on occupancy
load as set forth in division (A)(6) below. The license fee shall be payable on
January 1 of each year.
      (4)   Class A-2V (premises-packaged goods - video gaming). A Class A-2V
license shall authorize the licensee to make sales at retail of alcoholic
liquor for use or consumption on or off the premises where sold; provided that
any alcoholic liquor sold to go off premises must be in its original sealed
container. This class shall permit video gaming terminals on the property
subject to licensee having a video gaming license issued by the Illinois Gaming
Board in accordance with the Illinois Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.).
The license fee for a Class A-2V license shall be $1,750 per annum plus an
amount based on occupancy load as set forth in division (A)(6) below. The
license fee shall be payable on January 1 of each year.
      (5)   Class AA (additional bar/pouring station). A Class AA license shall
authorize the holder of a Class A-1, A-1V, A-2 or A-2V to operate an additional
bar and/or pouring station within the licensed establishment. The license fee
for a Class AA license shall be $500 per additional bar and/or pouring station.
The license fee shall be payable on January 1 of each year.
      (6)   Fee; load. The annual license fee for Class A-1, A-1V, A-2 or A-2V
licenses shall include the following amounts based upon occupancy load:
         (a)   Occupancy load 0—74. Establishments where the occupancy of the
licensed premises does not exceed 74 persons shall pay an additional $200 per
year;
         (b)   Occupancy load 75—149. Establishments where the occupancy of the
licensed premises does not exceed 149 persons shall pay an additional $400 per
year;
         (c) Occupancy load 150—199. Establishments where the occupancy of the
licensed premises does not exceed 199 persons shall pay an additional $600 per
year;
         (d)   Occupancy load 200—249. Establishments where the occupancy of
the licensed premises does not exceed 249 persons shall pay an additional $800
per year;
         (e)   Occupancy load 250—299. Establishments where the occupancy of
the licensed premises does not exceed 299 persons shall pay an additional
$1,000 per year;
         (g)   Occupancy load 300—349. Establishments where the occupancy of
the licensed premises does not exceed 349 persons shall pay an additional
$1,200 per year;
         (h)   Occupancy load 350—399. Establishments where the occupancy of
the licensed premises does not exceed 399 persons shall pay an additional
$1,400 per year; and
         (i)   Occupancy load 400+. Establishments where the occupancy of the
licensed premises exceeds 399 persons shall pay an additional $1,600 per year.
   (B)   Retail - package.
      (1)   Class B (package).
         (a)   Generally. A Class B license shall authorize the licensee to
make sales at retail of alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises, but not for
consumption on the premises. All alcoholic liquor sold to go off premises must
be in its original sealed container. It shall be lawful to permit the tasting
or sampling of alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises if the tasting or
sampling is part of a promotion, is of a temporary nature, or if no direct or
indirect charge is made therefore. The license fee for a Class B license shall
be $1,250 per annum payable on January 1 of each year.
         (b)   Class B (package) requirements. A Class B license may be granted
or renewed if:
            1.   The primary purpose of the licensed premises shall be for the
sale at retail of alcoholic liquor;
            2.   The licensed premises derives more than 75% of its gross
revenue (on an annual basis) from the retail sales of alcoholic liquor. The
burden of meeting the determination shall be on the licensee. The records used
to determine whether said 75% standard has been met shall include, but not be
limited to, audited financial statements, corporate financial reports, tax
return information, state liquor license reports, or any other form of
information deemed acceptable by the Liquor Control Commissioner; and
            3.   The licensed premises shall contain not less than 1,500 square
feet of above-grade retail floor area open to the public.
      (2)   Class B-1 (grocery store - package).
         (a)   Generally. A Class B-1 license shall authorize the licensee to
make sales at retail of alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises, but not for
consumption on the premises. All alcoholic liquor sold must be in its original
sealed container. This class shall not permit entertainment, tasting or
sampling on the property. The license fee for a Class B-1 license shall be
$1,250 per annum payable on January 1 of each year.
         (b)   Class B-1 (grocery store-package) requirements. A Class B-
1 license may be granted or renewed if:
            1.   The primary purpose of the licensed premises shall be for
retail sales other than the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, such as a grocery
store or drug store;
            2.   The licensed premises derives more than 60% of its gross
revenue (on an annual basis) from retail sales other than the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor. The burden of meeting the determination shall be on the
licensee. The records used to determine whether said 60% standard has been met
shall include, but not be limited to, audited financial statements, corporate
financial reports, tax return information, state liquor license reports or any
other form of information deemed acceptable by the Liquor Control Commissioner;
            3.   The licensed premises shall contain not less than 1,500 square
feet of above-grade retail floor area open to the public; and
            4.   The square footage devoted to the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor shall not exceed 10% of the retail floor area open to the public.
      (3)   Class B-2 (grocery store - package - beer and wine only).
         (a)   Generally. A Class B-2 license shall authorize the licensee to
make sales at retail of beer and wine only on the licensed premises, but not
for consumption on the premises. All beer and wine sold must be in its original
sealed container. This class shall not permit video gaming terminals,
entertainment, tasting or sampling on the property. The license fee for a Class
B-2 license shall be $1,000 per annum payable on January 1 of each year.
         (b)   Class B-2 (grocery store-package- beer and wine only)
requirements. A Class B-2 license may be granted or renewed if:
            1.   The primary purpose of the licensed premises shall be for
retail sales other than the retail sale of beer and wine, such as a grocery
store or drug store;
            2.   The licensed premises derived more than 60% of its gross
revenue (on an annual basis) from the sale of retail goods other than the
retail sale of beer and wine. The burden of meeting the determination shall be
on the licensee. The records used to determine whether said 60% standard has
been met shall include, but not be limited to, audited financial statements,
corporate financial reports, tax return information, state liquor license
reports or any other form of information deemed acceptable by the Liquor
Control Commissioner;
            3.   The licensed premises shall contain not less than 1,500 square
feet of retail floor area open to the public; and
            4.   The square footage devoted to the retail sale of beer and wine
shall not exceed 10%.
      (4)   Class B-3 (gas station - package - beer and wine only).
         (a)   Generally. A Class B-3 license shall authorize the licensee to
make sales at retail of beer and wine only on the licensed premises, but not
for consumption on the premises. All beer and wine sold must be in its original
sealed container. This class shall not permit video gaming terminals,
entertainment, tasting or sampling on the property. The license fee for a Class
B-3 license shall be $1,000 per annum payable on January 1 of each year.
         (b)   Class B-3 (gas station-package- beer and wine only)
requirements. A Class B-3 license may be granted or renewed if:
            1.   The primary purpose of the licensed premises shall be those of
a gas station which is licensed to sell motor fuel, and which engages in the
retail sale of groceries, sundries, convenience items, and periodicals; the
retail sale of beer and wine being incident thereto;
            2.   The licensed premises derives more than 70% of its gross
revenue (on an annual basis) from the sale of retail goods other than the
retail sale of beer and wine. The burden of meeting the determination shall be
on the licensee. The records used to determine whether said 70% standard has
been met shall include, but not be limited to, audited financial statements,
corporate financial reports, tax return information, state liquor license
reports or any other form of information deemed acceptable by the Liquor
Control Commissioner; and
            3.   The square footage devoted to the retail sale of beer and wine
shall not exceed 10%.
      (5)   Class B-3V (gas station - package - beer and wine only - video
gaming). A Class B-3V license shall authorize the licensee to make sales at
retail of beer and wine only on the licensed premises, but not for consumption
on the premises, subject to the same requirements as a Class B-3 license. This
class shall permit video gaming terminals on the property subject to licensee
having a video gaming license issued by the Illinois Gaming Board in accordance
with the Illinois Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.). The proceeds from
video gaming terminals shall not be used when determining whether the license
holder meets the 70% threshold of its gross revenue from the sale of retail
goods other than the retail sale of beer and wine. All beer and wine sold must
be in its original sealed container. This class shall not permit entertainment,
tasting or sampling on the property. The license fee for a Class B-3V license
shall be $1,750 per annum payable on January 1 of each year.
   (C)   Bowling alley.
      (1)   Class C-1 (bowling alley).
         (a)   Generally. A Class C-1 license shall authorize the licensee to
make sales at retail of alcoholic liquor for consumption only on the premises
where sold in conjunction with the operation of a licensed bowling alley. Video
gaming as defined under the Illinois Video Gaming Act, being 230 ILCS 40/1 et
seq., shall not be allowed in a Class C-1 licensed premises. The license fee
for a Class C-1 license shall be $1,250 per annum payable on January 1 of each
year.
         (b)   Class C-l (bowling alley) requirements. A Class C-l license may
be granted or renewed if:
            1.   The primary purpose of the licensed premises shall be for the
operation of a bowling alley;
            2.   The premises has ten or more lanes available for bowling;
            3.   The premises offers the patrons full bowling facilities with
liquor service incidental to bowling; and
            4.   The licensed premises derives more than 60% of its gross
revenue (on an annual basis) from the retail sale of goods and services other
than the retail sale of alcoholic liquors. The burden of meeting the
determination shall be on the licensee. The records used to determine whether
said 60% standard has been met shall include, but not be limited to, audited
financial statements, corporate financial reports, tax return information,
state liquor license reports or any other form of information deemed acceptable
by the Liquor Control Commissioner.
      (2)   Class C-1V (bowling alley-video gaming). A Class C-1V license shall
authorize the licensee to make sales at retail of alcoholic liquor for
consumption only on the premises where sold in conjunction with the operation
of a licensed bowling alley, subject to the same requirements as a Class C-
1 license. This class shall permit video gaming terminals on the property
subject to licensee having a video gaming license issued by the Illinois Gaming
Board in accordance with the Illinois Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.).
The proceeds from video gaming terminals shall not be used when determining
whether the license holder meets the 60% threshold of its gross revenue from
the retail sale of goods and services other than that of alcoholic liquors. The
license fee for a Class C-1V license shall be $1,7500 per annum payable on
January 1 of each year.
   (D)   Restaurants.
      (1)   Class D-1 (beer and wine only).
         (a)   Generally. A Class D-1 license shall authorize the licensee to
make sales at retail of beer and wine only for consumption on the premises, as
an integral part of a licensed restaurant facility. Video gaming as defined
under the Illinois Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.) shall not be
allowed in a Class D-1 licensed premises. The license fee for a Class D-
1 license shall be $1,000 per annum plus an amount based on occupancy load as
set forth in division (D)(6). The license fee shall be payable on January 1 of
each year.
         (b)   Class D-1 (beer and wine only) requirements. A Class D-l license
may be granted or renewed if:
            1.   The facilities for food preparation and service are primarily
those of a restaurant;
            2.   The restaurant derives more than 60% of its gross revenue (on
an annual basis) from the sale of food. The determination of whether the 60%
gross revenue standard has been met shall be made at the time of license
renewal for the year just ended. The burden of meeting the determination shall
be on the licensee. The records used to determine whether said 60% standard has
been met shall include, but not be limited to, audited financial statements,
corporate financial reports, tax return information, state liquor license
reports or any other form of information deemed acceptable by the Liquor
Control Commissioner; and
            3.   Alcoholic liquor is served along with food.
      (2)   Class D-1V (beer and wine only- video gaming). A Class D-1V license
shall authorize the licensee to make sales at retail of beer and wine only for
consumption only on the premises, as an integral part of a licensed restaurant
facility subject to the same requirements as a Class D-1 license. This class
shall permit video gaming terminals on the property subject to licensee having
a video gaming license issued by the Illinois Gaming Board in accordance with
the Illinois Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.). The proceeds from video
gaming terminals shall not be used when determining whether the license holder
meets the 60% threshold of its gross revenue from the sale of foods. The
license fee for a Class D-1V license shall be $1,500 per annum plus an amount
based on occupancy load as set forth in division (D)(6) below. The license fee
shall be payable on January 1 of each year.
      (3)   Class D-2 (alcoholic liquor). A Class D-2 license shall authorize
the licensee to make sales at retail of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the
premises, as an integral part of a licensed restaurant facility, subject to the
same requirements as a Class D-1 license. Video gaming as defined under the
Illinois Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.) shall not be allowed in a
Class D-2 licensed premises. The license fee for a Class D-2 license shall be
$1,250 per annum plus an amount based on occupancy load as set forth in
division (D)(6) below. The license fee shall be payable on January 1 of each
year.
      (4)   Class D-2V (alcoholic liquor- video gaming). A Class D-2V license
shall authorize the licensee to make sales at retail of alcoholic liquor for
consumption only on the premises, as an integral part of a licensed restaurant
facility subject to the same requirements as a Class D-1 license. This class
shall permit video gaming terminals on the property subject to licensee having
a video gaming license issued by the Illinois Gaming Board in accordance with
the Illinois Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.). The proceeds from video
gaming terminals shall not be used when determining whether the license holder
meets the 60% threshold of its gross revenue from the sale of foods. The
license fee for a Class D-2V license shall be $1,750 per annum plus an amount
based on occupancy load as set forth in division (D)(6) below. The license fee
shall be payable on January 1 of each year.
      (5)   Class DA (additional bar/pouring station). A Class DA license shall
authorize the holder of a Class D-1, D-1V, D-2 or D-2V to operate an additional
bar and/or pouring station within the licensed establishment. The license fee
for a Class DA license shall be $500 per each additional bar and/or pouring
station. The license fee shall be payable on January 1 of each year.
      (6)   Fee; loads. The annual license fee for Class D-1, D-1V, D-2 or D-2V
licenses shall include the following amounts based upon occupancy load:
         (a)   Occupancy load 0—74. Establishments where the occupancy of the
licensed premises does not exceed 74 persons shall pay an additional $100 per
year;
         (b)   Occupancy load 75—149. Establishments where the occupancy of the
licensed premises does not exceed 149 persons shall pay an additional $200 per
year;
         (c)   Occupancy load 150—199. Establishments where the occupancy of
the licensed premises does not exceed 199 persons shall pay an additional $400
per year;
         (d)   Occupancy load 200—249. Establishments where the occupancy of
the licensed premises does not exceed 249 persons shall pay an additional $600
per year;
         (e)   Occupancy load 250—299. Establishments where the occupancy of
the licensed premises does not exceed 299 persons shall pay an additional $800
per year;
         (f)   Occupancy load 300—349. Establishments where the occupancy of
the licensed premises does not exceed 349 persons shall pay an additional
$1,000 per year;
         (g)   Occupancy load 350—399. Establishments where the occupancy of
the licensed premises does not exceed 399 persons shall pay an additional
$1,200 per year; and
         (h)   Occupancy load 400+. Establishments where the occupancy of the
licensed premises exceeds 399 persons shall pay an additional $1,400 per year.
   (E)   Class E (catering). A Class E license shall authorize the licensee to
make sales at retail of alcoholic liquor for consumption, either on-site or
off-site, where the location is licensed or unlicensed, as an incidental part
of a food service in conjunction with a license catering facility. Prepared
meals and alcoholic liquors are sold at a package price agreed upon under
contract. The license fee for a Class E license shall be $800 per annum payable
on January 1 of each year.
   (F)   Class F (club). A Class F license shall authorize the licensee to make
sales at retail of alcoholic liquor for consumption only on the licensed
premises by club members and guests who are personally accompanied by a club
member. This class shall permit video gaming terminals on the property subject
to licensee having a video gaming license issued by the Illinois Gaming Board
in accordance with the Illinois Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.). The
license fee for a Class F license shall be $800 per annum payable on January 1
of each year.
   (G)   Class G (microbrewery).
      (1)   Generally. A Class G license authorizes the on-site production and
storage of alcoholic and/or nonalcoholic malt liquor in quantities not to
exceed 930,000 gallons per year. Sales by Class G microbreweries must conform
with the requirements set forth in the state statutes, including the Illinois
Liquor Control Act of 1934. This class shall perrmit video gaming terminals on
the property subject to licensee having a video gaming license issued by the
Illinois Gaming Board in accordance with the Illinois Video Gaming Act (230
ILCS 40/1 et seq.). The license fee for a Class G license shall be $1,000 per
annum payable on January 1 of each year.
      (2)   Class G (microbrewery) requirements.
         (a)   A license holder must obtain a valid craft brewer’s license from
the State of Illinois and follow all requirements set forth therein.
         (b)   A license holder must conform with the requirements set forth in
state statutes, including the Illinois Liquor Control Act of 1934.
   (H)   Class H (special events). A Class H license permits the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor containing not more than 4% of alcohol by weight for
consumption only at the location and on the specific date designated for the
special event at temporary stands, booths and counters such as those used at
carnivals, and not for resale in any form. The special event must have received
pre-approval from the Local Liquor Commissioner. A Class H license shall only
be issued to a Class A-1, A-V, A-2 or A-2V or Class G license holder unless
otherwise authorized by the Liquor Commissioner. The license fee for a Class H
license shall be $25 per day and shall only be valid for the event authorized
by the Liquor Commissioner.
   (I)   Class I (meeting room/banquet facility).
      (1)   Generally. A Class I license permits the sale of alcoholic liquor
for consumption on the premises where sold for a meeting room and/or banquet
facility during a prearranged event involving the service of food. Video gaming
as defined under the Illinois Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.) shall
not be allowed in a Class I licensed premises. The license fee for a Class I
license shall be $1,250 per annum plus an amount based on occupancy load as set
forth in division (I)(2) below. The license fee shall be payable on January 1
of each year.
      (2)   Additional fee. The annual license fee for Class I license shall
include the following amounts based upon occupancy load:
         (a)   Occupancy load 0—74. Establishments where the occupancy of the
licensed premises does not exceed 74 persons shall pay an additional $100 per
year;
         (b)   Occupancy load 75—149. Establishments where the occupancy of the
licensed premises does not exceed 149 persons shall pay an additional $200 per
year;
         (c)   Occupancy load 150—199. Establishments where the occupancy of
the licensed premises does not exceed 199 persons shall pay an additional $400
per year;
         (d)   Occupancy load 200—249. Establishments where the occupancy of
the licensed premises does not exceed 249 persons shall pay an additional $600
per year;
         (e)   Occupancy load 250—299. Establishments where the occupancy of
the licensed premises does not exceed 299 persons shall pay an additional $800
per year;
         (f)   Occupancy load 300—349. Establishments where the occupancy of
the licensed premises does not exceed 349 persons shall pay an additional
$1,000 per year;
         (g)   Occupancy load 350—399. Establishments where the occupancy of
the licensed premises does not exceed 399 persons shall pay an additional
$1,200 per year; and
         (h)   Occupancy load 400+. Establishments where the occupancy of the
licensed premises exceeds 399 persons shall pay an additional $1,400 per year.
   (J)   Class M (municipal). A Class M license shall authorize the licensee to
make sales at retail of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the licensed
premises, provided the premises are owned and operated by the city. This class
shall permit video gaming terminals on the property subject to licensee having
a video gaming license issued by the Illinois Gaming Board in accordance with
the Illinois Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.). The license fee for a
Class M license shall be waived by the city.
   (K)   Class BG (beer garden). Any holder of a Class A-1, A-1V, A-2, A-2V, D-
1, D-1V, D-2, D-2V or G liquor license may apply to the Liquor Control
Commissioner for issuance of a Class BG license to operate a beer garden which
allows for the sale and consumption of alcoholic liquor outside of the
permanent structure containing the licensed premises in a location designated
by the Liquor Commissioner. The license fee for a Class “BG” license shall be
$100 per annum payable on January 1 of each year.
      (1)   The permit issued to a liquor licensee shall be effective from
January 1 to December 31 each year.
      (2)   Any licensee whose property is directly adjacent to a residential
unit shall erect a privacy fence or other similar structure to cordon off the
area known as the beer garden. Any structure erected in this regard shall be in
conformity with any and all applicable codes of the city.
      (3)   The licensee shall be held solely responsible for the conduct of
his or her patrons in the permitted beer garden area.
      (4)   There shall be an enclosed area that prohibits unrestricted access
to the beer garden area from a public way.
      (5)   No patron shall leave the licensed premises or permitted beer
garden area with an open beer or liquor container.
      (6)   Any violation of this section shall subject the licensee to a
hearing on his or her license as provided in §§
111.64 and
111.65. The penalty shall be as set forth in §
111.99.
   (L)   Class VGC (video gaming café).
      (1)   Generally. A Class VGC license shall authorize the licensee to make
sales at retail of alcoholic liquor for consumption only on the premises where
sold in conjunction with the primary or major focus or source of revenue being
the operation of video gaming terminals. This class shall permit video gaming
terminals on the property subject to licensee having a video gaming license
issued by the Illinois Gaming Board in accordance with the Illinois Video
Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.). The license fee for a Class VGC license
shall be $1,700 per annum payable on January 1 of each year.
      (2)   Class VGC license requirements. A Class VGC license may be granted
or renewed if:
         (a)   The primary purpose of the licensed premises shall be the
operation of video gaming terminals as defined in Illinois Video Gaming Act
(230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.);
         (b)   The premises offers the patrons video gaming terminals with
liquor service incidental to gaming and food as a secondary amenity; and
         (c)   The occupancy load shall not exceed 74 persons.
   (M)   Limitation on total number of licenses.
      (1)   Class A-1 licenses to be issued under this chapter shall not exceed
five;
      (2)   Class A-1V licenses to be issued under this chapter shall not
exceed 20;
      (3)   Class A-2 licenses to be issued under this chapter shall not exceed
five;
      (4)   Class A-2V licenses to be issued under this chapter shall not
exceed 15;
      (5)   Class AA licenses to be issued under this chapter shall not exceed
five;
      (6)   Class B licenses to be issued under this chapter shall not exceed
three;
      (7)   Class B-1 licenses to be issued under this chapter shall not exceed
three;
      (8)   Class B-2 licenses to be issued under this chapter shall not exceed
three;
      (9)   Class B-3 licenses to be issued under this chapter shall not exceed
two;
      (10)   Class B-3V licenses to be issued under this chapter shall not
exceed three;
      (11)   Class C-1 licenses to be issued under this chapter shall not
exceed zero;
      (12)   Class C-1V licenses to be issued under this chapter shall not
exceed two;
      (13)   Class D-1 licenses to be issued under this chapter shall not
exceed five;
      (14)   Class D-1V licenses to be issued under this chapter shall not
exceed six;
      (15)   Class D-2 licenses to be issued under this chapter shall not
exceed ten;
      (16)   Class D-2V licenses to be issued under this chapter shall not
exceed eight;
      (17)   Class DA licenses to be issued under this chapter shall not exceed
five;
      (18)   Class E licenses to be issued under this chapter shall not exceed
two;
      (19)   Class F licenses to be issued under this chapter shall not exceed
zero;
      (20)   Class G licenses to be issued under this chapter shall not exceed
three;
      (21)   Class M licenses to be issued under this chapter shall not exceed
one;
      (22)   Class I licenses to be issued under this chapter shall not exceed
three;
      (23)   Class BG licenses to be issued under this chapter shall not exceed
30; and
      (24)   Class VGC licenses to be issued under this chapter shall not
exceed five.
   (N)   Class N (distillery). A Class N license shall be known as the craft
distiller license. It shall authorize a distiller to manufacture spirits by
distillation in quantities not to exceed the number of gallons authorized for
production each year by a craft distillery in the Liquor Control Act of 1934
(ILCS Act 235, Ch. 5, §§ 1-1 et seq.) and the storage of such spirits. A craft
distiller license shall allow the licensee to sell to distributors and to non-
licensees in accordance with the Liquor Control Act (or similar act) of the
State of Illinois. The craft distiller license shall allow the licensee to
offer spirits manufactured by the licensee on the premises specified in such
license for sale by the glass on the premises and in packaged form at retail on
the premises specified in such license for the use or consumption off the
premises. A craft distiller license shall permit the licensee to conduct
tastings of spirits for which remuneration may or may not be received. A single
tasting of distilled spirits shall not exceed one-fourth of one ounce. No more
than three tastings of distilled spirits shall be provided to any person on any
day. It shall be unlawful for such licensee to offer tastings or sell alcoholic
liquor for consumption on or off the premises between the hours of 1:00 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m., except New Year’s Day, in which case such tastings and sales
shall not be made between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. The license fee
for a Class N license shall be $1,200 per annum payable on January 1 of each
year.
   (O)   Time period. All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be
valid from the date of issuance, or in the case of renewals, from January 1
through the business night of December 31, including the morning hours of
January 1, per the closing times as stated in the license, or as indicated on
the license. A new or renewed license will be required in order for the
licensed premises to commence operations on January 1 of the new year.
   (P)   Late fee. A late fee of 5% will be assessed each day an applicant
fails to timely re-apply for its license after January 1 of the new year.
   (Q)   Refunds. No refund of any fee shall be made to any licensee.
(Prior Code, § 111.58) (Ord. 2021-054, passed 11-9-2021; Ord. 2022-024, passed
3-22-2022; Ord. 2023-023, passed 3-30-2023; Ord. 2024-016, passed 4-9-2024;
Ord. 2024-040, passed 10-8-2024)
§ 111.59 TEMPORARY LICENSES.
   The Local Liquor Commissioner may issue temporary liquor licenses for a
period not to exceed five days for any special event. The type of alcoholic
beverages to be served, the place of service and the hours of service shall be
established by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. The Liquor Commissioner
may impose a reasonable fee for such license.
(Prior Code, § 111.59) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999)
§ 111.60 PAYMENT OF LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   All license fees required by this chapter shall be paid in full to the
City Clerk.
   (B)   Upon payment of the license fee, the said city license fee shall be
promptly turned over to the City Treasurer for deposit in the corporate fund.
There shall be no proration of any license fee and no refund of any fee paid
for any unused portion of the license required. In the event that payment is
not made by January 1 of any license year, then said license shall be deemed to
have been abandoned by the licensee and said license shall automatically be
terminated for the reason that same has been abandoned.
   (C)   The Liquor Commissioner shall report any license abandonment to the
City Council at the first meeting in January.
(Prior Code, § 111.60) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999)
§ 111.61 LICENSES TO BE DISPLAYED.
   Every licensee shall cause his or her license or licenses to be framed and
hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises.
(Prior Code, § 111.61) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.62 LICENSE FOR DWELLING HOUSE AND THE LIKE PROHIBITED.
   No alcoholic liquor shall be sold at retail in any dwelling house, flat or
apartment building, and no license therefor shall be issued under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 111.62) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.63 ORIGINAL ISSUANCE OR TRANSFER.
   (A)   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may, at his or her discretion,
permit the transfer of interest in or location of a license issued for the
operation of the sale of alcoholic liquors at any location to which such
license has been issued, suspended or revoked upon the payment to the city of
the sum of $100, for such transfer, in addition to any other fees that my be
required hereby. No such transfer shall be made, nor shall any license be
issued, to any premises to which a license has been issued to sell alcoholic
liquors at retail, whether such business is a going business, has been
previously operated and is not out of existence, or where the license has been
suspended or revoked, without payment of the fee provided for in this section.
For the purpose of this section, a transfer of any interest in a partnership,
association or in more than 5% of ownership in shares of the stock of a
corporation shall be a transfer of interest and require the payment of the
transfer fee provided for by this section.
   (B)   Except with the consent of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, as
provided in division (A) above, licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter are not subject to sale, assignment, transfer or to a change of
location.
(Prior Code, § 111.63) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999)
§ 111.64 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   At all hearings, proceedings shall be taken and prepared by a
certified court reporter; and an appeal shall be limited to a review of the
certified official record of the proceedings of the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner. The City Attorney shall act as law officer, ask questions to
clarify statements, advise the Local Commissioner on procedure and law and
otherwise assist the Local Commissioner in the conduct of the hearings. He or
she shall not act as judge or jury or assist the Local Commissioner in making
findings and determinations.
   (B)   In lieu of a hearing, the Local Liquor Commissioner may pretrial the
charges and on a plea of nolo contendere (no contest), fine the licensee as
provided in §
111.03(B) of this chapter.
   (C)   The Local Liquor Commissioner shall have the power to suspend any
license for a period of not to exceed 30 days. In the case of revocation of any
license, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the power to allow
the use of the premises for the sale of alcoholic liquors after 90 days from
the date of such revocation upon his or her determination that the public good
will be served.
   (D)   The Local Liquor Commissioner shall also have the power to fine the
licensee a sum not to exceed $1,000 for each act of violation, and the costs of
the proceedings, including reasonable attorney’s fees. The provisions of this
division (D) shall be cumulative to other powers given the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 111.64) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999)
Statutory reference:
   License revocation or suspension, see 235 ILCS 5/5-4 and 235 ILCS 5/7-5 et
seq.
§ 111.65 COST OF HEARING, RECORDS AND THE LIKE.
   All costs of preparing and transcribing the official record on appeal to the
State Liquor Control Commission by the licensee shall be borne by the licensee
whose license has been suspended or revoked or against whom a fine has been
imposed.
(Prior Code, § 111.65) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999)
§ 111.66 RECORD REVIEW.
   All review or appeal of the actions or orders of the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner of the city shall be made by the Illinois Liquor Control
Commission on the official record made before the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner.
(Ord. 2018-027, passed 4-24-2018)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, group of persons, partnership, firm or corporation violating any
provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than $50, nor more than
$1,000, for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which the violation occurs or continues. In addition, the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the power to revoke, non-renew or
suspend licenses granted under this chapter pursuant to its provisions.
(Prior Code, § 111.99) (Ord. 99-287, passed 12-14-1999)
CHAPTER 112: TOBACCO
Section
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   Prohibiting sale or distribution to minors
   
112.03   Enforcement
   
112.04   Effective date
 
   
112.99   Penalty
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT. A product or device not consisting of or
containing tobacco that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine,
whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting,
sniffing or by any other means. ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT does not include:
cigarettes as defined in § 1 of the Cigarette Tax Act, being 35 ILCS 130/1, and
tobacco products as defined in § 10-5 of the Tobacco Products Tax Act of 1995,
being 35 ILCS 143/10-5; tobacco product and electronic cigarette as defined in
the section; or any product approved by the United States Food and Drug
Administration for the sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco
dependence product, or for other medical purposes and is being marketed and
sold solely for that approved purpose.
   BIDI CIGARETTE. A product that contains tobacco that is wrapped in temburni
or tendu leaf or that is wrapped in any other material identified by rules of
the Department of Public Health that is similar in appearance or
characteristics to the temburni or tendu leaf.
   ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE.
      (1)   Means:
         (a)   Any device that employs a battery or other mechanism to heat a
solution or substance to produce a vapor or aerosol intended for inhalation;
         (b)   Any cartridge or container of a solution or substance intended
to be used with or in the device or to refill the device; or
         (c)   Any solution or substance, whether or not it contains nicotine
intended for use in the device.
      (2)   ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE includes, but is not limited to, any
electronic nicotine delivery system, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo,
electronic pipe, electronic hookah, vape pen or similar product or device, and
any components or parts that can be used to build the product or device.
ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE does not include: cigarettes as defined in § 1 of the
Cigarette Tax Act, being 35 ILCS 130/1, and tobacco products as defined in §
10-5 of the Tobacco Products Tax Act of 1995, being 35 ILCS 143/10-5; tobacco
product and alternative nicotine product as defined in this definition; any
product approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as
a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other
medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved
purpose; any asthma inhaler prescribed by a physician for that condition and is
being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose; or any therapeutic
product approved for use under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot
Program Act, being 410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.
   SMOKING HERBS. All substances of plant origin and their derivatives,
including, but not limited to, broom, calea, California poppy, damiana, hops,
ginseng, lobelia, jimson weed and other members of the Datura genus, passion
flower and wild lettuce, which are processed or sold primarily for use as
smoking materials.
   SMOKELESS TOBACCO. Any tobacco products that are suitable for dipping or
chewing.
   TOBACCO ACCESSORIES. Cigarette papers, pipes, holders of smoking materials
of all types, cigarette rolling machines and other items, designed primarily
for the smoking or ingestion of tobacco products or of substances made illegal
under any statute or of substances whose sale, gift, barter or exchange is made
unlawful under this chapter.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any product containing or made from tobacco that is
intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed,
dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed or ingested by any other means, including,
but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe
tobacco, snuff, snus, and any other smokeless tobacco product which contains
tobacco that is finely cut, ground, powdered, or leaf and intended to be placed
in the oral cavity. TOBACCO PRODUCT includes any component, part or accessory
of a tobacco product, whether or not sold separately. TOBACCO PRODUCT does not
include: an electronic cigarette and alternative nicotine product as defined in
this definition; or any product that has been approved by the United States
Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a
tobacco dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is being
marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose.
(Prior Code, § 112.01) (Ord. 08-016, passed 6-10-2008; Ord. 2020-008, passed 2-
25-2020)
§ 112.02 PROHIBITING SALE OR DISTRIBUTION TO MINORS.
   (A)   Sale. No person under 21 years of age shall buy any tobacco product,
electronic cigarette or alternative nicotine product. No person shall sell, buy
for, distribute samples of or furnish any tobacco product, electronic cigarette
or any alternative nicotine product to any person under 21 years of age.
   (B)   False identification prohibited. No person under 21 years of age in
the furtherance or facilitation of obtaining any tobacco product, electronic
cigarette or alternative nicotine product shall display or use a false or
forged identification card or transfer, alter or deface an identification card.
   (C)   Sales persons. No person under 16 years of age may sell any tobacco
product, electronic cigarette or alternative nicotine product at a retail
establishment selling tobacco products, electronic cigarettes or alternative
nicotine products. This division (C) does not apply to a sales clerk in a
family-owned business which can prove that the sales clerk is in fact a son or
daughter of the owner.
   (D)   Sale identification process. Before selling, offering for sale, giving
or furnishing a tobacco product, electronic cigarette or alternative nicotine
product to another person, the person selling, offering for sale, giving or
furnishing the tobacco product, electronic cigarette or alternative nicotine
product shall verify that the person is at least 21 years of age by:
      (1)   Examining from any person that appears to be under 30 years of age
a government- issued photographic identification that establishes the person to
be 21 years of age or older; or
      (2)   For sales of tobacco products, electronic cigarettes or alternative
nicotine products made through the Internet or other remote sales methods,
performing an age verification through an independent, third party age
verification service that compares information available from public records to
the personal information entered by the person during the ordering process that
establishes the person is 21 years of age or older.
   (E)   Sale of bidi cigarettes. No person shall knowingly sell, barter,
exchange, deliver or give away a bidi cigarette to another person, nor shall a
person cause or permit or procure a bidi cigarette to be sold, bartered,
exchanged, delivered or given away to another person.
   (F)   Sale of cigarette paper. No person shall knowingly offer, sell,
barter, exchange, deliver or give away cigarette paper or cause, permit or
procure cigarette paper to be sold, offered, bartered, exchanged, delivered or
given away, except from premises or an establishment where other tobacco
products are sold. For purposes of this section, TOBACCO PRODUCTS means
cigarettes, cigars, smokeless tobacco or tobacco in any of its forms.
   (G)   Sale of cigarette paper from vending machines. No person shall
knowingly offer, sell, barter, exchange, deliver or give away cigarette paper
or cause, permit or procure cigarette paper to be sold, offered, bartered,
exchanged, delivered or given away by use of a vending or coin-operated machine
or device. For purposes of this section, cigarette paper shall not include any
paper that is incorporated into a product to which a tax stamp must be affixed
under the Cigarette Tax Act (35 ILCS 130/1 et seq.) or the Cigarette Use Tax
Act (35 ILCS 135/1 et seq.).
   (H)   Sale of loose cigarettes prohibited. The sale or distribution by any
person of a tobacco product as defined in this chapter, including, but not
limited to, a single or loose cigarette, that is not contained within a sealed
container, pack or package as provided by the manufacturer, which container,
pack or package bears the health warning required by federal law, is
prohibited.
   (I)   Sting operations. It is not a violation of this section for a person
under 21 years of age to purchase a tobacco product, electronic cigarette or
alternative nicotine product if the person under the age of 21 purchases or is
given the tobacco product, electronic cigarette or alternative nicotine product
in any of its forms from a retail seller of tobacco products, electronic
cigarettes or alternative nicotine products or an employee of the retail seller
pursuant to a plan or action to investigate, patrol, or otherwise conduct a
“sting operation” or enforcement action against a retail seller of tobacco
products, electronic cigarettes or alternative nicotine products or a person
employed by the retail seller of tobacco products, electronic cigarettes or
alternative nicotine products or on any premises authorized to sell tobacco
products, electronic cigarettes or alternative nicotine products to determine
if tobacco products, electronic cigarettes or alternative nicotine products are
being sold or given to persons under 21 years of age if the “sting operation”
or enforcement action is approved by, conducted by or conducted on behalf of
the city’s Police Department or Health Department.
   (J)   Warning to minors.
      (1)   Any person, firm, partnership, company or corporation operating a
place of business where tobacco products, tobacco accessories, alternative
nicotine products, electronic cigarettes and smoking herbs are sold or offered
for sale shall post in a conspicuous place upon the premises a sign upon which
there shall be imprinted the following statement:
 
THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS, ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS OR ELECTRONIC
CIGARETTES TO PERSONS UNDER TWENTY-ONE (21) YEARS OF AGE OR THE
MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE TO PROCURE SUCH A SALE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW.
 
      (2)   The sign shall be printed on a white card in red letters at least
one inch in height.
(Prior Code, § 112.02) (Ord. 08-016, passed 6-10-2008; Ord. 2020-008, passed 2-
25-2020) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.03 ENFORCEMENT.
   An alleged violation of §
112.02 of this chapter shall be evidenced by issuance of a violation notice and
shall be subject to administrative adjudication pursuant to the provisions of
Ch. 11 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 112.03) (Ord. 08-016, passed 6-10-2008)
§ 112.04 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval and publication in pamphlet form as provided by law. A full, true and
complete copy of this chapter shall be published in pamphlet form, by authority
of the City Council as corporate authorities.
(Prior Code, § 112.04) (Ord. 2020-008, passed 2-25-2020)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation of §
112.02. Any person who violates §
112.02 is guilty of a petty offense. For the first offense in a 24-month
period, the person shall be fined $200 if his or her employer has a training
program that facilitates compliance with minimum-age tobacco laws. For the
second offense in a 24-month period, the person shall be fined $400 if his or
her employer has a training program that facilitates compliance with minimum-
age tobacco laws. For the third offense in a 24-month period, the person shall
be fined $600 if his or her employer has a training program that facilitates
compliance with minimum-age tobacco laws. For the fourth or subsequent offense
in a 24-month period, the person shall be fined $800 if his or her employer has
a training program that facilitates compliance with minimum-age tobacco laws.
For the purposes of this division (A), the 24-month period shall begin with the
person’s first violation of §
112.02. The penalties in this division (A) are in addition to any other
penalties prescribed under the Cigarette Tax Act and the Tobacco Products Tax
Act of 1995.
   (B)   Violation of §
112.02 by retailer. Any retailer who violates §
112.02 is guilty of a petty offense. For the first offense in a 24-month
period, the retailer shall be fined $200 if it does not have a training program
that facilitates compliance with minimum-age tobacco laws. For the second
offense in a 24-month period, the retailer shall be fined $400 if it does not
have a training program that facilitates compliance with minimum-age tobacco
laws. For the third offense within a 24-month period, the retailer shall be
fined $600 if it does not have a training program that facilitates compliance
with minimum-age tobacco laws. For the fourth or subsequent offense in a 24-
month period, the retailer shall be fined $800 if it does not have a training
program that facilitates compliance with minimum-age tobacco laws. For the
purposes of this division (B), the 24-month period shall begin with the
person’s first violation of §
112.02. The penalties in this division (B) are in addition to any other
penalties prescribed under the Cigarette Tax Act and the Tobacco Products Tax
Act of 1995.
   (C)   Minor. If a person under 21 years of age violates §
112.02 (B), he or she is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 112.99) (Ord. 2020-008, passed 2-25-2020)
CHAPTER 113: AMUSEMENTS AND RECREATION
Section
Billiard and Pool Tables, Bowling Alleys
and Shooting Galleries
   
113.001   License required
   
113.002   Application
   
113.003   Fees
   
113.004   Hours of closing
   
113.005   Place of operation
   
113.006   Minors prohibited where liquor sold
   
113.007   Minors excluded from pool and billiard rooms
   
113.008   License not transferable
   
113.009   Revocation of license
Carnivals
   
113.020   Compliance with regulations required
   
113.021   Application for license
   
113.022   Approval; issuance of license
   
113.023   License fee
   
113.024   Clean-up fee
   
113.025   Revocation
Mechanical Amusement Devices
   
113.040   Definition
   
113.041   License provisions
   
113.042   Renewal of license
   
113.043   Maximum numbers of devices
   
113.044   Variance and procedure
   
113.045   Revocation of license and procedure
   
113.046   Existing devices
Miniature Golf Courses
   
113.060   License required
   
113.061   Application for license
   
113.062   License fee
   
113.063   Hours of operation
   
113.064   Automobile parking
   
113.065   Profane language not to be used
   
113.066   Revocation
Public Dances
   
113.080   License required
   
113.081   Application for license
   
113.082   License fee
Rebound Tumbling Centers
   
113.095   Definitions
   
113.096   License required
   
113.097   Liability insurance
   
113.098   Condition of equipment
   
113.099   Rules and regulations
   
113.100   Supervision
   
113.101   Qualifications of supervisors
   
113.102   Handling and reporting of accidents
   
113.103   Telephone to be maintained on premises
   
113.104   First aid equipment
   
113.105   Sanitation
   
113.106   Drinking facilities maintained on premises
   
113.107   Layout of rebound tumbling equipment
   
113.108   Construction of pits
   
113.109   Construction of equipment
   
113.110   Use of padding
   
113.111   Center to be enclosed by fence
   
113.112   Inspection
Sparring; Boxing or Wrestling Matches
   
113.125   Issuance of permits approved
   
113.126   Application for permit or license
   
113.127   Issuance of permit or license
Theaters
   
113.140   License required
   
113.141   License fee
   
113.142   Placement of seats; standing room
   
113.143   Revocation of license
Garage Sales
   
113.155   Definition
   
113.156   License required
   
113.157   Number of sales per year
   
113.158   License application; fee
   
113.159   Effective date
Auctions and Auctioneers
   
113.170   License required
   
113.171   Bond
   
113.172   Classes of licenses; fees
   
113.173   Deception of bidders prohibited
   
113.174   “Selling at auction” defined
Video Gaming
   
113.185   Definitions
   
113.186   Video gaming
   
113.187   Video gaming terminal operation fee
   
113.188   Video gaming license fee
   
113.189   License number and location restrictions
Raffle Regulations
   
113.200   License required
   
113.201   License application
   
113.202   Conduct of raffles
   
113.203   Raffle manager
   
113.204   Records
   
113.205   Non-progressive raffles; terms and fees
   
113.206   Progressive raffles; terms and fees
   
113.207   Fidelity bond
   
113.208   Annual report
 
   
113.999   Penalty
BILLIARD AND POOL TABLES, BOWLING
ALLEYS AND SHOOTING GALLERIES
§ 113.001 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall have or keep for such person’s profit, within the limits of
the city, any billiard or pool table, bowling alley or shooting galleries,
without obtaining a license. However, nothing herein contained shall be
construed as requiring a license for persons keeping or owning billiard and
pool tables, bowling alleys or shooting galleries without charging for their
use.
(Prior Code, § 113.001) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.002 APPLICATION.
   All applications for licenses shall be submitted to the Mayor and City
Council. When ordered by the City Council, the license shall be issued by the
City Clerk and attested by the city seal. No license shall extend beyond the
municipal year in which it is issued.
(Prior Code, § 113.002)
§ 113.003 FEES.
   All persons applying for a license shall pay to the City Collector, prior to
the time of obtaining the license, the following fees, payable each quarter
year in advance:
   (A)   For billiard tables: $15 per year for each table;
   (B)   For pool tables: $15 per year for each table;
   (C)   For pin and bowling alleys: $20 per year for each alley; and
   (D)   For shooting galleries or places for target practice: $100 per year.
(Prior Code, § 113.003) (Ord. 1669, passed 4-14-1952; Ord. 2325, passed 3-23-
1976)
§ 113.004 HOURS OF CLOSING.
   All billiard or pool rooms, pin and bowling alleys and shooting galleries or
places of target practice in the city shall close from 12:00 a.m. to 5:00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 113.004) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.005 PLACE OF OPERATION.
   (A)   The license shall confer upon the licensee the right to charge for
hire billiard and pool tables, bowling alleys and shooting galleries and places
for target practice upon the premises designated in the license.
   (B)   The licensee shall conduct the licensed business at the place
indicated, and at no other place, except upon permission granted by the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 113.005) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.006 MINORS PROHIBITED WHERE LIQUOR SOLD.
   No keeper of any billiard or pool table, bowling alley or shooting gallery
or place of target practice in the city where intoxicating liquors are sold
shall allow any minor to frequent, loiter about, remain in the premises or play
at any game or amusement in the place unless actually employed therein.
(Prior Code, § 113.006) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.007 MINORS EXCLUDED FROM POOL AND BILLIARD ROOMS.
   No person who keeps, conducts or operates any billiard or pool table for
profit or who keeps, conducts or operates any room or rooms where a billiard or
pool table is kept, used or operated for profit shall permit or allow any minor
under the age of 18 years to play or use any such table or remain in or
frequent any such room. Any minor under the age of 18 years who is found in any
billiard or pool room in the city shall be fined an amount as provided in §
10.99.
(Prior Code, § 113.007) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.008 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   A license granted is a personal license for the person to whom the license
is issued and shall not be sold, destroyed or transferred except upon
permission given by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 113.008)
§ 113.009 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   In the event that the holder of the license or the license-holder’s
assigns fail to conform to, abide by, and enforce each and all of the above
conditions and restrictions; allow the same to become a resort of dissolute or
disreputable persons; or violate any laws of the state or ordinances of the
city, then the Mayor may revoke the license so granted, and cause the premises
to be closed on any formal charge, whenever the Mayor is of the opinion that
the interest of the city demands such revocation. The Mayor shall report the
reasons for the revocation to the City Council at a meeting to be held not less
than five days, nor more than ten days, after the revocation. If the Mayor
fails or refuses to file with the City Clerk a statement in writing of the
reasons for the revocation, or with the Council by a majority vote of all its
members, disapproval of the revocation, the license becomes restored to the
licensee.
   (B)   No license shall be revoked the second time for the same offense.
(Prior Code, § 113.009)
CARNIVALS
§ 113.020 COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS REQUIRED.
   No person shall conduct or carry on a carnival within the city limits
without having complied with the regulations hereinafter set forth and paying
the license fee provided for.
(Prior Code, § 113.020) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.021 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Any person desiring to conduct or carry on a carnival within the city
limits shall make application to the Mayor for a license to carry on or conduct
the carnival.
   (B)   The application shall set forth the period of time during which it is
desired to conduct the carnival, which period of time shall be not longer than
ten successive days; the place which the carnival is to be held; a brief
description of the types of amusements, games of chance and other enterprises
to be carried on and conducted in connection with the carnival; the purpose for
which the carnival is to be held and the application to be made of the profits,
if any, accruing from the carrying on of the carnival.
(Prior Code, § 113.021)
§ 113.022 APPROVAL; ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   If the application provided for in §
113.021 of this chapter meets with approval of the Mayor, the Mayor shall issue
or cause to be issued to the person making an application, a license to carry
on and conduct a carnival.
(Prior Code, § 113.022)
§ 113.023 LICENSE FEE.
   The fee to be paid for a license to carry on and conduct a carnival in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter shall be $100 for a period of
not exceeding ten days. The fee shall be paid in advance at the time the
license is issued.
(Prior Code, § 113.023) (Ord. 1669, passed 4-14-1932; Ord. 2303, passed 3-23-
1976)
§ 113.024 CLEAN-UP FEE.
   (A)   In addition to any fee to be paid for a license hereunder, an
applicant for a carnival license shall deposit the sum of $200 with the City
Clerk at the time of filing an application for the license. This deposit shall
ensure compliance with all applicable ordinances of the city and shall further
ensure that the owner or operator of the carnival restore the public way and
the grounds upon which the carnival was held to their original condition.
   (B)   At the close of any carnival, the Superintendent of Public Works shall
inspect the grounds and public way upon which the carnival was held. In the
event that the grounds and public way are free from debris, litter and restored
to their original condition, the Superintendent shall direct the City Clerk in
writing to refund the deposit heretofore posted. If the Superintendent of
Public Works deems that the grounds or public way are not restored to their
original condition, and upon refusal or failure of the depositor to make the
required correction, the city may do the necessary work with the costs thereof
being deducted from the deposit. The balance of the deposit, if any, shall be
returned to the depositor or, if the costs of proper restoration exceed the
deposit, then the depositor shall pay to the city the amount of the excess.
(Prior Code, § 113.024) (Ord. 2303, passed 3-23-1976)
§ 113.025 REVOCATION.
   Any license issued hereunder may be revoked by the Mayor at any time for
good cause.
(Prior Code, § 113.025)
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES
§ 113.040 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE. Any device which, upon the insertion of a
coin, slug, token or disk, may be operated by the public as a game,
entertainment or amusement. It includes, but is not limited to, such devices as
pinball machines, skill ball machines and electronic games using a video screen
and electrical impulses. It includes any other type of mechanical game the
object of which is to secure a particular score or high score by the use of
balls, spheres, springs, trigger devices or electrical impulses.
(Prior Code, § 113.040) (Ord. 90-229, passed 7-10-1990)
§ 113.041 LICENSE PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity desiring
the license required by this subchapter shall make application for that purpose
to the City Clerk no later than April 30 of each year or at such time as the
person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity desires to commence
operation of a coin-operated amusement device.
   (B)   Application forms for such license shall be made available by the city
and shall require:
      (1)   The name and address of the person making the application;
      (2)   The name and address of the business establishment where the device
is to be located;
      (3)   A general description of the device;
      (4)   The number of other coin-operated amusement devices proposed for;
and
      (5)   Any other information the City Clerk deems necessary.
   (C)   The City Clerk, or such personnel as may be designated by the Clerk,
shall cause to be issued the license to permit the operation of a coin-operated
amusement device in any business establishment in the city for a period of one
year which shall begin on May 1 of the year for which such license is issued
and shall terminate on April 30 of the next year. A license shall be issued at
the yearly rate of $50 for each coin-operated amusement device; provided,
however, that, where such license is issued on or after October 1, the
regulatory fee shall be one-half of the yearly fee for the unexpired term of
the regulatory year.
   (D)   The required fee for each license issued shall be collected upon
application. In no event shall any rebate or refund be made of any fee.
   (E)   A license must be issued prior to the date the applicant installs any
device for use. If the device is already on the premises and is unlicensed, a
license must be obtained within 60 days of the effective date of this
subchapter.
   (F)   A coin-operated amusement device may only be used at the address set
forth in the license. Licenses are not transferable.
   (G)   Each coin-operated amusement device shall have affixed to it a current
municipal amusement device decal with an assigned number.
   (H)   Prior to issuance of any license the City Clerk or his or her designee
may cause an inspection of the premises identified in the application to verify
the accuracy of the information set forth in the application.
(Prior Code, § 113.041) (Ord. 90-229, passed 7-10-1990)
§ 113.042 RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   A grace period of 30 days begins on May 1 of each year for the renewal of
licenses. If a business establishment fails to renew its licenses by June 1 of
each year, an additional fee equal to 25% of the base fee shall be charged for
each month after June 1. Delinquency may also result in suspension and/or
revocation of the license to operate coin-operated amusement devices within the
city.
(Prior Code, § 113.042) (Ord. 90-229, passed 7-10-1990)
§ 113.043 MAXIMUM NUMBERS OF DEVICES.
   The maximum number of coin-operated amusement devices for use by the public
in any business establishment within the city shall be three.
(Prior Code, § 113.043) (Ord. 90-229, passed 7-10-1990)
§ 113.044 VARIANCE AND PROCEDURE.
   (A)   A business establishment may request that it be permitted to license,
for use in its premises, a number of coin-operated amusement devices in excess
of the maximum number allowed by the provisions of §§
113.043 and
113.046(A). Such a request shall be in writing and filed in the office of the
City Clerk. Upon receipt of same, the City Clerk shall forward the application
to the Chairperson of the Business Revitalization Committee (hereinafter
“Committee”). In each case, the application shall state the number of
additional coin-operated amusement devices requested.
   (B)   Upon receipt of the application the Chairperson of the Business
Revitalization Committee will cause a hearing to be conducted with the
applicant. At such hearing, the applicant shall present written reasons for the
request and shall show proof that there is existing compliance with the terms
and provisions of this subchapter. The Committee can cause such additional
investigation to be made as is deemed necessary and appropriate, to determine
whether there is existing compliance with the provisions of this subchapter. No
request for an increase may be granted if there is not current compliance by
the applicant at the time of application.
   (C)   The Committee shall have absolute discretion to approve the entire
increase requested in the application, to grant an increase of any part or
portion of the increase requested in the application and deny the remainder or
to deny the entire increase requested in the application. This decision shall
be final and binding and will be given in writing within 60 days of the date
the application is filed in the office of the City Clerk.
   (D)   No applicant shall be permitted to apply for more than one increase in
each year.
   (E)   Any variance granted hereunder is conditional upon continued
compliance with this subchapter. A violation of this subchapter or any other
ordinance or statute which pertains to or concerns the operation of the
particular business establishment may result in immediate revocation of all
licenses to operate any number of coin-operated automatic amusement devices in
excess of the maximum permitted hereunder without a variance.
   (F)   In the event a business establishment granted a variance hereunder is
transferred, sold, leased or has its ownership or control changed, the new
owner or operator shall be required to apply to renew any variance permitted to
the prior owner or operator. At the time of such application, any prior
variance granted hereunder is subject to amendment, termination or revocation.
   (G)   The new owner or operator may, in its discretion, apply for renewal of
the variation at a time prior to taking over ownership or control of the
business establishment.
(Prior Code, § 113.044) (Ord. 90-229, passed 7-10-1990)
§ 113.045 REVOCATION OF LICENSE AND PROCEDURE.
   (A)   In addition to the penalties provided for herein, if any provision of
this subchapter is violated, the City Clerk or his or her designated agent
shall notify the owner-operator of the business establishment of the violation
and set a time limit for the correction of same commensurate with the
seriousness of the violation.
   (B)   (1)   If the violation is not corrected within the time specified, the
City Clerk shall cause a notice to be sent to the licensee for a hearing before
the Business Revitalization Committee to determine whether such license should
be revoked. Such hearing shall be held within 14 days, but no sooner than three
days, from the receipt of such notice. The notice shall set forth the nature of
the hearing and shall contain such information as is necessary to reasonably
inform the licensee or operator of the establishment of those violations for
which he or she is charged, and shall further set forth the time, date and
location of such hearing.
      (2)   Upon the completion of such hearing, the Business Revitalization
Committee shall determine whether sufficient cause has been shown which would
require the revocation of the license and shall, within five days from the date
of the hearing, inform the licensee, in writing, if such determination results
in a revocation.
      (3)   Within three days of revocation, all coin-operated amusement
devices shall be removed from the premises where the violation occurred and no
new license shall be issued to the violator for a period of two years from the
date of revocation.
(Prior Code, § 113.045) (Ord. 90-229, passed 7-10-1990)
§ 113.046 EXISTING DEVICES.
   (A)   Any persons, firms, corporations, partnerships, entities and business
establishments which presently have located on their premises a number of coin-
operated amusement devices in excess of the maximum number allowed by the
provisions of §
113.043 of this chapter, shall be permitted to retain that number of devices.
They shall not be allowed to install any additional coin-operated amusement
devices on the premises of their establishments which increase the number of
devices presently located on the premises. Such entities will be required to
obtain licenses for each coin-operated amusement device on their premises.
   (B)   (1)   Should any persons, firms, corporations, partnerships or
entities desire to replace an existing coin-operated amusement device with
another device, they shall first obtain a license for the device in the manner
provided for herein.
      (2)   In this event, the party making application for the device shall
inform the City Clerk or his or her designee of the device or devices being
replaced.
(Prior Code, § 113.046) (Ord. 90-229, passed 7-10-1990)
MINIATURE GOLF COURSES
§ 113.060 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate or control a so-called miniature, “Tom Thumb” or
“peewee” golf course in the city without securing a license for such operation.
(Prior Code, § 113.060) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.061 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Any person desiring to operate a miniature golf course within the city
shall make application to the City Clerk for a license for operation. The
applicant shall state in the application the name of the owner of the golf
course, its location and any other information desired by the City Clerk, and
shall agree to abide by all the proper rules and regulations made by the Police
Department or by the governmental body of the city.
   (B)   Upon the payment of the fee and the proper signing of the application,
the City Clerk shall issue to the applicant a license permitting the operation
of a golf course.
(Prior Code, § 113.061)
§ 113.062 LICENSE FEE.
   The fee to be paid for a license shall be $50 per year, and all licenses
shall expire on April 30 of each year, and the charge for any license issued
for less than one year shall be reduced pro rata.
(Prior Code, § 113.062)
§ 113.063 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   No tickets permitting any person to play on such golf course shall be
sold or given away between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 9:30 a.m.
   (B)   No persons shall be permitted to play on such course from 11:30 p.m.
to 9:00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 113.063) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.064 AUTOMOBILE PARKING.
   The parking of automobiles and other vehicles in or near a golf course shall
be subject to regulation by the Police Department of the city.
(Prior Code, § 113.064)
§ 113.065 PROFANE LANGUAGE NOT TO BE USED.
   No boisterous, profane or obscene language shall be permitted on or about
such golf course.
(Prior Code, § 113.065)
§ 113.066 REVOCATION.
   Any license issued for the operation of such golf course may be revoked for
good cause shown by the Mayor of the city with the consent of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 113.066)
PUBLIC DANCES
§ 113.080 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No public dance for which an admission fee is charged or for which admission
tickets are sold and which is open to the public generally shall be held in the
city without securing a license so to do.
(Prior Code, § 113.080) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.081 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Any person desiring to hold a public dance, as defined in §
113.080 of this chapter, shall make application to the City Clerk for a permit
so to do.
   (B)   The application shall state the name of the party, club or
organization giving such dance, and the time and the place where such dance is
to be held.
   (C)   Upon the payment of the license fee as hereinafter provided, the City
Clerk shall issue to the applicant a permit attested by the proper city
authority, authorizing the applicant to conduct or give a public dance at the
time and place specified in the permit.
(Prior Code, § 113.081)
§ 113.082 LICENSE FEE.
   The license fee to be paid for such permit shall be $10 for each dance so
given; provided that, a license may be granted to a person, firm or corporation
for the holding of public dances which license may be for a period of one year,
for which the license fee shall be $50 per year.
(Prior Code, § 113.082) (Ord. 1669, passed 4-14-1952)
REBOUND TUMBLING CENTERS
§ 113.095 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   REBOUND TUMBLING CENTER. A place where rebound tumbling equipment is
provided and maintained for public use.
   REBOUND TUMBLING EQUIPMENT. A fabric bed or surface designed to provide
resilience by virtue of its own elasticity, or that provided by an elastic or
spring suspension system or both; within a stable and tested frame and intended
to be used for jumping, bouncing or acrobatic tumbling, which apparatus is
sometimes described and referred to as a TRAMPOLINE.
(Prior Code, § 113.095) (Ord. 1880, passed 6-12-1961)
§ 113.096 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business of operating a rebound tumbling
center unless such person shall have first applied and obtained a license
therefor. Application for such license shall be made to the City Clerk and
shall give the full name and address of the applicant, shall state the location
of the proposed rebound tumbling center and shall describe the equipment to be
situated therein and a brief description of the activities proposed to be
carried on and such other information as the City Clerk may require in order to
show compliance with the provisions of this subchapter. The annual license fee
for any such rebound tumbling center shall be $50 which shall entitle the
licensee to operate not more than ten separate trampolines; provided that, if
more than ten trampolines are to be operated there shall be an additional
annual license fee of $5 for each such trampoline in excess of ten. Each and
every license shall expire on April 30 next after its issuance.
(Prior Code, § 113.096) (Ord. 1880, passed 6-12-1961) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.097 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   The operator of a rebound tumbling center shall procure and at all times
maintain in full force and effect a policy of liability insurance for each
rebound tumbling equipment insuring him or her against liability arising from
personal injury with limits of not less than $50,000 for any one occurrence;
and $25,000 for any one person, per occurrence. The operator shall file a true
copy of his or her insurance policy or policies with the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 113.097) (Ord. 1880, passed 6-12-1961) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.098 CONDITION OF EQUIPMENT.
   Rebound tumbling equipment shall be maintained in a good state of repair.
Rebound tumbling equipment which has broken springs or broken webbing shall not
be used. The licensee shall take precautionary measures to prevent broken
springs from disengaging from the assembly.
(Prior Code, § 113.098) (Ord. 1880, passed 6-12-1961) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.099 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The licensee shall enforce, and all customers using rebound tumbling
equipment shall observe and obey, the following rules and regulations which
shall be printed in clear, easily read letters not less than one inch in size,
and posted in one or more conspicuous and well lighted place within the
tumbling equipment center.
   (A)   Not over one person on the apparatus at a time.
   (B)   No flips, twists or similar difficult routines unless under the
immediate supervision of a qualified instructor, or until qualified as
demonstrated by an officially acceptable certificate or as determined by the
operator. In case of dispute with a patron, the operator’s ruling shall be
final.
   (C)   No use of equipment in street shoes or in bare feet.
   (D)   All patrons shall strictly and promptly comply with requests or
requirements of operator.
   (E)   No use while under the influence of any alcoholic beverage or when not
in condition to safely use the equipment, as determined by operator.
   (F)   No jumping from apparatus to apparatus or to any point outside the
frame of the apparatus.
   (G)   No actions allowed which will or may seriously distract or interfere
with a performer.
   (H)   No children under six years of age shall be allowed to use the
equipment unless accompanied by a responsible person.
   (I)   No smoking, eating or drinking while using the equipment.
(Prior Code, § 113.099) (Ord. 1880, passed 6-12-1961) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.100 SUPERVISION.
   (A)   A rebound tumbling center, whenever open for use, shall be under the
direct supervision of as many supervisors as are necessary to comply with the
posted rules.
   (B)   The supervisor shall be observing all equipment units whenever they
are in use.
   (C)   Each unit shall be numbered or otherwise clearly designated.
   (D)   A suitable loudspeaker system shall be maintained to enforce rules,
except where there are less than eight units.
   (E)   There shall be at least one supervisor on active supervising duty for
each 12 units or fractional part which are in use.
(Prior Code, § 113.100) (Ord. 1880, passed 6-12-1961) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.101 QUALIFICATIONS OF SUPERVISORS.
   A rebound tumbling supervisor shall be:
   (A)   Eighteen years of age or over;
   (B)   Of good moral character;
   (C)   Trained and experienced in the supervision and control of personnel,
both skilled and unskilled, in the art of rebound tumbling; and
   (D)   Physically and otherwise fully fit to manage the facility.
(Prior Code, § 113.101) (Ord. 1880, passed 6-12-1961)
§ 113.102 HANDLING AND REPORTING OF ACCIDENTS.
   The operator of a rebound tumbling center shall:
   (A)   Direct to competent care for handling and disposition all accidents
and injuries;
   (B)   Report in writing to the City Health Officer all accidents of a nature
to cause unconsciousness, broken or sprained extremities or bones, removal,
breaking or loosening of teeth, hemorrhaging or lacerations which may require
suturing, and eye injuries;
   (C)   Maintain on the premises records of all medical aid or care
administered; and
   (D)   Keep, in a place readily available at all times to the operator and
the center’s employees, the telephone number of available emergency service.
(Prior Code, § 113.102) (Ord. 1880, passed 6-12-1961) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.103 TELEPHONE TO BE MAINTAINED ON PREMISES.
   The operator of a rebound tumbling center shall maintain on the premises a
telephone which shall be available for emergency use at all times during which
the rebound tumbling center is in operation.
(Prior Code, § 113.103) (Ord. 1880, passed 6-12-1961) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.104 FIRST AID EQUIPMENT.
   The operator of a rebound tumbling center at all times shall maintain on the
premises and replenish as necessary an adequate first aid kit of at least 16
units, as recommended by the American Red Cross First Aid Manual.
(Prior Code, § 113.104) (Ord. 1880, passed 6-12-1961) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.105 SANITATION.
   (A)   The operator of a rebound tumbling center shall keep the premises and
all facilities in a clean condition.
   (B)   The operator shall provide, as needed to prevent litter, waste
containers and appropriate signs.
(Prior Code, § 113.105) (Ord. 1880, passed 6-12-1961) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.106 DRINKING FACILITIES MAINTAINED ON PREMISES.
   The operator of a rebound tumbling center shall provide on the premises
drinking facilities which shall consist of either a sanitary drinking fountain
or bottled water and paper cups available in a suitable sanitary dispenser.
(Prior Code, § 113.106) (Ord. 1880, passed 6-12-1961) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.107 LAYOUT OF REBOUND TUMBLING EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Rebound tumbling equipment shall be located on a level surface in such
a way as to be within view of the operator or attendant at all times.
   (B)   The spacing of equipment units shall conform to the following minimum
dimensions as measured from the inside edge of the frame:
      (1)   Three feet between sides of units;
      (2)   Four feet between ends of units;
      (3)   Five feet from ends to nearest fence, building or other similar
construction; and
      (4)   Three feet from sides or corners to nearest fence, building or
other similar construction.
   (C)   The area surrounding the rebound tumbling equipment shall be surfaced
to prevent a dust nuisance and have a reasonably level surface of pea gravel or
equivalent type of material from a safety and dust control standpoint.
(Prior Code, § 113.107) (Ord. 1880, passed 6-12-1961) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.108 CONSTRUCTION OF PITS.
   (A)   Pits for rebound tumbling centers shall be so constructed that they
will not interfere with the operation of the equipment and of a depth not less
than three feet, nor more than four feet, at centers.
   (B)   (1)   Pits shall be so framed that the rebound tumbling equipment is
held in a level position and is supported on a solid stable surface.
      (2)   Lumber used as framing for pits shall be not less than two inches
in thickness and shall be securely connected together.
(Prior Code, § 113.108) (Ord. 1880, passed 6-12-1961) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.109 CONSTRUCTION OF EQUIPMENT.
   Precautionary measures shall be taken to prevent broken springs on rebound
tumbling equipment disengaging from the assembly.
(Prior Code, § 113.109) (Ord. 1880, passed 6-12-1961) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.110 USE OF PADDING.
   (A)   The frames of rebound tumbling equipment shall be completely padded to
provide reasonable safety.
   (B)   Pads two inches thick filled with cotton liners shall be deemed to
meet this requirement.
(Prior Code, § 113.110) (Ord. 1880, passed 6-12-1961) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.111 CENTER TO BE ENCLOSED BY FENCE.
   The entire rebound tumbling center shall be completely enclosed by fencing
not less than five feet in height.
(Prior Code, § 113.111) (Ord. 1880, passed 6-12-1961) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.112 INSPECTION.
   The Building Commissioner shall inspect annually every rebound tumbling
center.
(Prior Code, § 113.112) (Ord. 1880, passed 6-12-1961)
SPARRING; BOXING OR WRESTLING MATCHES
§ 113.125 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS APPROVED.
   The issuance of permits and licenses by the State Athletic Commission for
such boxing, sparring or wrestling matches and exhibitions is hereby approved.
(Prior Code, § 113.125)
§ 113.126 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT OR LICENSE.
   Any person desiring to receive a permit or license to hold within the city
any sparring, boxing or wrestling match or exhibition shall make application to
the City Clerk for such permit or license and shall agree to pay to the city 3%
of the gross receipts derived from the sale of admission tickets to the match
or exhibition and shall state in the application the time and place where the
match or exhibition will be held.
(Prior Code, § 113.126)
§ 113.127 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT OR LICENSE.
   Upon giving the information required in such application and agreeing to pay
such percent, the City Clerk shall issue to the applicant a permit or license
to conduct the match or exhibition.
(Prior Code, § 113.127)
THEATERS
§ 113.140 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate or conduct a motion picture theater or any other
theater within the city limits without having obtained a license.
(Prior Code, § 113.140) (Ord. 1528, passed 6-23-1947) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.141 LICENSE FEE.
   The license fee for every motion picture theater in the city with a seating
capacity of 500 or more persons shall be $350 per annum. Where seating capacity
is less than 500 persons, the license fee shall be $200 per annum. Every
license issued hereunder shall expire on the April 30 next following its
issuance.
(Prior Code, § 113.141) (Ord. 1578, passed 6-23-1947; Ord 1669, passed 4-14-
1952)
§ 113.142 PLACEMENT OF SEATS; STANDING ROOM.
   No person shall place seats in the aisles or passages between seats in any
theater, and no person shall allow persons to stand in the aisles or passages
between seats in the theater, except for the purpose of passing to or from any
seat.
(Prior Code, § 113.142) (Ord. 1578, passed 6-23-1947) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.143 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The Mayor may revoke any license granted hereunder at the Mayor’s
discretion.
(Prior Code, § 113.143)
GARAGE SALES
§ 113.155 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARAGE SALE. Any sale, or offer for sale of any item of personal property,
by any person, firm or corporation, at a residence, dwelling or other
residential location situated in the city when the sale is advertised in any
manner as a garage sale, estate sale, moving sale, yard sale or basement sale
and the owner or occupant of the residence, dwelling or other residential
location is not otherwise licensed to sell personal property from said
location.
(Prior Code, § 113.155) (Ord. 96-374, passed 2-27-1996)
§ 113.156 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person, firm or corporation shall conduct a garage sale within the city
unless a license is issued permitting the sale. Each license will be valid for
a period of not more than three consecutive days. No garage sale shall begin
earlier than 8:00 a.m. on any day. All garage sales shall end not later than 5:
00 p.m. on any date. The license shall be displayed in a prominent place on the
premises so that it is visible from the exterior of the premises.
(Prior Code, § 113.156) (Ord. 96-374, passed 2-27-1996) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.157 NUMBER OF SALES PER YEAR.
   No person, firm or corporation shall be issued more than three garage sale
licenses in any calendar year for any single location address.
(Prior Code, § 113.157) (Ord. 96-374, passed 2-27-1996) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.158 LICENSE APPLICATION; FEE.
   (A)   Application for a garage sale license will be made to the Building
Department of the city. The fee for the license will be $5. Each license
applicant shall also deposit $25 to assure that all signs advertising the sale
are removed and that no city property is damaged.
   (B)   This deposit will be refunded two days after the last date permitted
for the respective sale; provided, the Building Department determines that all
signs are removed, the premises where the sale is conducted are cleaned up and
no damage to city property has occurred.
(Prior Code, § 113.158) (Ord. 96-374, passed 2-27-1996)
§ 113.159 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage, approval and publication as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 113.159) (Ord. 96-374, passed 2-27-1996)
AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS
§ 113.170 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall exercise within the limits of the city the business or trade
of an auctioneer or sell at public auction any goods, wares, merchandise or
chattels without having obtained a license for that purpose. However, nothing
herein contained shall apply to any ministerial officer selling by virtue of
his or her office.
(Prior Code, § 113.170) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.171 BOND.
   No person shall receive a license to sell goods at auction within the city
until such person has executed to the city a bond, to be approved by the Mayor,
in the penal sum of $1,000, with two or more sureties residing within the city,
conditioned for strict observance of all ordinances of the city pertaining to
auctions and auctioneers, requiring licenses to expire on the April 30 next
after the date of issuance, and giving the Mayor power to revoke the license
when satisfied of the fact of violation of any ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 113.171)
§ 113.172 CLASSES OF LICENSES; FEES.
   (A)   Auctioneer’s licenses shall be of the following classes.
      (1)   A Class “A” daily license shall entitle the licensee to undertake
the business or trade of an auctioneer or sell at public auction for not more
than one day. The license fee for a Class “A” license shall be $25 per license.
      (2)   A Class “B” license shall entitle the licensee to undertake the
business or trade of an auctioneer or sell at public auction on a yearly basis;
the license to expire on the April 30 next after the date of issuance. The
license fee for a Class “B” license shall be $300 per license.
   (B)   Class “A” and “B” licenses shall be mutually exclusive.
(Prior Code, § 113.172) (Ord. 2353, passed 10-12-1976)
§ 113.173 DECEPTION OF BIDDERS PROHIBITED.
   Whoever shall exhibit and offer for sale at auction any article and shall
induce its purchase by any bidder and shall afterward secretly substitute any
other article for the one so exhibited with intent to deceive and defraud the
bidder; or whoever shall, while engaged in or about the making of an auction
sale, be guilty of any device or trick or other fraudulent practice with intent
thereby to deceive or defraud the bidder, upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined an amount as provided in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 113.173)
§ 113.174 “SELLING AT AUCTION” DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SELLING AT AUCTION. All sales of property within the limits of the city by
public outcry to the highest bidder, as well as the public offer of property at
a price beyond its value then lowering the price or increasing the number of
articles until some one accepts the offer of the property as a purchase.
(Prior Code, § 113.174)
VIDEO GAMING
§ 113.185 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT.
      (1)   Any licensed retail establishment where alcoholic liquor is drawn,
poured, mixed, or otherwise served for consumption on the premises, whether the
establishment operates on a nonprofit or for-profit basis. LICENSED
ESTABLISHMENT includes any such establishment that has a contractual
relationship with an inter-track wagering location licensee licensed under the
Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975, being 230 ILCS 5, provided any contractual
relationship shall not include any transfer or offer of revenue from the
operation of video gaming under this Act to any licensee licensed under the
Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975.
      (2)   Provided, however, that the LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT that has such a
contractual relationship with an inter-track wagering location licensee may
not, itself, be:
         (a)   An inter-track wagering location licensee;
         (b)   The corporate parent or subsidiary of any licensee licensed
under the Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975; or
         (c)   The corporate subsidiary of a corporation that is also the
corporate parent or subsidiary of any licensee licensed under the Illinois
Horse Racing Act of 1975.
      (3)   LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT does not include a facility operated by an
organization licensee, an inter-track wagering licensee, or an inter-track
wagering location licensee licensed under the Illinois Horse Racing Act of 1975
or a riverboat licensed under the Riverboat Gambling Act, being 230 ILCS 10/
1 et seq., except as provided in this definition. The changes made to this
definition by Public Act 98-587 are declarative of existing law.
   LICENSED FRATERNAL ESTABLISHMENT. The location where a qualified fraternal
organization that derives its charter from a national fraternal organization
regularly meets.
   LICENSED TRUCK STOP ESTABLISHMENT.
      (1)   A facility:
         (a)   That is at least a three-acre facility with a convenience store;
         (b)   With separate diesel islands for fueling commercial motor
vehicles;
         (c)   That sells at retail more than 10,000 gallons of diesel or
biodiesel fuel per month; and
         (d)   With parking spaces for commercial motor vehicles.
      (2)   COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLES has the same meaning as defined in § 18b-
101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, being 625 ILCS 5/18b-101. The requirement of
division (1)(c) above may be met by showing that estimated future sales or past
sales average at least 10,000 gallons per month.
   LICENSED VETERANS’ ESTABLISHMENT. The location where a qualified veterans
organization that derives its charter from a national veterans organization
regularly meets.
   VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL. Any electronic video game machine that, upon
insertion of cash, electronic cards or vouchers, or any combination thereof, is
available to play or simulate the play of a video game, including but not
limited to video poker, line up and blackjack, as authorized by the Board
utilizing a video display and microprocessors in which the player may receive
free games or credits that can be redeemed for cash. The term does not include
a machine that directly dispenses coins, cash or tokens or is for amusement
purposes only.
(Ord. 2018-049, passed 9-25-2018)
§ 113.186 VIDEO GAMING.
   Video gaming in accordance with the Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.)
shall be permitted in the city if in compliance with the following:
   (A)   Any licensed establishment, licensed fraternal establishment or
licensed veterans establishment within the city which holds a liquor license
which allows for gaming and has obtained a license to operate a video gaming
terminal from the Illinois Gaming Board at such premises shall be required to
apply for and obtain the applicable city liquor license with video gaming
classification as specified in and required by
Chapter 111, Alcoholic Liquor of this code of ordinances;
   (B)   Any licensed truck stop establishment, shall in addition to a business
license, as required by Chapter 119, Vehicles; Parking Lots, Filling Stations,
§
119.002, License Required of this code of ordinances, obtain a city video
gaming license; and
   (C)   Every licensed establishment shall comply with all provisions of the
Video Gaming Act and all rules, regulations and restrictions imposed by the
Illinois Gaming Board.
(Ord. 2018-049, passed 9-25-2018)
§ 113.187 VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL OPERATION FEE.
   (A)   Fee amount. Each licensed establishment, licensed fraternal
establishment, licensed veterans establishment and licensed truck stop
establishment within the city shall pay an annual video gaming terminal
operation fee of $25 per video gaming terminal located in the licensed
establishment, licensed fraternal establishment, licensed veterans
establishment and licensed truck stop establishment and prominently display
evidence of fee payment provided by the city.
   (B)   Fee due date. The video gaming terminal fee will be due and payable as
follows:
      (1)   For a licensed establishment, licensed fraternal establishment or
licensed veterans establishment, this fee is due and payable when the liquor
license renewal fee is due and payable as specified in
Chapter 111, Alcoholic Liquor, of this code of ordinances; and
      (2)   For a licensed truck stop establishment, this fee is due and
payable when the business license annual fee is due and payable as specified in
Chapter 119, Vehicles; Parking Lots, Filling Stations, Section
119.002, License Required, of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 2018-049, passed 9-25-2018)
§ 113.188 VIDEO GAMING LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   The video gaming license fee for a licensed establishment, licensed
fraternal establishment or licensed veterans establishment is incorporated into
the applicable liquor license classification as set forth in
Chapter 111, Alcoholic Liquor, of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   The video gaming license fee for a licensed truck stop establishment
shall be as set forth in
Chapter 39, Fee and Fine Schedule of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 2018-049, passed 9-25-2018)
§ 113.189 LICENSE NUMBER AND LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Video gaming terminals may not be operated on any premises located
within 100 feet of a school or a place or worship.
   (B)   The number, of video gaming licenses available for a licensed
establishment, licensed fraternal establishment or licensed veterans
establishment shall be restricted as specified in
Chapter 111, Alcoholic Liquor, of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 2018-049, passed 9-25-2018)
RAFFLE REGULATIONS
§ 113.200 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No organization or association shall operate or conduct a raffle in the city
without first obtaining a license and complying with this subchapter. An
organization or association must be one of the following as defined in the
Raffles and Poker Runs Act, 230 ILCS 15/0.01, as amended (hereinafter, in this
chapter, the “Act”); religious; charitable; labor; fraternal; educational;
veterans or non-profit fundraising organization. The religious; charitable;
labor; fraternal; educational; or veterans organization must have been in
existence continuously for five years immediately preceding the filing of the
application for a raffle license and which have had during that entire five-
year period a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their objects, and
be located in the city or substantially serve the residents of the city. A non-
profit fundraising organization must be organized for the sole purpose of
providing financial assistance to an identified individual or group of
individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as the result of illness,
disability, accident or disaster. Association is a law enforcement agency or
statewide association that represents law enforcement officials as provided for
in § 9 of the Act.
(Ord. 2018-049, passed 9-25-2018)
§ 113.201 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Any organization seeking to conduct or operate a raffle shall file an
application with the City Clerk on forms provided by the city.
   (B)   The application shall be approved or denied within 30 days of receipt.
   (C)   Application requirements must comply with the requirements of the Act.
   (D)   An applicant denied a license will be notified in writing as set forth
in the Act.
   (E)   License denials may be appealed to City Council by filing notice of
appeal with the City Clerk within ten business days of the issuance of the
denial notice.
   (F)   An applicant denied a license may reapply 60 days after the denial
notice was issued.
(Ord. 2018-049, passed 9-25-2018)
§ 113.202 CONDUCT OF RAFFLES.
   (A)   Entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to the
lawful purposes of the organization.
   (B)   No person, except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization,
may participate in the management or operation of the raffle.
   (C)   No person may receive any payment or profit for participating in the
management of the raffle.
   (D)   An organization may rent a premises on which to determine the winning
chance or chances in a raffle only from another organization which is also
licensed to have raffles.
   (E)   Raffle chances may be sold or issued only with the area specified on
the license and winning chances may be determined only at those locations
specified on the license for a raffle in compliance with this chapter and state
law.
(Ord. 2018-049, passed 9-25-2018)
§ 113.203 RAFFLE MANAGER.
   All operation of and the conduct of raffles within the city shall be under
the supervision of a single raffles manager designated by the organization.
(Ord. 2018-049, passed 9-25-2018)
§ 113.204 RECORDS.
   (A)   Each organization shall keep records of its gross receipts, expenses
and net proceeds for each single occasion at which winning chances are
determined. All deductions from gross receipts for each single occasion shall
be documented with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a
description of the purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction.
The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount
and date of payment.
   (B)   Each organization shall have separate records of each raffle
conducted. The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses and net
proceeds from the operation of raffles on behalf of such organization shall not
be the same person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.
   (C)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report monthly to
its membership, and to the city, its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds
from raffles and the distribution of the net proceeds itemized. This report
shall be submitted to the City Clerk’s office on the first of each month.
(Ord. 2018-049, passed 9-25-2018)
§ 113.205 NON-PROGRESSIVE RAFFLES; TERMS AND FEES.
   The following terms and fees shall govern and controls raffles other than
progressive raffles as defined in §
113.206.
   (A)   Retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded in a single raffle
shall not exceed $500,000.
   (B)   Retail value of each prize in a single raffle shall not exceed
$250,000.
   (C)   Maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued or
sold shall not exceed $100.
   (D)   Maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or sold
shall not exceed 90 days.
   (E)   Fees: the license fees shall be as depicted in
Chapter 39, Fee and Fine Schedule of this code of ordinances and shall be paid
when applying for the license. A religious; charitable; labor; fraternal;
educational; or veterans organization may obtain a yearly license for the
organization.
(Ord. 2018-049, passed 9-25-2018)
§ 113.206 PROGRESSIVE RAFFLES; TERMS AND FEES.
   The following terms and fees shall govern and control progressive raffles
such as “Queen of Hearts” raffles or other named raffles which have a roll-
overprize.
   (A)   The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a
licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed $3,500,000.
   (B)   The maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a licensee in a
single raffle shall not exceed $3,000,000.
   (C)   The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued
or sold shall not exceed $10.
   (D)   The maximum number of weeks during which chances may be issued or sold
shall not exceed 54 weeks.
   (E)   Licenses issued hereunder shall be valid for one progressive raffle
and may be suspended or revoked for any violation of this section.
   (F)   Raffle chances shall be sold only within the boundaries of the city at
the location indicated in the license.
   (G)   No organization shall be issued more than one progressive raffle
license at a time. No organization shall simultaneously operate more than one
progressive raffle at a time. A location, which is not the location of the
organization, may only host one progressive raffle during a weekly period,
Monday through Sunday.
   (H)   Any license issued hereunder shall be non-transferable.
   (I)   All operation of and the conduct of a progressive raffle shall be
under the supervision of a single manager designated by the organization.
   (J)   As determined by the Mayor, the licensee when notified and required by
the Mayor shall obtain security for traffic and crowd control for the raffle
drawings.
   (K)   Fees: the license fees for a progressive raffle shall be as depicted
in
Chapter 39, Fee and Fine Schedule of this code of ordinances, and shall be paid
when applying for the license. A religious; charitable; labor; fraternal;
educational; or veterans organization may only obtain a progressive raffle
license. The license issued pursuant to this section for a “progressive” raffle
shall be valid for one raffle until the winner is selected and shall be
conducted during a specified period not to exceed 54 weeks and may be suspended
or revoked for any violation of this section.
(Ord. 2018-049, passed 9-25-2018)
§ 113.207 FIDELITY BOND.
   (A)   The manager of a non-progressive raffle other than 50/50 split the pot
for which monies are collected and awarded on the same date of the raffle game
with prize for the split the pot being less than $200 shall give a fidelity
bond in the sum of the aggregate retail value of the prizes as set out in the
application.
   (B)   The manager of a progressive shall give a fidelity bond in the amount
of $5,000,000.
   (C)   The terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be given in
writing to the licensing authority not less than 30 days prior to its
cancellation. A copy of the fidelity bond shall be filed with the City Clerk
prior to the start of the raffle game.
(Ord. 2018-049, passed 9-25-2018)
§ 113.208 ANNUAL REPORT.
   The city will prepare, publicly announce and publish a report concerning
licensing applicants as set forth in the Act.
(Ord. 2018-049, passed 9-25-2018)
§ 113.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $750. A separate offense shall
be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
   (B)   (1)   Any persons, firms, corporations, partnerships or other entities
who violate the provisions of §§
113.040 through
113.046 by failing to apply for and obtain a license for each coin-operated
amusement device operated or to be operated on their premises, shall be fined
not less than $100, nor more than $750, for each offense. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed for each device which is not licensed and for each
day during which a violation occurs or continues. No license shall be issued to
an applicant until all penalties are paid in full.
      (2)   Any persons, firms, corporations, partnerships or entities who
violate the provisions of §§
113.040 through
113.046 by maintaining on their premises a number of coin-operated amusement
devices in excess of the maximum number allowed by the provisions of §§
113.040 through
113.046, shall be fined not less than $100, nor more than $750 for each
offense. They shall also be required to remove the excess number of devices
from their premises within three days of the date they are notified by the City
Clerk of such a violation.
(Prior Code, § 113.999)
   (C)   (1)   Any person convicted of violating §§
113.186 through
113.188 shall be subject to a fine of not less than $75 nor more than $500 for
each offense.
      (2)   A person convicted of failing to display a license for each video
gaming terminal shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $100 per unlicensed
terminal.
      (3)   A separate offense shall be committed each time a person operates a
video gaming terminal in a manner that violates §
113.186. A separate offense shall be committed each 24-hour period, or part
thereof, that a person is in possession of or maintains a video gaming terminal
in violation of §
113.186 or is in possession of any other electronic gaming machine that can be
used for video gaming in violation of §
113.186.
      (4)   Any video gaming terminal unlawfully used may be seized by the city
in accordance with the Illinois Criminal Code, 720 ILCS 5/28-5 and the Video
Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/35.
      (5)   Any liquor license issued under the Liquor Control Act of 1934,
being 235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq., to any owner or operator of a licensed
establishment, licensed truck stop establishment, licensed fraternal
establishment, or licensed veterans establishment that operates or permits the
operation of a video gaming terminal within its establishment in violation of
this Act, in accordance with 230 ILCS 40/35(a), shall be immediately revoked.
   (D)   A person violating any provision of §§
113.200 through
113.208 is subject to prosecution and shall be fined not less than $250, nor
more than $750, for each offense, and a separate and distinct offense shall be
considered as having been committed for each and every day on which any person
shall be found guilty of any such violation.
(Ord. 2018-049, passed 9-25-2018)
CHAPTER 114: ADVERTISING AND BILL POSTING; NEWSRACKS
Section
Newsracks
   
114.001   Title
   
114.002   Purpose and intent
   
114.003   Definitions
   
114.004   Permit required
   
114.005   Securing newsracks to structures
   
114.006   Agreement required
   
114.007   Removal for violations
   
114.008   Effective date
Posting of Bills and Advertisements
   
114.020   Prohibited posting
Outdoor Advertising
   
114.035   Permit required
   
114.036   Definition
   
114.037   Size limitations
   
114.038   Location restrictions
   
114.039   Permit required for alterations
   
114.040   Material standards; face or side of building
   
114.041   Material standards; roof of building
   
114.042   Strength of signboards
   
114.043   Inspection; duties of Building Inspector
   
114.044   Report to be filed
   
114.045   Permit fee
   
114.046   Signboards to be maintained in sanitary condition
   
114.047   Bond required
   
114.048   Written consent of owner required
   
114.049   Legal notices
   
114.050   Consent of city authorities
Distribution of Handbills and
Samples Requiring License
   
114.065   License required
   
114.066   Application for license
   
114.067   License fee; expiration
   
114.068   Report of change in personnel
   
114.069   Permitted hours of distribution
   
114.070   Exceptions
NEWSRACKS
§ 114.001 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as and may be cited as the “Blue Island
Newsrack Ordinance”.
(Prior Code, § 114.001) (Ord. 07-068, passed 4-10-2007)
§ 114.002 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is the purpose and intent of this subchapter to regulate the placement of
newsracks located on city property within the corporate limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 114.002) (Ord. 07-068, passed 4-10-2007)
§ 114.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NEWSRACK. Any vending machine the purpose of which is to dispense,
distribute or sell newspapers, magazines, books, pamphlets, periodicals or
other literature.
   PARKWAY. The area of the street between the nearest edge of the pavement and
sidewalk; or, in areas where there is no sidewalk, that area of the street
between the nearest edge of the pavement and the property line.
   PAVEMENT. The area of the street the primary purpose being for the passage,
parking or standing of motor vehicles. PAVEMENT includes curbs, gutters and any
sewer structures.
   SIDEWALK. Any paved surface the primary purpose being for the passage of
pedestrians.
   STREET. Any area dedicated to public use for street, highway, alley or
roadway purposes, including, but not limited to, the areas of pavement, parkway
and sidewalk.
(Prior Code, § 114.003) (Ord. 07-068, passed 4-10-2007)
§ 114.004 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, own, maintain or operate
a newsrack located on city property within the corporate limits of the city;
except that, a newsrack may be placed, owned, maintained or operated after a
permit has been granted. A newsrack may be placed, owned, maintained or
operated only in C-1 and C-2 Zoning Districts. Application for a permit shall
be made on forms supplied by the Building Department.
   (B)   No newsrack may be located or placed:
      (1)   Within 15 feet of any fire hydrant or fire hose connection;
      (2)   Within 15 feet of any intersecting pavement or driveway;
      (3)   Within five feet of any marked crosswalk;
      (4)   In a flower bed;
      (5)   On the pavement;
      (6)   Where it reduces the width of the sidewalk or other paved portions
of the parkway available for passage to less than five feet;
      (7)   Within ten feet of any door of a building;
      (8)   On the sidewalk or parkway on the same side of the street and
immediately adjacent to a no parking zone or a no standing zone;
      (9)   On or in any handicapped access ramp;
      (10)   Fronting the curb line of Western Avenue;
      (11)   In a group containing more than four newsracks; and/or
      (12)   Within 200 of any other newsrack or group of newsracks on the same
side of the street in the same block.
   (C)   No newsrack shall exceed 50 inches in height as measured from the
ground to the highest portion of the newsrack. No newsrack shall exceed 24
inches in width as measured across the front portion of the newsrack. No
newsrack shall exceed 20 inches in depth as measured from the front of the
newsrack to the rear of the newsrack. The front and rear panels shall be of the
same width and height. The side panels shall be of the same width and height.
   (D)   All applications shall be granted or denied within 30 days after
receipt thereof. Upon the initial granting of a permit, the application shall
pay $20 permit per location. The permit shall be automatically renewable upon
the payment of a $10 annual permit fee; provided that, the location of the
newsrack complies with this section. If an application for a permit required by
this subchapter is denied, the applicant shall be notified and may request a
review by submitting a written request within seven days from the notice of
denial to the Judiciary Committee.
(Prior Code, § 114.004) (Ord. 07-068, passed 4-10-2007) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.005 SECURING NEWSRACKS TO STRUCTURES.
   No person or entity shall chain or otherwise secure any newsrack to any
tree, light pole, sidewalk, parkway, traffic-control device or street sign.
(Prior Code, § 114.005) (Ord. 07-068, passed 4-10-2007) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.006 AGREEMENT REQUIRED.
   (A)   In every application for a newsrack, the applicant shall provide a
color photograph of the newsrack and list the dimensions of the newsrack.
   (B)   The applicant shall also agree to the following conditions:
      (1)   Any and all costs related to the installation and maintenance or
removal of the newsrack shall be incurred by the applicant;
      (2)   The privileges granted to the applicant are non-transferable;
      (3)   Upon the removal of a newsrack, the permittee shall restore the
property where the newsrack was located to the condition of the property prior
to the installation of the newsrack, normal wear and tear excepted;
      (4)   Each newsrack shall be fully enclosed and shall secure the
materials contained therein so as to prevent the materials from potentially
littering public property;
      (5)   Each newsrack shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and
in good repair at all times;
      (6)   Each newsrack shall have affixed to it, in a readily visible place
so as to be seen by anyone using the newsrack, a notice setting forth the name
and address of the permittee and a telephone number of a working telephone
service to call to report a malfunction; and
      (7)   Each newsrack shall not be used for advertising signs or publicity
other than advertising for the newspaper or news periodical dispensed
therefrom.
(Prior Code, § 114.006) (Ord. 07-068, passed 4-10-2007) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.007 REMOVAL FOR VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Any newsrack located in violation of any provision of this subchapter
is subject to removal by the city only after the owner thereof has been given
the opportunity for a pre-removal hearing. Prior to removal, the Building
Department shall give notice by mail addressed to the owner, which notice shall
state why the newsrack is in violation and give the owner seven days to remedy
the violation. The owner, within this period, may request a hearing before the
Judiciary Committee and present evidence to the effect that no violation
exists. If the Judiciary Committee determines that a violation does exist, then
the owner shall have seven days to remedy the violation after which the
newsrack is subject to removal by the city. If the owner fails to request a
hearing, then the city may remove the newsrack.
   (B)   The city may cause the immediate removal of any newsrack not located
in a permitted position which creates an imminent danger of personal injury or
property damage to the public.
(Prior Code, § 114.007) (Ord. 07-068, passed 4-10-2007)
§ 114.008 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage
and approval as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 114.008) (Ord. 07-068, passed 4-10-2007)
POSTING OF BILLS AND ADVERTISEMENTS
§ 114.020 PROHIBITED POSTING.
   No person shall post, stick, stamp, tack, paint or otherwise fix or cause
the same to be done by any person, any notice, placard, bill, card, poster,
advertisement or other device calculated to attract the notice of the public to
or upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, curb or curbstone, flagstone or any other
portion or part of any sidewalk or street, lamp post, electric light,
telegraph, telephone, hydrant, shade tree or upon any bridge, pier, fence,
gate, gate post or upon any pole, box or fixture of the fire alarm, except such
as may be required by the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city.
(Prior Code, § 114.020) Penalty, see §
10.99
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING
§ 114.035 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No billboard, signboard or sign, or other similar structure such as
described in this chapter, shall be erected or painted within the city unless a
permit therefor shall first have been secured by the person desiring to erect
or maintain such billboard, signboard or sign from the City Clerk, to whom
application for such permit shall be made; and the application shall be
accompanied by plans and specifications of the proposed billboard, signboard or
signs, and the location of the same. If the plans and specifications
accompanying the application shall be in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter, the Building Inspector shall thereupon approve the same and the
City Clerk shall issue a permit for the erection of such billboard, signboard
or sign upon the payment by the applicant of a fee.
(Prior Code, § 114.035) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.036 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BILLBOARD or SIGNBOARD or SIGN. All outdoor structures of whatever material
constructed which are erected, maintained and used for the public display of
posters, painted signs, pictures or pictorial or reading matter; except that,
such terms shall not include signs erected or maintained on roofs or signs
attached to or painted upon the walls of buildings. The term SIGN shall include
all advertising structures, having a face similar to a billboard or signboard,
but which are erected and maintained on the roofs, or attached to the walls of
buildings. The terms BILLBOARD, SIGNBOARD or SIGN shall not be held to include
any board, sign or surface used to display official notices, issued by any
court of public office or officer, or to include any board or sign having an
area of less than 25 square feet.
(Prior Code, § 114.036)
§ 114.037 SIZE LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   No billboard or signboard hereafter erected on the surface of the
ground shall exceed 12 feet in height, clear posting or painting surface.
   (B)   Every such billboard or signboard shall have an open space of not less
than two feet between the lower edge of such board and the ground.
   (C)   The face of every billboard or signboard within the city limits shall
be constructed of galvanized iron or other equally incombustible material, but
the supporting structure and framework thereof may be of wood.
   (D)   All such billboards or signboards shall be securely anchored or
fastened so as to be safe and substantial.
(Prior Code, § 114.037) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.038 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
   No billboard or signboard shall be erected nearer to the front line of the
lot on which it is located than the main front wall of the building immediately
adjoining such billboard or signboard and in no case shall a billboard or
signboard be erected nearer to the front line of the lot than the established
building line.
(Prior Code, § 114.038) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.039 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR ALTERATIONS.
   No billboard or signboard having a surface area of more than 25 square feet
shall be reconstructed or materially altered without a permit from the Building
Inspector; provided, however, that, this provision shall not apply to the
changing of any advertising matter of any billboard or signboard or the
refacing or changing of the painted panel on such billboard or signboard.
(Prior Code, § 114.039) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.040 MATERIAL STANDARDS; FACE OR SIDE OF BUILDING.
   No sign, having a surface area of more than 25 square feet, shall be
hereafter attached to the face or side of any building unless the face of such
sign is wholly constructed of metal or other non-combustible material.
(Prior Code, § 114.040) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.041 MATERIAL STANDARDS; ROOF OF BUILDING.
   Every sign erected on the roof of any building shall be built entirely of
metal and shall be securely fastened to the roof or walls of the building.
(Prior Code, § 114.041) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.042 STRENGTH OF SIGNBOARDS.
   All billboards, signboards and signs now in existence or hereafter to be
constructed, erected or maintained shall be made, constructed, erected and
maintained of sufficient strength to withstand a wind pressure of 25 pounds per
square foot of surface.
(Prior Code, § 114.042) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.043 INSPECTION; DUTIES OF BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to inspect all plans
and specifications submitted in connection with the erection, reconstruction or
alteration of any billboard, signboard or sign and to approve the same if the
method of construction and provisions made for fastening, securing, anchoring
and maintaining such billboard, signboard or sign are such as will serve to
protect the public and to render such billboard, signboard or sign safe and
substantial. It is further made the duty of the Building Inspector to exercise
supervision over all billboards, signboards and signs erected or being
maintained under the provisions of this subchapter and to cause inspection by
inspectors in the Building Inspector’s Department of all such billboards,
signboards and signs to be made once each year and more often where the
condition of the same so requires; and whenever it shall appear to the Building
Inspector that any such billboard, signboard or sign has been erected in
violation of this chapter or is in an unsafe condition or has become unstable
or insecure or is in such a condition as to be a menace to the safety or health
of the public, the Building Inspector shall thereupon issue or cause to be
issued a notice in writing to the owner of the billboard, signboard or sign or
to the person in charge, possession or control thereof, if the whereabouts of
such person is known, informing such owner or person in charge thereof, of the
violation of this subchapter and the dangerous condition of the billboard,
signboard or sign and directing such person to make alterations or repairs
thereto or to do such acts or things as are necessary or advisable to place the
billboard, signboard or sign in safe, substantial and secure condition and to
make the same comply with the requirements of this subchapter, within such
reasonable time as may be stated in the notice.
   (B)   If the owner or person in charge, possession or control of any
billboard, signboard or sign, when so notified, shall refuse, fail or neglect
to comply with and conform to the requirements of such notice, the Building
Inspector shall, upon the expiration of the time therein mentioned, alter,
change, tear down or cause to be torn down such part of the billboard,
signboard or sign as is constructed or maintained in violation of this
subchapter, and shall charge the expense to the owner or person in possession,
charge or control of the billboard, signboard or sign, which may be recovered
from the owner or person in charge by appropriate legal proceedings.
   (C)   If the owner of the billboard, signboard or sign, or the person in
charge, possession or control thereof cannot be found, or his, her or their
whereabouts cannot be ascertained, the Building Inspector shall attach or cause
to be attached to the billboard, signboard or sign, a notice of the same report
as that required to be sent to the owner or person in charge, possession or
control thereof, where the owner or person in charge is known; and if such
billboard, signboard or sign shall not have been made to conform to this
subchapter and be placed in a secure, safe and substantial condition, in
accordance with the requirements of such notice, within 30 days after such
notice shall have been attached to such billboard, signboard or sign, it shall
be the duty of the Building Inspector to thereupon cause such billboard,
signboard or sign, such portion thereof as is constructed or maintained in
violation of this subchapter, to be torn down; provided that, nothing herein
contained shall prevent the Building Inspector from adopting such precautionary
measures as may be necessary or advisable in cases of imminent danger in order
to place the billboard, signboard or sign in a safe condition, the expense of
which shall be charged to and recovered from the owner of such billboard,
signboard or sign or person in charge, possession or control thereof, in any
appropriate proceedings therefor.
   (D)   It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to require that the
name of the person or corporation owning or in possession, charge or control of
any billboard, signboard or sign is placed upon such billboard, signboard or
sign forthwith upon the erection thereof and is kept thereon during the entire
time that such billboard, signboard or sign is maintained; and, in case the
owner of the billboard, signboard or sign, or the person in charge, possession
or control thereof, shall fail or refuse to place and maintain such name on the
same, such person shall be subject to the penalty hereinafter provided for in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 114.043) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.044 REPORT TO BE FILED.
   Every person engaged in the business of erecting or maintaining billboards,
signboards or signs for the purpose of display advertising shall file with the
City Clerk a full and complete report of the location and size of all existing
billboards, signboards or signs so maintained by such person, firm or
corporation.
(Prior Code, § 114.044) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.045 PERMIT FEE.
   (A)   The fees to be charged for permits for the erection of billboards,
signboards or signs shall be as follows:
      (1)   First 25 lineal feet or fraction thereof: $10;
      (2)   All signs over 25 feet in length and under 50 feet in length: $15;
      (3)   All signs over 50 feet in length and under 75 feet in length: $20;
and
      (4)   All signs 75 feet in length and under 100 feet in length: $25.
   (B)   These fees shall be paid to the City Clerk at the time application is
made for the permit, and there shall also be charged an annual inspection fee
of $1 for each 25 lineal feet or fraction thereof, for each and every
billboard, signboard or sign erected.
   (C)   The fee to be paid by the person, firm or corporation who shall own,
be in possession of, or control any such billboard, signboard or sign.
(Prior Code, § 114.045)
§ 114.046 SIGNBOARDS TO BE MAINTAINED IN SANITARY CONDITION.
   Any person who shall maintain billboards, signboards or signs under the
provisions of this subchapter shall keep the same in a sanitary condition and
shall not allow waste paper or refuse from billboards, signboards or signs to
accumulate in or about the premises on which the same are erected or
maintained.
(Prior Code, § 114.046) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.047 BOND REQUIRED.
   Every person engaged in the business of constructing, erecting and
maintaining billboards, signboards or signs in the city shall file with the
City Clerk a bond with sureties to be approved by the City Council, in the sum
of $10,000, conditioned that such person shall faithfully comply with the
provisions of this subchapter with reference to the construction, alteration,
maintenance and safety of such billboards, signboards and signs and for the
payment of such fees as are herein provided to be paid and, further, to save
and keep harmless the city and its officials from all damages, liability,
losses or judgments which may be claimed or recovered by any person against the
city by reason of the erection, maintenance, removal or repair of any such
billboard, signboard or sign.
(Prior Code, § 114.047)
§ 114.048 WRITTEN CONSENT OF OWNER REQUIRED.
   No person shall paste, post, paint, print, nail or otherwise fasten any
handbill, sign, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind, or cause the same
to be done upon any private wall, roof, window, door, gate, fence, advertising
board or signboard or upon any other private structure or building, unless such
person is the owner, agent or lessee thereof, without the written consent of
the owner, agent or lessee of the wall, roof, window, door, fence, gate,
advertising board, signboard or other private structure, building or private
grounds.
(Prior Code, § 114.048) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.049 LEGAL NOTICES.
   Nothing in this subchapter contained shall be construed to apply to the
posting of legal notices by public officers in the performance of a public
duty, in the manner and in the place prescribed by law.
(Prior Code, § 114.049)
§ 114.050 CONSENT OF CITY AUTHORITIES.
   No person shall paste, post, paint, print, nail or otherwise fasten any
handbill, sign, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind whatsoever, or
cause the same to be done, on any curbstone, flagstone or any portion or part
of any sidewalk, pole, telephone pole, hydrant, bridge, pier or upon any
structure, within the limits of any street in the city, except as may be
required by the ordinances of the city, without the express consent of the city
authorities.
(Prior Code, § 114.050) Penalty, see §
10.99
DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS AND
SAMPLES REQUIRING LICENSE
§ 114.065 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person, firm or corporation shall distribute, or cause to be distributed
indiscriminately to the public, any cards, circulars, handbills, samples of
merchandise or any advertising matter whatsoever on any public street or
sidewalk or other public place in the city, or distribute or cause to be
distributed indiscriminately by leaving at stores, offices, houses or
residences in the city, any cards, circulars, handbills, samples of merchandise
or any advertising matter whatsoever without having first secured a license so
to do as required by the provisions of §§
114.065 to
114.069, inclusive; provided that, the provisions of this subchapter shall not
be construed to prohibit the sale of articles by licensed peddlers or the
peddling or sale of any article or publication that may carry or be accompanied
by advertising matter where a charge is made or a price paid for such article
or publication.
(Prior Code, § 114.065) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.066 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Any person desiring to distribute any such cards, circulars, handbills,
samples of merchandise, or any other advertising matter whatsoever, or to cause
the same to be distributed by one or more individuals as distributors, shall
make application in writing to the City Clerk for a license so to do, which
application shall set forth a general description of the cards, circulars,
handbills, samples of merchandise or advertising matter which it is proposed to
distribute and the name of the applicant and the name or names of the
individual or individuals who are to make the actual distribution of such
cards, circulars, handbills, samples of merchandise or advertising matter. No
license shall be issued to any but a person of good character. The Chief of
Police of the city shall make or cause to be made an investigation into the
character of each applicant as well as the character of each individual who is
to be engaged in the actual distribution of such cards, circulars, handbills,
samples of merchandise or advertising matter and shall report the results
thereof to the City Clerk before any such license shall be issued.
(Prior Code, § 114.066)
§ 114.067 LICENSE FEE; EXPIRATION.
   The license required under the terms of §§
114.065 to
114.069, inclusive, may be issued on a yearly basis in which event the fee
shall be $50 or it may be issued for a period of one day, in which event the
license fee shall be $4. All licenses issued on a yearly basis shall expire on
April 30 next after the issuance thereof. The fee for any license issued on a
yearly basis, but for a period less than one year shall be reduced pro rata.
(Prior Code, § 114.067)
§ 114.068 REPORT OF CHANGE IN PERSONNEL.
   Any person to whom a license may be issued hereunder on a yearly basis shall
report in writing to the City Clerk as often as the circumstances may require,
any change or changes in the personnel of the individual or individuals making
the actual distribution of any such cards, circulars, handbills, samples of
merchandise or advertising matter. No individuals of questionable character
shall be permitted to act as such distributors.
(Prior Code, § 114.068)
§ 114.069 PERMITTED HOURS OF DISTRIBUTION.
   No cards, circulars, handbills, samples of merchandise or advertising matter
shall be distributed within the limits of the city, except between the hours of
6:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. and they shall not be distributed in such manner as to
litter any public street or sidewalk or any other public place in the city, nor
shall they be distributed in such manner as to become a public nuisance. The
distribution indiscriminately of any such cards, circulars, handbills, samples
of merchandise or advertising matter by leaving the same at stores, offices,
houses or residences in the city, shall be accomplished without undue
molestation of the occupants of such stores, offices, houses or residences.
(Prior Code, § 114.069)
§ 114.070 EXCEPTIONS.
   No provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to political or religious
speech or to newspaper or magazine solicitors.
(Prior Code, § 114.070)
CHAPTER 115: FOOD AND FOOD DEALERS
Section
Food Deliveries
   
115.001   License required
   
115.002   Application; fees
   
115.003   Exemptions
   
115.004   Regulations
   
115.005   Inspection
Bakeries
   
115.020   License required
   
115.021   Application
   
115.022   License fee
   
115.023   Sanitation
Food Dispensers
   
115.035   Definition
   
115.036   License required; application
   
115.037   Outdoor dining; license
   
115.038   License fee; term
   
115.039   Inspection
   
115.040   Regulation of food dispensers
   
115.041   Dining room requirements
   
115.042   Kitchen requirements
   
115.043   Refrigerators
   
115.044   Plumbing
   
115.045   Employees; cleanliness and health
   
115.046   Storage of foodstuffs
   
115.047   Dishes and eating utensils to be cleaned
   
115.048   Poisonous substances not permitted to come into contact with
foodstuffs
   
115.049   Food to be adequately protected
   
115.050   Place where food served to be clean
   
115.051   Clothing of employees
   
115.052   Premises to be free from vermin and harmful material
   
115.053   Receptacles for garbage
   
115.054   Food handling and serving methods
   
115.055   Screens required
   
115.056   Enforcement
Drive-In Restaurants
   
115.070   Acts prohibited
   
115.071   Intoxicating liquor prohibited on premises
   
115.072   Loitering prohibited
   
115.073   Leaving unoccupied vehicles prohibited
   
115.074   Notice to be posted
Automatic Food Vending Machines
   
115.085   Definitions
   
115.086   License required
   
115.087   Application for license
   
115.088   License fee
   
115.089   Regulations; inspection
   
115.090   Emblem to be kept with license
   
115.091   Additional licenses
Retail Food Stores
   
115.105   Definitions
   
115.106   License required
   
115.107   Application
   
115.108   License fee; term
   
115.109   Sanitary requirements
   
115.110   Sunday sale restriction on fresh meat
Food Service Sanitation
   
115.125   Definitions
   
115.126   Adoption of health regulations
   
115.127   License required; non-transferable
   
115.128   License expiration
   
115.129   Issuance of license
   
115.130   Renewal of license
   
115.131   Suspension of licenses
   
115.132   Reinstatement of suspended license
   
115.133   Revocation of license
   
115.134   Hearing
   
115.135   Application for new license after revocation
   
115.136   Fees
   
115.137   Inspection of food service establishments and retail food stores
   
115.138   Access to establishment
   
115.139   Report of inspection
   
115.140   Correction of violations
   
115.141   Inspection of records
   
115.142   Issuance of notices
   
115.143   Service of notices
   
115.144   Examination and condemnation of food
   
115.145   Establishments outside jurisdiction of Health Authority
   
115.146   Plan review of future construction
   
115.147   Procedure when infection suspected
Waste Storage and Disposal in Food
Service Establishments
   
115.160   Definitions
   
115.161   Containers
   
115.162   Disposal of refuse
   
115.163   Storage in containers
   
115.164   Violations
   
115.165   Inspection of storage and disposal; hearings
   
115.166   Effective date
Food Vendors’ Extermination Requirements
   
115.180   Definition
   
115.181   Required extermination
   
115.182   Certificates required
   
115.183   Notice to close; appeal
   
115.184   Effective date
Ice Dealers
   
115.195   License required
   
115.196   Application for license
   
115.197   License fee
Mobile Food Vendors and Mobile Food Vehicles
   
115.210   Definitions
   
115.211   Mobile food vendor registration
   
115.212   Mobile food vehicle and pushcart permits
   
115.213   Mobile food vehicle operational restrictions
 
   
115.999   Penalty
FOOD DELIVERIES
§ 115.001 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall use or permit the use of any vehicle, including wagons and
motor vehicles and vehicles propelled by human power, for the storage or
carrying of any meat, poultry, fish, lard, vegetables, bread or bakery
products, or any other provisions intended for human consumption, excluding
milk, butter and cheese, in the city for the purpose of delivering any such
foodstuffs to any place in the city for the use and consumption or for resale
in the city, unless a license for the vehicle is secured and the provisions of
this subchapter are fully complied with.
(Prior Code, § 115.001) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.002 APPLICATION; FEES.
   Any person desiring to use or permit the use of any vehicle for the purposes
set forth in §
115.001 of this chapter shall make application to the City Clerk for a license.
The application shall set forth the name and address of the owner of the
vehicle or vehicles for which the license or licenses are sought, the name or
names of the persons from whom the deliveries are made, and the nature of the
goods carried. The City Clerk shall issue the licenses and shall give to the
Health Commissioner a list of all licenses issued. The annual license fee for
each of the vehicles shall be $30 per year. All licenses shall expire April 30
next after the issuance. The fee for any license issued for a period of less
than one year shall be reduced pro rata.
(Prior Code, § 115.002)
§ 115.003 EXEMPTIONS.
   No license fee shall be required for any vehicle used to deliver foodstuffs
from any establishment which is licensed and inspected as a retail food
establishment in the city, nor shall any license fee be required for any
vehicle for which a peddler’s license has been issued by the city. However, all
provisions of this subchapter, other than that providing for the payment of a
fee, shall be complied with in regard to the vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 115.003)
§ 115.004 REGULATIONS.
   All vehicles shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be
thoroughly cleaned each day that they are used. No person shall permit stale
food, decaying matter or any other waste or material to accumulate in or on any
vehicle while it is used. If foodstuffs not in covered containers or not
adequately protected in wrappings are transported in any vehicle, the goods
shall be carried in a portion or compartment of the vehicle which is screened
and protected against dust and insects.
(Prior Code, § 115.004) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.005 INSPECTION.
   It shall be the duty of the Health Commissioner to make or cause to be made
inspections necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 115.005)
BAKERIES
§ 115.020 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall establish, maintain or operate any bakery in the city
without having been licensed by the city.
(Prior Code, § 115.020) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.021 APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring to establish, maintain or operate a bakery shall make
application to the City Clerk for a license. The application shall set forth
the name and place of residence of the applicant together with the location of
the place for which the license is desired. The applicant shall pay a license
fee to the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 115.021)
§ 115.022 LICENSE FEE.
   The license fee to be paid to the City Clerk by the applicant shall be $50
per year. The license shall expire on April 30 following the date of its
issuance. If the license is issued for less than one year, the amount of the
license shall be reduced pro rata.
(Prior Code, § 115.022) (Ord. 1669, passed 4-14-1952; Ord. 2320, passed 3-23-
1976)
§ 115.023 SANITATION.
   All bakeries shall be conducted in a clean and sanitary manner and the
license of any bakery may be revoked if, upon examination by the Commissioner
of Health, the bakery is found to be in an unsanitary location or is conducted
in an unsanitary manner.
(Prior Code, § 115.023) Penalty, see §
115.999
FOOD DISPENSERS
§ 115.035 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FOOD DISPENSER. Any person, firm or corporation that keeps for sale, and
serves to the general public, for consumption on the premises, or on the
sidewalk or public way contiguous to the premises, any articles of food or
drink for human consumption. Restaurants, ordinaries, coffee houses, ice cream
parlors, lunch rooms, tea rooms, lunch stands, refreshment stands, box lunch
deliveries, luncheonettes, cafeterias and retail drug stores serving counter
lunches and drinks shall be included among FOOD DISPENSERS.
   SERVES. The placing of the food for the convenience of the patron into any
cup, glass, cone, dish, plate or other receptacle from which the patron may
conveniently “consume it”.
(Prior Code, § 115.035)
§ 115.036 LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   No person shall conduct or operate the business of food dispenser without
first having obtained a license. Written application, which shall conform to
the general requirements of this subchapter relating to applications for
licenses, shall be made to the City Clerk. The application shall contain the
name and residence of the applicant and, if the applicant is a firm, of each
member of the firm. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall
contain the names and residences of its principal officers. The application
shall contain such further information as may be required by the Commissioner
of Health in order to inform the Commissioner fully of the size and nature of
the place to be used for the purposes of the business and the conditions,
equipment and facilities for conducting the business therein, the health of
persons to be employed and the regulations and facilities provided for them.
(Prior Code, § 115.036) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.037 OUTDOOR DINING; LICENSE.
   Any food dispenser may apply for a permit for outdoor dining or café seating
pursuant to the following requirements and conditions. No event center events
or similar activities will be permitted outdoor dining or café seating.
   (A)   Generally. Subject to approval by the city, outdoor dining or café
seating may be made up of a combination of sidewalk space, private parking,
city parking, and on-street parking subject to the below conditions. Outdoor
seating cannot exceed 50% of a food dispenser’s total seating capacity, and no
more than 25% of a food dispenser’s parking facilities may be converted to
outdoor dining.
   (B)   Conditions.
      (1)   Sidewalk dining or café seating is subject to the following
conditions.
         (a)   The food dispenser otherwise conforms with current city zoning
code.
         (b)   The sidewalk is wide enough for sidewalk dining or café seating.
         (c)   A five-foot minimum clear zone is provided for pedestrian
traffic. A reduction to the clear zone can be requested with a detailed
justification but will require additional review and processing time.
         (d)   Fencing is optional. Pavement demarcations are required for all
outdoor dining or café seating areas. These must be provided prior to operation
of any sidewalk dining or café seating, and are subject to inspection and
approval by the city.
      (2)   Seating in private or city parking lots is subject to the following
conditions.
         (a)   The outdoor seating or café dining will not impair the normal,
safe and effective operation of a permanent use on the same site.
         (b)   The outdoor seating or café dining will not significantly impact
public health, safety or convenience, or create traffic hazards or congestion,
or otherwise interrupt or interfere with the normal conduct or uses and
activities in the vicinity.
         (c)   The outdoor seating or café dining will not be materially
detrimental to the surrounding uses in terms of traffic, noise and other
external effects.
      (3)   General conditions for all outdoor or café seating.
         (a)   The outdoor seating or café dining must be immediately adjacent
to the food dispenser location.
         (b)   Outdoor seating or café dining conducted in a city or private
parking facility shall not occupy or remove from availability more than 25% of
the spaces required for the permanent use.
         (c)   Each site occupied by outdoor or café dining must provide or
have available enough parking and vehicular maneuvering area for customers or
other users.
         (d)   Each site occupied by outdoor or café dining shall be left free
of debris, litter or other evidence of the outdoor or café dining upon
completion and removal of the use.
         (e)   All materials, structures and products related to the outdoor or
café dining must be removed from the premises following expiration of the
permit.
         (f)   Additional conditions may be established as necessary and as
required by the city to ensure land use compatibility and to minimize potential
impacts on nearby uses. These include, but are not limited to, time and
frequency of operation, temporary arrangements for parking and traffic
circulation, requirement for screening or enclosure, and guarantees for site
restoration and cleanup following outdoor or café dining.
         (g)   If multiple applicants would like to convert parking to outdoor
or café seating, the city shall evaluate potential for shared space between
businesses.
         (h)   All areas temporarily repurposed for outdoor seating or café
dining shall only be used with the understanding that the city may require
immediate access to utilities or other infrastructure for the purpose of
maintenance and emergencies.
   (C)   Permits. Food dispensers wanting to provide outdoor or café dining
must submit a temporary outdoor dining permit application from the city, which
includes providing the city with a sketch of the proposed outdoor or café
dining area. Permits for outdoor or café dining are valid from May 1 through
October 31 in any given year. The permit fee for outdoor or café dining is $100
per year.
(Ord. 2021-015, passed 6-22-2021)
§ 115.038 LICENSE FEE; TERM.
   (A)   The annual license fee for a restaurant shall be $100. However, the
license fee for a restaurant with a maximum seating capacity of less than 50
persons shall be $50 per year. The annual license fee for all other food
dispensers shall be $50; provided that, in each case where the applicant for
the license as a food dispenser is a person holding a Class A retailer’s liquor
license under the provisions of
Ch. 111 of this code of ordinances, the license fee to be charged shall be $25.
Where the holder of such Class A retailer’s liquor license is engaged in the
business of serving meals to the public regularly each day in the manner
customarily followed by restaurants, the license fee shall be $50.
   (B)   A food dispenser’s license shall expire on April 30 next following its
issuance. License fees payable upon the initial issuance of a license shall be
reduced in proportion to the number of full quarters of the license year which
have elapsed prior to the date on which the license is issued.
(Prior Code, § 115.037) (Ord. 1669, passed 4-14-1952; Ord. 2306, passed 3-23-
1976)
§ 115.039 INSPECTION.
   Before any license is issued by the Commissioner of Health shall cause an
inspection to be made of the premises to be occupied by the applicant as a food
dispenser, the equipment contained therein, the persons to be employed therein,
the sanitary and hygienic features and conditions, and all other matters
relating to the business which the Commissioner considers it is necessary or
proper to inquire into from the standpoint of health and sanitation. If the
Commissioner of Health is satisfied from the inspection that the place where
the business is to be conducted is in a sanitary condition and a fit and proper
place for the business and that all the provisions of this subchapter relating
to the conduct of the business have been observed, the Commissioner shall
approve the application, and thereupon, upon the payment of the license fee
herein provided, the Mayor may issue a license to the applicant to conduct the
business at the place during the year for which the license is issued. The
Mayor may revoke the license at any time by notice in writing whenever it shall
appear to the Mayor’s satisfaction from the recommendation of the Commissioner
of Health or otherwise that the licensee has violated the provisions of any
state or city law relating to the carrying on of the business of food dispenser
and has failed to correct the violation upon due notice from the Commissioner
of Health. In addition to the preliminary inspection herein provided for, the
Commissioner of Health shall cause periodical inspections to be made of the
place and personnel employed for the purpose of determining whether all the
requirements of this subchapter and the state health and sanitation laws are
being complied with. The periodical inspections shall be made with special
reference to the requirements of §
115.040 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 115.038) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.040 REGULATION OF FOOD DISPENSERS.
   The conditions and regulations contained in §§
115.035 through
115.040 of this chapter shall be observed in all food dispensers’ places or
establishments.
(Prior Code, § 115.039) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.041 DINING ROOM REQUIREMENTS.
   There shall be adequate light and ventilation; the walls, ceilings and
floors shall be clean and in good repair; tables, counters, shelves and other
furniture shall have clean surfaces, and be kept clean. All utensils, including
urns and containers for milk, cream, coffee and water shall be made of
materials that can be easily cleaned and disinfected. Foods during service
hours shall be handled or kept so that they are not exposed to contamination by
dirt, flies or vermin, or promiscuous handling by patrons.
(Prior Code, § 115.040) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.042 KITCHEN REQUIREMENTS.
   The kitchen shall have adequate light and ventilation, and the air flow
shall always be from the dining room through the kitchen. The discharge from
kitchen fans shall always be through a duct to a point above the roof line to
protect the occupants of the building in which the establishment is located or
adjoining buildings from nuisance. Ranges, refrigerators and other bulky
equipment should be so arranged as not to obstruct the light and ventilation.
Tables for clean and dirty dishes and food shall be so arranged that the dirty
dishes will be as far removed from the food rack and clean dishes as may be
possible. Ranges shall be hooded so that the cooking odors may be effectually
carried off by a stack or an exhaust fan or a skylight immediately above. The
walls and ceilings shall be preferably impervious, in good repair and kept
clean at all times. The floors and walls should be rat-proof and vermin-proof.
Ranges, steam tables, shelves, racks, blocks, tables or other machinery or
furniture used in mixing, cutting, grinding, cooking or otherwise preparing the
foods for service shall be of such material and construction that they may be
kept scrupulously clean at all times.
(Prior Code, § 115.041) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.043 REFRIGERATORS.
   (A)   Refrigerators shall be lined with impervious non-absorbent material
and adequately drained by indirect or broken connection with the sewer.
   (B)   There shall be separate compartments for keeping food materials which
may unfavorably affect each other if kept together.
   (C)   Scrupulous cleanliness shall be maintained at all times.
(Prior Code, § 115.042) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.044 PLUMBING.
   (A)   There shall be adequate plumbing facilities so that there is a
sufficient supply of running hot and cold water for all washing purposes, and
all fixtures, such as sinks, wash basins and the like, must be adequately
trapped, vented and revented, and properly connected to the sewer.
   (B)   All sinks in which greasy pots or dishes are washed must be connected
to a catchbasin or be equipped with an approved waterjacket grease trap.
(Prior Code, § 115.043) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.045 EMPLOYEES; CLEANLINESS AND HEALTH.
   All employees shall be clean in person and in clothing, and no person
afflicted with any contagious or infectious disease in communicable form and no
human carrier of b. diphtheria, b. Typhosus, b. dysenteriae, b. enteritidis, b.
paratyphosus, a. or b. amoebic dysentery shall be employed in or about the
preparing, handling, cooking or serving of foodstuffs, or in the washing of the
dishes or other utensils.
(Prior Code, § 115.044) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.046 STORAGE OF FOODSTUFFS.
   All store rooms or other rooms directly connected with the establishment
shall be clean, dry and kept in such a condition as not to affect unfavorably
the foodstuffs used or the health of the employees or of the public. Yards,
cellars or other areas directly connected with, or in close proximity to, the
establishment shall be kept clean.
(Prior Code, § 115.045) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.047 DISHES AND EATING UTENSILS TO BE CLEANED.
   (A)   Glasses, cups, dishes, knives, forks, spoons and other eating and
drinking utensils which are used more than once in any food dispensing
establishment or any similar establishment shall be thoroughly washed and
cleansed in such a way as to remove completely all visible foreign matter by
either of the following methods:
      (1)   By mechanical dish washing machine which have a direct connection
to hot water supply and which spray a fresh supply of hot rinse water direct on
all sides of dishes and eating and drinking utensils;
      (2)   By handwashing, which shall be done in warm water containing soap
or other effective cleansing agent and followed by rinsing in clean boiling
water of a temperature not below 170°F for at least one minute, followed by
draining; provided, however, that, in lieu of such rinsing in boiling water,
such dishes and utensils may be immersed for at least one minute in clean
water, such quantity as to yield approximately 100 parts per million of
available chlorine (one-half ounce of a solution of chlorinated soda per gallon
of wash water). The amount of available chlorine in such rinse water at no time
shall be less than 35 parts per million, and the water shall be kept clean at
all times; or
      (3)   By handwashing which shall be done in clean warm water containing
an inorganic cleansing agent to which has been added a chlorine disinfectant in
such quantity as to yield approximately 200 parts per million of available
chlorine. The water shall be changed when dirty. The washing mixture shall at
no time contain less than 35 parts per million of available chlorine.
   (B)   No such glass, cup, dish, knife, fork, spoon or other eating or
drinking vessel or utensil, after use by one patron in eating or drinking,
shall be offered or permitted to be used by any other patron without such
glass, cup, dish, knife, fork, spoon or other eating or drinking vessel or
utensil having been first thoroughly washed and cleansed by either of the
foregoing methods.
(Prior Code, § 115.046) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.048 POISONOUS SUBSTANCES NOT PERMITTED TO COME INTO CONTACT WITH
FOODSTUFFS.
   No person operating, maintaining or conducting any hotel, club, restaurant,
coffee house, lunchroom or other eating place wherein food is served to the
public, shall use any ingredient or substance containing any sodium cyanide,
potassium cyanide, oxalic acid, mercuric compound or other poisonous
substances, for the cleaning of nickel, copper, silverware or silver-plated
ware, and other articles or utensils used for the service or preparation of
food or foodstuffs.
(Prior Code, § 115.047) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.049 FOOD TO BE ADEQUATELY PROTECTED.
   All food which is received and which is intended to be used and prepared for
human consumption upon being received by any person shall be adequately
protected from dust, flies, vermin and other insects.
(Prior Code, § 115.048) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.050 PLACE WHERE FOOD SERVED TO BE CLEAN.
   The room or place where food is sold or served for human consumption shall
be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
(Prior Code, § 115.049) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.051 CLOTHING OF EMPLOYEES.
   All persons who are engaged in preparing meals to be sold at such places
shall wear suitable clothing which shall be clean and of a washable character
or nature and used for that purpose only.
(Prior Code, § 115.050) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.052 PREMISES TO BE FREE FROM VERMIN AND HARMFUL MATERIAL.
   Every such place shall be kept free from rats, mice and vermin and free from
matter of a deleterious nature.
(Prior Code, § 115.051) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.053 RECEPTACLES FOR GARBAGE.
   (A)   Every person owning or controlling any place where more than 20 guests
or boarders are fed daily shall cause all offal, table refuse, shells and
animal or vegetable matter commonly known and described as garbage, to be
placed in proper metallic cans, which shall be practically air- and water-tight
and shall cause all such substances deposited in such cans or receptacles to be
removed daily from the premises and to be disposed of either by burning in a
properly constructed crematory which shall have been approved by the
Commissioner of Health or by dumping the same at any dumping ground or place
where garbage is dumped or disposed of by the city. The removal and disposition
of such substances shall be done by such person at such person’s own expense
solely, and in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter, and the
directions or rules of the Commissioner of Health relating to the disposition
and removal of such substances.
   (B)   All garbage and refuse shall be kept in such manner and at such places
and the same will not become a nuisance to the public. The use of wooden boxes
or barrels for the storage of garbage or refuse will not be permitted; except
that, wooden barrels which are washed regularly may be used for the storage of
grease for soap stock.
(Prior Code, § 115.052) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.054 FOOD HANDLING AND SERVING METHODS.
   All employees in such establishment and all persons handling or serving food
therein are prohibited from handling butter intended to be used for foods in
such places in a manner which causes their hands to come in contact therewith
and from picking up glasses, cups or mixers with their fingers inserted
therein, and from wiping dishes with soiled napkins or aprons or with napkins
or aprons that were previously used for any purpose and not relaundered since
last used. No bakery goods shall be exposed for the purpose of exhibiting same
in such places unless adequately protected against insects of all kinds and
contamination by dust or handling by patrons. Such places shall not be so
dusted or swept that dust will settle on food that is exposed. Dry sweeping in
such places is prohibited and, if indulged in, shall subject both the
proprietor or manager and the employee who actually does the sweeping to the
penalty herein prescribed.
(Prior Code, § 115.053) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.055 SCREENS REQUIRED.
   Every such establishment shall be kept reasonably free from flies, and the
doors, windows and other openings of every such place shall, from April 15 to
November 15 in each year, be fitted with wire window screens and self-closing
wire screen doors.
(Prior Code, § 115.054) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.056 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Commissioner of Health to enforce the
provisions of this subchapter, and the Commissioner is authorized and empowered
from time to time to inspect and examine all retail food establishments, as
defined herein, for the purpose of ascertaining whether such sections and all
ordinances of the city and laws of state, relative to retail food
establishments, are being complied with.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of every owner or operator of a retail food
establishment to permit such inspections to be made and, when required, to
furnish samples of any foods kept, sold, offered for sale or served in any such
establishment.
   (C)   The samples shall be examined or analyzed by or under the direction of
the Commissioner of Health and a record of each such examination or analysis
shall be made and kept on file in the Commissioner’s office.
(Prior Code, § 115.055)
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANTS
§ 115.070 ACTS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person while on or adjacent to the premises of any drive-in
restaurant within the city limits shall race the motor of any car or suddenly
start or stop any motor of any car or make or cause to be made any loud or
unusual noise.
   (B)   No person parked on the premises of a drive-in restaurant shall blow
or cause to be blown any automobile horn or motorcycle horn at any time while
so parked.
(Prior Code, § 115.070) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.071 INTOXICATING LIQUOR PROHIBITED ON PREMISES.
   No patron or other person on the premises of a drive-in restaurant, whether
in or out of a motor vehicle, shall drink any beer or other intoxicating liquor
or at any time to have in his or her possession any open bottle, can or other
receptacle containing beer or alcoholic liquor.
(Prior Code, § 115.071) (Ord. 2035, passed 6-12-1967) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.072 LOITERING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No group of three or more persons shall congregate or loiter at any
location on the premises of a drive-in restaurant other than in the restaurant
building or in a parked motor vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle onto the premises of a
restaurant and then from the premises without parking the vehicle unless there
is a lack of available parking space thereon.
(Prior Code, § 115.072) (Ord. 2035, passed 6-12-1967) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.073 LEAVING UNOCCUPIED VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall leave any unoccupied motor vehicle on any restaurant parking
lot and leave the premises for more than ten minutes, except with the knowledge
and consent of the proprietor of the restaurant.
(Prior Code, § 115.073) (Ord. 2035, passed 6-12-1967) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.074 NOTICE TO BE POSTED.
   It shall be the duty of the restaurant operator or proprietor who furnishes
parking to patrons to post on the premises in a conspicuous location, in words
of not less than one inch type, at least one sign bearing the following legend:
 
CRUISING IN OR CONGREGATING OR LOITERING OUTSIDE OF A MOTOR VEHICLE IS
UNLAWFUL. NO UNOCCUPIED VEHICLE MAY BE LEFT ON THE PREMISES FOR MORE THAN 10
MINUTES WITHOUT THE CONSENT OF THE RESTAURANT OPERATOR.
 
(Prior Code, § 115.074) (Ord. 2035, passed 6-12-1967)
AUTOMATIC FOOD VENDING MACHINES
§ 115.085 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTOMATIC FOOD VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical container or device used for
the sale of any article of food, the operation of which is governed or
controlled by the deposit of a coin or token.
   FOOD. Any cooked or uncooked article of food, drink, condiment or confection
used for or intended to be used for human consumption.
   MULTIPLE AUTOMATIC FOOD VENDING MACHINE. An automatic food vending machine
equipped with or containing a plural number of magazines, columns, shelves or
other compartments for the holding of food.
   SINGLE AUTOMATIC FOOD VENDING MACHINE. An automatic food vending machine
which is equipped with or containing one magazine, column, shelter or other
compartment for the holding of food.
(Prior Code, § 115.085) (Ord. 1748, passed 1-3-1956)
§ 115.086 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall deliver or install any automatic food vending machine
within the city without having obtained a license.
   (B)   No person shall install, keep, maintain or use, or permit the
installation, keeping, maintenance or use, upon such person’s premises of any
automatic food vending machine for which a license has not been issued for the
current year.
(Prior Code, § 115.086) (Ord. 1748, passed 1-23-1956) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.087 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Any person desiring a license for an automatic food vending machine or
machines shall make application in writing to the City Clerk.
   (B)   The application shall set forth the number of automatic food vending
machines intended to be installed, the location at which each is to be
installed, and a description of each.
   (C)   The description shall contain the manufacturer’s name, the make and
factory number, whether a single or multiple machine, and the monetary value of
the coin or coins used to operate the machine.
   (D)   The application shall also set forth further information required by
the Health Commissioner concerning the type or types of machines and the kind
or kinds of food to be dispensed therefrom.
   (E)   Before any license is issued, the Health Commissioner shall cause an
inspection to be made to determine the character and fitness of the machine or
machines from the standpoint of insuring protection of the food from improper
handling, dust, dirt, flies, vermin or other contamination.
(Prior Code, § 115.087) (Ord. 1748, passed 1-23-1956; Ord. 1748, passed 6-12-
1967)
§ 115.088 LICENSE FEE.
   Every owner of an automatic food vending machine installed or maintained
within the city shall pay an annual license fee of $50 and, in addition
thereto, for each automatic food vending machine installed or maintained by
such person, annual license fees as prescribed in the following classes:
   (A)   Class “I”, single machines operated by the deposit of coins or tokens
of the monetary value of $0.01: $1;
   (B)   Class “II”, multiple machines operated by the deposit of coins or
tokens of the monetary value of $0.01: $1.50;
   (C)   Class “III”, single machines operated by the deposit of coins or
tokens of a monetary value from $0.02 to $0.05: $2;
   (D)   Class “IV”, multiple machines operated by the deposit of coins or
tokens of a monetary value from $0.02 to $0.05: $3;
   (E)   Class “V”, single machines operated by the deposit of coins or tokens
of a monetary value from $0.06 to $0.10: $3.50;
   (F)   Class “VI”, multiple machines operated by the deposit of coins or
tokens of a monetary value from $0.06 to $0.10: $5;
   (G)   Class “VII”, single machines operated by the deposit of coins or
tokens of a monetary value from $0.11 to $0.20: $10;
   (H)   Class “VIII”, multiple machines operated by the deposit of coins or
tokens of a monetary value from $0.11 to $0.20: $15;
   (I)   Class “DC”, single machines operated by the deposit of coins or tokens
of the monetary value over $0.20: $20; and
   (J)   Class “X”, multiple machines operated by the deposit of coins or
tokens of the monetary value over $0.20: $25.
(Prior Code, § 115.088) (Ord. 2337, passed 3-27-1976)
§ 115.089 REGULATIONS; INSPECTION.
   Before any license shall be issued, the Commissioner of Health shall cause
an inspection to be made to determine the character and fitness of the machine
or machines from the standpoint of ensuring protection of the food from
improper handling, dust, dirt, flies, vermin or other contamination. All
articles of food provided by means of automatic food vending machines shall be
clean, wholesome, free from taint, decay or infection and shall contain no
poisonous, deleterious or other injurious ingredients in kind and quantities so
as to render such articles injurious or detrimental to health. The Health
Commissioner shall make periodic inspections of all such machines and the
articles of food provided therefrom to assure compliance with all requirements
of this subchapter and other applicable ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 115.089) (Ord. 1748, passed 6-12-1967)
§ 115.090 EMBLEM TO BE KEPT WITH LICENSE.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall deliver with each automatic food vending; machine
license a sticker license emblem for each machine authorized to be kept or
installed under the license.
   (B)   The sticker shall bear appropriate information indicating the number
of the license and the year for which it is issued.
(Prior Code, § 115.090) (Ord. 1748, passed 6-12-1967)
§ 115.091 ADDITIONAL LICENSES.
   Upon the filing of a supplemental application and the payment of the
prescribed fees, a licensee shall be entitled to receive license emblems and
install additional machines at the location or locations designated for a
supplemental application.
(Prior Code, § 115.091) (Ord. 1748, passed 6-12-1967)
RETAIL FOOD STORES
§ 115.105 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   RETAIL FOOD STORE. Any store, stand, booth, pavilion or other place of
business wherein there is sold or offered for sale at retail any article of
food, confection, condiment or drink used or intended for human consumption;
provided that, hotels, bakeries, food dispensers, peddlers and milk dealers,
who are especially licensed and defined by other city ordinances, shall not be
considered retail food stores for the purposes of this subchapter.
   SALE AT RETAIL. Any transfer of the ownership of or title to tangible
personal property to the purchaser for use or consumption, and not for resale
in any form as tangible personal property for a valuable consideration.
(Prior Code, § 115.105)
§ 115.106 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person, firm or corporation shall operate or maintain a retail food store
in the city without securing a license as hereinafter provided.
(Prior Code, § 115.106) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.107 APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring to establish, maintain or operate a retail food store,
as defined in §
115.105 of this chapter, shall make application to the City Clerk for a license
to do so. The application shall contain the name and residence of the
applicant, the place at which it is intended or desired to carry on or conduct
the retail food store, a brief description of the commodities desired to be
sold, and any further information which may be required by the City Clerk in
keeping with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 115.107)
§ 115.108 LICENSE FEE; TERM.
   (A)   The license fee to be paid by the applicant desiring to establish,
operate or maintain a retail food store shall be $50 per year.
   (B)   All licenses shall expire on April 30 following the date of issuance.
If issued for less than one year, the amount of the license fee shall be
reduced pro rata.
(Prior Code, § 115.108) (Ord. 1669, passed 4-14-1952; Ord. 2305, passed 3-23-
1976)
§ 115.109 SANITARY REQUIREMENTS.
   Every retail food store shall be conducted in a clean and sanitary manner
and shall at all times be subject to the inspection of the City Health
Commissioner. In all cases where perishable food is kept for sale, adequate
provision should be made for the refrigeration of perishable foods that require
refrigeration in order to keep them in a wholesome state. The premises of any
retail food store shall be protected as far as practicable against flies and
all manner of vermin. Spoiled or decayed food and any other refuse shall not be
allowed to accumulate in or about the premises, and all refuse containers shall
be of tight construction and furnished with adequate covers.
(Prior Code, § 115.109) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.110 SUNDAY SALE RESTRICTION ON FRESH MEAT.
   In order to ensure inspection and prevent sale of unwholesome and tainted
meats, it shall be unlawful for any person to keep open or conduct any meat
market, or to expose or offer for sale therein any fresh meats between the
hours of 12:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on Sundays.
(Prior Code, § 115.110) Penalty, see §
115.999
FOOD SERVICE SANITATION
§ 115.125 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULTERATED. The condition of a food:
      (1)   If it bears or contains any poisonous or deleterious substance in a
quantity which may render it injurious to health;
      (2)   If it bears or contains any added poisonous or deleterious
substance for which no safe tolerance has been established by regulation, or in
excess of such tolerance if one has been established;
      (3)   If it consists in whole or in part of any filthy, putrid or
decomposed substance, or if it is otherwise unfit for human consumption;
      (4)   If it has been processed, prepared, packed or held under unsanitary
conditions, whereby, it may be become contaminated with filth or, whereby, it
may have been rendered injurious to health;
      (5)   If it is whole or in part the product of a diseased animal, or an
animal which has died otherwise than by slaughter; or
      (6)   If the containers are composed in whole or in part of any poisonous
or deleterious substance which may render the contents injurious to health.
   ADEQUATE. Acceptable or sufficient as determined by Health Authority.
   APPROVED. Acceptable to the Health Officer based on his or her determination
as to conformance with appropriate standards and good public health practice.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE. The legally designated Health Authority of the
city and shall include those persons designated by the Health Authority to
enforce the provisions of this subchapter.
   CLOSED. Fitted together snugly leaving no openings large enough to permit
the entrance of vermin.
   CORROSION-RESISTANCE MATERIAL. A material which maintains it original
surface characteristics under prolonged influence of the food, cleaning
compounds and sanitizing solutions which may contact it.
   EASILY CLEANABLE. Readily accessible and of such material and finish, and so
fabricated that residue may be completely removed by normal cleaning methods.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person working in a food service establishment or retail food
store who transports food or food containers, who engages in food preparation,
packaging or service, or who comes in contact with any food utensils or
equipment.
   EQUIPMENT. All stoves, ranges, hoods, meat blocks, tables, counters,
refrigerators, sinks, dishwashing machines, steamtables and similar items,
other than utensils, used in the operation of a food service establishment or
retail food store.
   FOOD. Any raw, cooked or processed edible substance, beverage or ingredient
used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human consumption.
   FOOD CONTACT SURFACES. Those surfaces of equipment and utensils with which
food normally comes in contact, and those surfaces with which food may come in
contact and drain back onto surfaces normally in contact with food.
   FOOD PROCESSING ESTABLISHMENT. A commercial establishment in which food is
processed or otherwise prepared and packaged for human consumption.
   FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. Any fixed or mobile restaurant, coffee shop,
cafeteria, short-order café, luncheonette, grill, tearoom, sandwich shop, soda
fountain, tavern, bar, cocktail lounge, night club, roadside stand, industrial-
feeding establishment, private, public or non-profit organization or
institution which is routinely serving food; any catering kitchen, commissary
or similar place in which food or drink is prepared for sale or for service on
the premises or elsewhere; and any other eating or drinking establishment or
operation where food is served or provided for the public with or without
charge.
   HEALTH AUTHORITY.
      (1)   The Aldermen of the city who compose the Health Committee, and the
Mayor.
      (2)   The person or persons who have been designated by the Mayor and
City Council to administer the affairs of the City Health Department.
   KITCHENWARE. All multi-use utensils other than tableware used in the
storage, preparation, conveying or serving of food.
   LAW. State and local statutes, ordinances and regulations.
   LICENSE HOLDER. An individual, a firm, partnership, company, corporation,
trustee, association or public or private entity who is directly or indirectly
responsible for the operation of a food service establishment or retail food
store.
   MISBRANDED. The presence of any written, printed or graphic matter, upon or
accompanying food or containers of food, which is false or misleading, or which
violates any applicable state or local labeling requirements.
   MOBILE FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISH- MENT. Any food service establishment capable
of being moved from location to location, or without a fixed location.
   PACKAGED. Bottled, canned, cartoned or securely wrapped.
   PERISHABLE FOOD. Any food of such type or in such condition as may spoil.
   PERMANENT FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT OR RETAIL FOOD STORE. Any food service
establishment or retail food store which operates at a fixed location for a
period of time exceeding 14 days.
   PERSON IN CHARGE. The individual present in a food service establishment who
is the supervisor of the food service establishment at the time.
   POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD. Any perishable food which consists in whole, or
in part, of milk or milk products, eggs, meat, poultry, fish, shellfish or
other ingredients capable of supporting rapid and progressive growth of
infectious or toxigenic micro-organisms.
   RETAIL FOOD STORE. Retail grocery, meat market, poultry market, fish market,
fresh fruit and vegetable market, confectionery, nut store, retail bakery or
any other establishment, whether fixed or movable, where food, intended for
human consumption, off the premises, is prepared, handled, transported, sold or
offered for sale at retail.
   SAFE TEMPERATURES. As applied to potentially hazardous food, shall mean
temperatures of 45°F or below, and 140°F or above. As applied to frozen
perishable foods, SAFE TEMPERATURES shall be -0°F or below, except for a
variation of 15°F during transit, unloading or defrosting during a mechanical
defrosting cycle. Temperatures shall be determined by measurement of the actual
product temperature or the ambient air temperature in the storage device.
   SANITIZING.
      (1)   Effective bactericidal treatment by a process that destroys micro-
organisms, including pathogens.
      (2)   Effective bactericidal treatment is demonstrated by an average
plate count per tableware utensil surface examined of not more than 100
colonies, or not more than 12-1/2 colonies per square inch of equipment and
utensils surfaces examined other than tableware in accordance with procedures
detailed in Public Health Service Publication No. 1631 (Procedure for the
Bacteriological Examination of Food Utensils and or Flood Equipment Surfaces).
   SEALED. Free of cracks or other opening which permit entry or passage or
moisture.
   SINGLE SERVICE ARTICLES. Cups, containers, lids or closures; plates, knives,
forks, spoons, stirrers, paddles, straws, place mats, napkins, doilies,
scrapping material and all similar articles which are constructed wholly in
part from paper, paperboard, molded pulp, foil, wood, plastic, synthetic or
other readily destructible materials, and which are intended by the
manufacturer and generally recognized by the public as for one usage only, then
to be discarded.
   TABLEWARE. All multi-use eating and drinking utensils, including flatware
(knives, forks and spoons).
   TEMPORARY FOOD SERVICE ESTAB- LISHMENT. Any food service establishment which
operates at a fixed location for a term not exceed two weeks, in connection
with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition or similar transitory
gathering.
   TEMPORARY RETAIL FOOD STORES. Any retail food store which operates at a
fixed location for a temporary period of time not to exceed two weeks.
   UTENSILS. Any tableware and kitchenware used in the storage, preparation,
conveying or serving of food.
   WHOLESOME. In sound condition, clean, free from adulteration, and otherwise
suitable for use as human food.
(Prior Code, § 115.125)
§ 115.126 ADOPTION OF HEALTH REGULATIONS.
   In addition to those provisions set forth in the city code of ordinances for
food sanitation, the city hereby adopts by reference the provisions set forth
in the State Department of Public Health’s Food Service Sanitation Code, 77
Ill. Adm. Code Part 750.
(Prior Code, § 115.126)
§ 115.127 LICENSE REQUIRED; NON- TRANSFERABLE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food service
establishment or retail food store within the city, who does not possesses a
valid license issued to him or her by the City Clerk. Only a person who
complies with the requirements of this chapter shall be entitled to receive and
retail such a license. Licenses shall not be transferable from one person to
another person or place.
   (B)   A valid license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in every food
service and retail food establishment.
(Prior Code, § 115.127) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.128 LICENSE EXPIRATION.
   Licenses for permanent food service establishments and retail food stores
shall expire on April 30 next following the date of issuance. Licenses for
temporary food service establishments and temporary retail food stores shall be
issued for a period of time not to exceed 14 days.
(Prior Code, § 115.128)
§ 115.129 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Any person desiring to operate a food service establishment or retail
food store or to renew an expired license shall make written application for a
permit on forms provided by the Health Authority. Such application shall
include: the applicant’s full name and post office address and whether such
applicant is an individual, firm or corporation; and, if a partnership, the
names of partners, together with their addresses shall be included; the
location and type of the proposed food service establishment or retail food
store; and the signature of the applicant or applicants. If the application is
for a temporary food service establishment or temporary retail food store, it
shall also include the inclusive dates of the proposed operation.
   (B)   Upon receipt of such an application, the Health Officer shall make an
inspection of the establishment to determine compliance with the provisions of
this subchapter. When inspection reveals that the applicable requirements of
this subchapter have been met, a license shall be issued to the applicant by
the Health Authority.
(Prior Code, § 115.129)
§ 115.130 RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   Whenever the inspection for renewal of a license reveals serious or repeated
violations of this subchapter, the license will not be issued and the Health
Authority shall notify the applicant immediately thereof. Such notice shall
state the reasons for not renewing the permit. Such notice shall also state
that an opportunity for a hearing shall be provided for the applicant at a time
and place designated by the Health Authority. Such hearing shall be scheduled
not later than ten days from the date of the notice. The notice referred to in
this delivered to the applicant in person by the Health Authority.
(Prior Code, § 115.130)
§ 115.131 SUSPENSION OF LICENSES.
   (A)   Licenses may be suspended temporarily by the Health Authority for
failure of the license holder to comply with the requirements of this
subchapter. Whenever a license holder or operator has failed to comply with any
notice issued under the provisions of this subchapter, the license holder or
operator shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the
notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for a hearing will be
provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the Health Authority
by the license holder.
   (B)   (1)   Upon suspension of the license, the license shall be removed
from the establishment by the Health Authority and returned to the Health
Department.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the other provisions of this subchapter, whenever
the Health Officer finds unsanitary or other conditions in the operation of a
food service establishment or retail food store which, in the Health Officer’s
judgement, constitute a substantial hazard to the public health, he or she may,
without warning, notice or hearing, issue a written notice to the license
holder or operator citing such condition, specifying the corrective action to
be taken, and specifying the time period within which such action shall be
taken and if deemed necessary, such order shall state that the license is
immediately suspended, and all operations as a food service establishment or
retail food store are to be immediately discontinued. Any person to whom such
an order is issued shall comply immediately herewith, but upon written petition
to the Health Authority shall be afforded a hearing within 72 hours.
(Prior Code, § 115.131)
§ 115.132 REINSTATEMENT OF SUSPENDED LICENSE.
   Any person whose license has been suspended may, at any time, make
application for a reinspection for the purpose of reinstatement of the license.
Within 48 hours following receipt of a written request, including a statement
signed by the applicant that in the applicant’s opinion the conditions causing
suspension of the license have been corrected, the Health Officer shall make a
reinspection. If the applicant is complying with the requirements of this
subchapter, their license shall be reinstated.
(Prior Code, § 115.132)
§ 115.133 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   For serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this
subchapter, or for interference with the Health Authority in the performance of
its duties, the license may be permanently revoked by the Mayor and City
Council after an opportunity for a hearing has been provided by the Health
Authority.
   (B)   Prior to such action, the Health Authority shall notify the license
holder, in writing, stating the reasons for which the license is subject to
revocation and advising that the license shall be permanently revoked at the
end of five days following service of such notice, unless a request for a
hearing is filed with the Health Authority, by the license holder, within such
five-day period.
   (C)   If no request for a hearing is filed within the five-day period, the
revocation of the license becomes final.
(Prior Code, § 115.133)
§ 115.134 HEARING.
   (A)   The hearings (suspension or revocation) provided for in this section
shall be conducted by the Health Authority at a time and place designated by
the Health Authority.
   (B)   Based upon the record of such hearing, the Health Authority shall make
a finding and shall sustain, modify or rescind any official notice or order
considered in the hearing.
(Prior Code, § 115.134)
§ 115.135 APPLICATION FOR NEW LICENSE AFTER REVOCATION.
   Whenever a revocation of a license has become final, the holder of the
revoked license may make written application for new license.
(Prior Code, § 115.135)
§ 115.136 FEES.
   The following fee for license may be required for food service
establishments and retail food stores. There shall be an annual charge of $50
at the time of the license renewal inspection for each permanent license and a
charge of $5 for each temporary license issued to cover the cost of issuing
said permits. This fee shall be collected by the City Clerk. There will be no
charge made for such license to any schools, religious, voluntary or non-profit
making community organizations and institutions.
(Prior Code, § 115.136)
§ 115.137 INSPECTION OF FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS AND RETAIL FOOD STORES.
   At least once every 12 months, the Health Authority shall inspect each food
service establishment and retail food store located in the city and shall make
as many additional inspections and reinspections as are necessary for the
enforcement of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 115.137)
§ 115.138 ACCESS TO ESTABLISHMENT.
   The Health Authority, after proper identification, shall be permitted to
enter at any reasonable time any food service establishment or retail food
store within the city, for the purpose of making inspections to determine
compliance with this subchapter. The Health Authority shall be permitted to
examine the records of the establishment to obtain pertinent information
pertaining to food and supplies purchased, received or used, and persons
employed.
(Prior Code, § 115.138)
§ 115.139 REPORT OF INSPECTION.
   Whenever an inspection of a food service establishment or retail food store
is made, the finding shall be recorded on the inspection report forms set out
in §
115.129 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 115.139)
§ 115.140 CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS.
   The completed inspection report form shall specify a reasonable period of
time for the correction of the violations found; and correction of the
violations shall be accomplished within the period specified, in accordance
with the following provisions.
   (A)   If an imminent health hazard exists, such as complete lack of
refrigeration or sewage backup into the establishment, the establishment shall
immediately cease food service operation. Operations shall not be resumed until
authorized by the Health Officer.
   (B)   All violations of four- or five-point weighted items, as indicated in
the “Rules and Regulations Governing Food Service Sanitation” shall be
corrected as soon as possible, but in any event, within ten days following
inspection. Within 15 days after inspection, the holder of the license shall
submit a written report to the regulatory authority stating that the four- or
five-point weighted violations have been corrected. A follow-up inspection
shall be conducted to confirm correction.
   (C)   All one- or two-point weighted items shall be corrected as soon as
possible, but in any event, by the time of the next routine inspection.
   (D)   When the rating score of the establishment is less than 60, the
establishment shall initiate corrective action on all identified violations
within 48 hours. One or more reinspections will be conducted at reasonable time
intervals to assure correction.
   (E)   In the case of temporary food service establishments, all violations
shall be corrected within 24 hours. If violations are not corrected within 24
hours, the establishment shall immediately cease food service operations until
authorized to resume by the regulatory authority.
   (F)   The inspection report shall state that failure to comply with any time
limits for corrections may result in cessation of food service operations. An
opportunity for hearing on the inspection findings or the time limitations or
both will be provided if a written request is filed with the regulatory
authority within ten days following cessation of operations. If a request for
hearing is received, a hearing shall be held within 20 days of receipt of the
request.
   (G)   Whenever a food service establishment is required under these
provisions to cease operations, it shall not resume operations until it is
shown on reinspection that conditions responsible for the order to cease
operations no longer exist. Opportunity for reinspection shall be offered
within a reasonable time.
(Prior Code, § 115.140)
§ 115.141 INSPECTION OF RECORDS.
   Whenever the Health Officer makes an inspection, he or she shall record his
or her findings on an inspection report form provided for this purpose, and
shall furnish a copy of such inspection report form to the license holder or
operator. The current inspection report shall be posted in a conspicuous place
in the establishment.
(Prior Code, § 115.141)
§ 115.142 ISSUANCE OF NOTICES.
   (A)   Whenever the Health Officer makes an inspection of an establishment
and discovers that any of the requirements of this subchapter have been
violated, the Health Officer shall notify the license holder or operator of
such violations by means of an inspection report form or other written notice.
   (B)   In such notification, the Health Officer shall:
      (1)   Set forth the specific violations found;
      (2)   Establish a specific and reasonable period of time for the
correction of the violations found;
      (3)   State that failure to comply with any notice issued in accordance
with the provisions of this subchapter may result in immediate suspension of
the license or other prosecution; and
      (4)   State that an opportunity for appeal from any notice or inspection
findings will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the
Health Authority within the period of time established in the notice of
correction.
(Prior Code, § 115.142)
§ 115.143 SERVICE OF NOTICES.
   Notices provided for under this section shall be deemed to have been
properly served when a copy of the original of the inspection report form or
other notice has been delivered personally to the license holder or person in
charge, or such notice has been sent by registered or certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the last known address of the license holder. The
original of such notice shall be filed with the records of the Health
Authority.
(Prior Code, § 115.143)
§ 115.144 EXAMINATION AND CONDEMNATION OF FOOD.
   Food may be examined or sampled by the Health Officer as often as may be
necessary to determine freedom from adulteration or misbranding. The Health
Officer may, upon written notice to the owner or person in charge, place a hold
order on any food which the Health Officer determines, or has probable cause to
believe to be unwholesome, or otherwise adulterated or misbranded. Under a hold
order, food shall be permitted to be suitably stored. It shall be unlawful for
any person to remove or alter a hold order notice or tag placed on food by the
Health Officer and neither such food, nor the containers thereof, shall be
relabeled, repacked, reprocessed, altered, disposed of or destroyed without
permission of the Health Officer, except on order by a court of competent
jurisdiction. After the owner or person in charge has had a hearing, as
provided for in the “Rules and Regulations Governing Food Service Sanitation”,
as amended, and on the basis of evidence produced at such hearing, or on the
basis of the Health Officer’s examination in the event a written request for a
hearing is not received, within ten days, the Health Officer may vacate the old
order or may by written order direct the owner or person in charge of the food
which was placed under the hold order to denature or destroy such food, or
bring it into compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 115.144) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.145 ESTABLISHMENTS OUTSIDE JURISDICTION OF HEALTH AUTHORITY.
   Food from food service establishments outside the jurisdiction of the Health
Authority of the city, may be sold within the city, if such food service
establishments conform to the provisions of this subchapter, or to
substantially equivalent provisions. To determine the extent of compliance with
such provisions, the Health Officer may accept reports from responsible
authorities in other jurisdictions where such food service establishments are
located.
(Prior Code, § 115.145)
§ 115.146 PLAN REVIEW OF FUTURE CONSTRUCTION.
   When a food service establishment or retail food store is, hereafter,
constructed or extensively remodeled, or when an existing structure is
converted for use as food service establishment or retail food store, properly
prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling or
alteration, showing layout, arrangement and construction materials of work
areas, and the location, size and type of fixed equipment and facilities, shall
be submitted to the Health Officer for approval before such work is begun.
(Prior Code, § 115.146)
§ 115.147 PROCEDURE WHEN INFECTION SUSPECTED.
   When the Health Officer has reasonable cause to suspect possibility of
disease transmission from any food service establishment or retail food store
employee, the Health Officer shall secure a morbidity history of the suspected
employee, or make such other investigation as may be indicated, and take
following measures:
   (A)   The immediate exclusion of the employee from all food service
establishments and retail food stores;
   (B)   The immediate closing of the establishment concerned until, in the
opinion of the Health Officer, no further danger of disease outbreak exists;
   (C)   Restriction of the employee’s services to some area of the
establishment where there would be no danger of transmitting disease; and
   (D)   Adequate medical and laboratory examination of the employee, and of
his or her body discharges.
(Prior Code, § 115.147) (Ord. 2515, passed 6-24-1980)
WASTE STORAGE AND DISPOSAL IN
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 115.160 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING COMMISSIONER, BUILDING INSPECTOR and HEALTH INSPECTOR. Those
persons who have been designated by the Mayor and City Council to administer
the affairs of the City Building and Health Department.
   DISPOSE or DISPOSAL. The removal of garbage, waste or refuse from the
container in which it is being stored to a location outside the city.
   FOOD. Any raw, cooked or processed edible substance, beverage or ingredient
used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human consumption.
   FOOD PROCESSING ESTABLISHMENT. A commercial establishment in which food is
processed or otherwise prepared and packaged for human consumption.
   FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. Any fixed or mobile restaurant; coffee shop;
cafeteria; short-order café; luncheonette; grill; tearoom/ sandwich shop; soda
fountain; tavern; bar; cocktail lounge; night club; roadside stand; industrial-
feeding establishment; private, public or non-profit organization or
institution routinely serving food; catering kitchen; commissary or similar
place in which food or drink is prepared for sale or for service on the
premises or elsewhere; and any other eating or drinking establishment or
operation where food is served or provided for the public with or without
charge.
   GARBAGE. Waste resulting from the handling, processing, preparation, cooking
and consumption of food and wastes from the handling, processing, storage and
sale of produce, whether in solid, liquid or semi-solid.
   MOBILE FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISH- MENT. Any food service establishment capable
of being moved from location to location or without a fixed location.
   REFUSE. Waste.
   RETAIL FOOD STORE. Retail grocery, meat market, poultry market, fish market,
fresh fruit and vegetable market, confectionary, nut store, retail bakery or
any other establishment, whether fixed or movable, where food, intended for
human consumption, off the premises, is prepared, handled, transported, sold or
offered for sale at retail.
   STORE or STORAGE. The containment of garbage, waste or refuse in a container
approved for such purpose.
   WASTE. Any garbage or other discarded materials.
(Prior Code, § 115.160) (Ord. 03-470, passed 12-9-2003)
§ 115.161 CONTAINERS.
   (A)   Those establishments defined in §
115.160 of this chapter are required to store garbage, waste and refuse in
water-tight, metal containers which are rust-resistant, non-absorbent, have
handles and have covers or lids which are capable of being secured to the
container or which can be closed in such a manner that the garbage, waste and
refuse stored inside the container cannot be visible from the exterior. All
containers for storage of garbage, waste or refuse in those establishments
defined in §
115.160 of this chapter must be approved by a representative of the City
Building and Health Department.
   (B)   Approval shall not be unreasonably withheld if the container conforms
to the requirements of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 115.161) (Ord. 03-470, passed 12-9-2003)
§ 115.162 DISPOSAL OF REFUSE.
   Those establishments defined in §
115.160 of this chapter are required to dispose of garbage, waste and refuse at
such intervals of time as are necessary to prevent the garbage, waste and
refuse stored inside the containers torn being exposed to the outside in such a
manner that it protrudes over the top of the container or prevents the
container cover or lid from being securely fastened or closed.
(Prior Code, § 115.162) (Ord. 03-470, passed 12-9-2003) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.163 STORAGE IN CONTAINERS.
   Those establishments defined in §
115.160 of this chapter shall not allow waste, refuse or garbage to be stored
on top of or outside of the container or containers which are used for storage
of waste, refuse or garbage prior to its disposal. These establishments shall
also be required to keep the top or cover of the container closed at all times.
(Prior Code, § 115.163) (Ord. 03-470, passed 12-9-2003) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.164 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this subchapter for any
establishment as defined in §
115.160 of this chapter to fail to provide for storage of waste, refuse and
garbage in containers as described in §
115.161 of this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this subchapter for any
establishment as defined in §
115.160 of this chapter to fail to provide for disposal of waste, refuse and
garbage at such intervals as are required and necessary to prevent accumulation
in the manner described in §
115.162 of this chapter.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this subchapter for any
establishment as defined in §
115.160 of this chapter to allow waste, refuse or garbage to be stored on top
of or outside of a container or containers which are used for storage of waste,
refuse or garbage prior to its disposal.
   (D)   It shall also be unlawful and a violation of this subchapter for any
establishment as defined in §
115.160 of this chapter to fail to keep a top or cover of the storage container
closed at all times.
(Prior Code, § 115.164) (Ord. 03-470, passed 12-9-2003) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.165 INSPECTION OF STORAGE AND DISPOSAL; HEARINGS.
   The Building Commissioner, Building Department Inspectors and the Health
Inspector for the city are authorized to inspect the storage and disposal of
waste, refuse and garbage by those establishments defined in §
115.160 of this chapter and to issue notices of violations and a summons to the
licensee of the establishment addressed to the address of the establishment
commanding the licensee to appear at a hearing conducted pursuant to the
provisions of §
32.04 of this code of ordinances. The Building Commissioner, Building Inspector
or Health Inspector issuing the notice of violation and summons shall
photograph the violation as proof thereof and preserve said photograph for the
hearing.
(Prior Code, § 115.165) (Ord. 03-470, passed 12-9-2003)
§ 115.166 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage, approval and publication in pamphlet form as required by applicable
law.
(Prior Code, § 115.166) (Ord. 03-470, passed 12-9-2003)
FOOD VENDORS’ EXTERMINATION
REQUIREMENTS
§ 115.180 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FOOD VENDOR. Any person, partnership, corporation, limited liability company
or other business entity engaged in any business which keeps for sale, sells or
serves food to the general public for human consumption, whether at retail or
wholesale and whether for consumption on the premises of the business or
elsewhere.
(Prior Code, § 115.180) (Ord. 00-332, passed 9-26-2000)
§ 115.181 REQUIRED EXTERMINATION.
   Every food vendor doing business within the geographic limits of the city
shall be required to have the premises where he, she or they do business as
food vendors exterminated for pests, insects, rats, mice, rodents and other
vermin at least one time each month, beginning in the first month after passage
of this subchapter and continuing each month thereafter.
(Prior Code, § 115.181) (Ord. 00-332, passed 9-26-2000) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.182 CERTIFICATES REQUIRED.
   Every food vendor doing business within the geographic limits of the city
shall submit on a quarterly basis, beginning at the end of the third month
following passage of this subchapter and continuing quarterly thereafter,
certificates from a duly licensed exterminator or exterminator whose
qualifications have been approved by the Health Inspector for the city, showing
that the monthly exterminations have been performed for those months included
in the quarterly period.
(Prior Code, § 115.182) (Ord. 00-332, passed 9-26-2000) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.183 NOTICE TO CLOSE; APPEAL.
   (A)   Should a food vendor fail to provide the certification required by §
115.182 of this chapter to the Health Inspector within five days of the end of
any quarter, the Health Inspector shall issue a written notice to the food
vendor that the premises where the food vendor is doing business shall be
ordered closed and the business license suspended unless evidence of
extermination, as required by this subchapter, is presented to the Health
Inspector within five business days or until a proper extermination is
conducted by a duly licensed or approved exterminator and certification of such
extermination presented to the Health Inspector.
   (B)   Any food vendor may appeal the order of the Health Inspector to close
the business to the office of the Building Commissioner who may affirm, reverse
or modify the decision of the Health Inspector based upon the information
presented.
(Prior Code, § 115.183) (Ord. 00-332, passed 9-26-2000)
§ 115.184 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage, approval and publication in pamphlet form as provided by law. A full,
true and complete copy of this subchapter shall be published in pamphlet form,
by authority of the City Council as corporate authorities.
(Prior Code, § 115.184) (Ord. 00-332, passed 9-26-2000)
ICE DEALERS
§ 115.195 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business of selling ice at retail in the city
without securing a license.
(Prior Code, § 115.195) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.196 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Any person desiring to engage in the business of selling ice at retail shall
make application to the City Clerk. The application shall contain the name and
residence of the applicant and other information desired by the City Clerk.
Upon payment of the license fee, the City Clerk shall issue a license, attested
by the proper city authorities, to sell ice at retail.
(Prior Code, § 115.196)
§ 115.197 LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   The license fee to be paid by the applicant shall be $50 per year.
   (B)   All licenses shall expire on the April 30 next after the date of
issuance.
   (C)   If a license is granted for less than one year, the license fee shall
be reduced pro rata.
(Prior Code, § 115.197) (Ord. 2315, passed 3-23-1976)
MOBILE FOOD VENDORS AND MOBILE FOOD VEHICLES
§ 115.210 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY EVENT. A temporary special event sponsored by a governmental entity,
church or nonprofit organization. A CITY EVENT also includes private events in
residential districts and private corporate-sponsored events in commercial,
industrial or U-TOD districts where no items are offered for sale to the
general public not associated with and/or participating in the event. CITY
EVENTS may last one to three days and must be approved by the city.
   MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE. A self-contained food service operation located in a
readily moveable, motorized, wheeled or towed vehicle, with facilities for
storing, preparing, displaying and/or serving food or non-alcoholic beverages
for retail sale intended for individual consumption, commonly referred to as a
food truck. A MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE is a motorized vehicle registered as a
commercial vehicle that is not used for any purposes other than as a mobile
food vendor, mobile food dispenser or mobile food preparer business.
   MOBILE FOOD VENDOR. Any person engaged in the business of preparing and/or
serving food or non-alcoholic beverages from a mobile food vehicle or pushcart
while traveling from place to place upon the public ways.
   PUSHCARTS. Small handcarts or barrows from which fruit, ice cream or other
goods are sold in the street.
   SPONSORING BUSINESS. The individual, corporation, firm, partnership,
association, proprietorship or other legal entity that owns and/or operates the
business at the location where a mobile food vendor will operate its mobile
food vehicle under this subchapter.
(Ord. 2022-030, passed 4-26-2022)
§ 115.211 MOBILE FOOD VENDOR REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Registration required. No person shall operate a mobile food vehicle
within the city’s boundaries without first registering as a mobile food vendor.
For any business having a valid business registration for a permanent physical
business location in the city as required by Title XI of this code, the
requirement to register as a mobile food vendor shall not apply provided the
information required for a mobile vehicle vendor registration, as set forth
below, is provided with the business registration application.
   (B)   Required information. The Building Official or designee shall provide
a form for application for a mobile food vendor as required under this
subchapter. The application shall require the following:
      (1)   The name, address and phone number of the applicant;
      (2)   A government-issued photo ID from all applicants, owners and
business entities controlling persons and registered agents;
      (3)   The federal Employer Identification Number (EIN) and State of
Illinois File Number (if a business entity) and Illinois Department of Revenue
Account ID for the business;
      (4)   The relationship of the applicant to the mobile food vehicle;
      (5)   The name, address and phone number of an owner or other responsible
person to be contacted in case of an emergency;
      (6)   The name of the mobile food vehicle;
      (7)   A photo and/or detailed description of the mobile food vehicle;
      (8)   The vehicle identification number;
      (9)   Proof of vehicle insurance and registration;
      (10)   A general description of the types of items to be sold from the
mobile food vehicle;
      (11)   A valid copy of the operating permit issued by the Cook County
Health Department for the mobile food vehicle;
      (12)   A copy of the current State of Illinois sales tax registration;
      (13)   A valid retail food establishment or shared kitchen user business
license, if the mobile food dispenser license applicant is going to produce
food for sale;
      (14)   A certificate of general liability insurance in the amount of
$1,000,000 and listing the city as additionally insured. No cancellation or
reduction in coverage may occur during the effective period of the mobile food
vendor registration; and
      (15)   Additional information may be required as determined by the city
from time to time.
   (C)   Fee term.
      (1)   The required fee for each registration issued under this subchapter
shall be $100. The fee shall be collected upon application. The effective term
of the registration shall commence on January 1 and expire at midnight on
December 31 of each year. The renewal of each existing registration under this
subchapter shall be $50.
      (2)   If the mobile food vendor is only operating temporarily in the city
for a city event, the fee for registration may be waived. However, an
application must still be submitted to the Building and Zoning Department.
(Ord. 2022-030, passed 4-26-2022) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.212 MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE AND PUSHCART PERMITS.
   (A)   Permit required.
      (1)   In addition to the mobile food vendor registration required under
this subchapter, no person shall operate a mobile food vehicle within the city
without a permit. In regard to mobile food vehicles, the sponsoring business
for the location at which the mobile food vendor intends to operate its mobile
food vehicle must first obtain a permit from the Building Official or designee.
      (2)   In addition to the pushcart vendor registration required under this
subchapter, no person shall operate a pushcart within the city without a
permit.
   (B)   Required information, mobile food vehicles. The Building Official,
City Clerk, or designee shall provide a form for application for a mobile food
vehicle permit as required under this subchapter. The permit application shall
require the following:
      (1)   The name, address and phone number of the owner of the sponsoring
business;
      (2)   The name, address and phone number of the mobile food vendor;
      (3)   Written permission signed by the property owner for where the
mobile food vehicle will be located specifying the date and hours of operation
of the mobile food vehicle, with any restrictions imposed by the property owner
clearly identified; and
      (4)   A site plan clearly depicting the following:
         (a)   Property boundaries of the parcel on which the mobile food
vehicle will be operating;
         (b)   Footprint and dimensions of all existing and proposed buildings
and structures on the property;
         (c)   All curb cuts, drive aisles and parking spaces on the property;
         (d)   The proposed location of the mobile food vehicle, including the
number of parking spaces that would be occupied by the mobile food vehicle and
related activities; and
         (e)   A description of all proposed lighting, signage, trash
receptacles, other equipment and other activities associated with the mobile
food vehicle.
   (C)   Required information, pushcart vendors. The Building Official, City
Clerk or designee shall provide a form for application for a pushcart permit as
required under this subchapter.
   (D)   Fee; duration. The required fee for each mobile food vehicle permit
issued under this subchapter shall be $25. The permit shall be valid only for
the date and times listed on the permit. The required fee for a pushcart permit
is $100. The fee shall be collected upon application. The effective term of the
permit shall commence on January 1 and expire at midnight on December 31 of
each year. The renewal of each existing permit under this subchapter shall be
$50.
   (E)   Multiple dates under a single permit, mobile food vehicles. A
sponsoring business may submit one permit for the same mobile food vehicle to
operate at the same location for more than one date. The permit application
shall list every date and the hours of operation of the mobile food vehicle on
each date. The requirements of §
115.211 of this chapter and this §
115.212 must be complied with for each individual date the mobile food vehicle
operates at the location.
   (F)   Approval standards. No mobile food vehicle permit or pushcart permit
shall be issued unless the applicant demonstrates compliance with all of the
following.
      (1)   The mobile food vehicle or pushcart shall not be located on a
property that is less than 250 feet from a property containing a restaurant
unless written consent by the proprietor of such restaurant is provided with
the mobile food vehicle permit application.
      (2)   The mobile food vehicle shall not be parked within 100 feet of a
residential district or a property recommended for residential use in the
city’s Comprehensive Plan unless the mobile food vehicle is operating on
private property in such residential district for a private event and is not
offering items for sale to the general public not associated with and/or
participating in the event.
      (3)   The mobile food vehicle shall be parked on an improved surface.
      (4)   The mobile food vehicle shall not be located within any required
setback of the underlying zoning district.
      (5)   The mobile food vehicle or pushcart shall not be located within a
handicap accessible parking space or any parking space required for the
permanent/primary use(s) on the property.
      (6)   The mobile food vehicle or pushcart shall not be located or
operated in such a manner that it interferes with vehicle or pedestrian
visibility, traffic flow, emergency vehicle access or pedestrian circulation.
      (7)   The mobile food vehicle or pushcart shall be located a minimum of
15 feet from all fire hydrants and Fire Department connections.
      (8)   A permanent divide must exist between the front driving area and
the back cook/prep area of the mobile food vehicle, and a grease trap must be
installed under a three-compartment sink.
      (9)   The mobile food vehicle or pushcart must pass an initial health
inspection by the City Health Inspector, meeting all Health Code requirements.
The mobile food vehicle or pushcart must maintain sanitary conditions,
including frequent hand washing and proper food temperature controls, and pass
every subsequent health inspection.
      (10)   The mobile food vehicle or pushcart must pass an initial fire
inspection by the City Fire Inspector, meeting all Fire Code and Fire
Department requirements. The mobile food vehicle or pushcart must maintain fire
safety protocols, including installation of an appropriate fire suppression
system and carrying a combustible gas detector, and pass every subsequent fire
inspection.
   (G)   Permit displayed. A copy of the approved mobile food vehicle or
pushcart permit shall be clearly displayed on the mobile food vehicle or
pushcart at all times while operating in the city.
   (H)   Exceptions. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, any mobile
food vehicle operating at a city event shall be exempt from the requirement to
obtain a mobile food vehicle permit provided the sponsoring entity or
organization provides the city with a list of valid Cook County Health
Department permits, State of Illinois sales tax registrations and certificates
of insurance, with copies thereof, for all mobile food vehicles participating
in the event.
(Ord. 2022-030, passed 4-26-2022) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.213 MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE OPERATIONAL RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No fixed location. Mobile food vehicles that have not obtained a
permit as provided in this subchapter must move from place to place upon the
public ways and shall not be operated at a fixed location except as otherwise
provided herein. Mobile food vehicle stops shall be made only to service
customers and shall not exceed in any one block whichever is less:
      (1)   A total of two hours; or
      (2)   The maximum permitted period for parking.
   (B)   Sound amplification. No mobile food vehicle or pushcart shall be
equipped with any electronic sound-amplifying device. Mobile food vehicles or
pushcarts employing musical or noise-making devices shall only sound said
devices while traversing the public way, not while standing or parked.
   (C)   Hours of operation. Mobile food vehicles shall not service customers
between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Pushcarts shall not service
customers between the hours of 9:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
   (D)   Location. Mobile food vehicles shall not park or stand:
      (1)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk;
      (2)   Within 30 feet of a stop light or stop sign;
      (3)   Adjacent to a protected bike lane; or
      (4)   Within 200 feet of any principal customer entrance to a restaurant.
   (E)   Sales. No sale shall be made from a mobile food vehicle except from
the curb side thereof, and then only when such vehicle is standing or parked in
a legal parking spot.
   (F)   Food preparation. No food that is sold or served from a mobile food
vehicle or a pushcart may be stored or prepared in a residential home.
(Ord. 2022-030, passed 4-26-2022) Penalty, see §
115.999
§ 115.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is required shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any establishment defined in §
115.160 of this chapter found to be in violation of §§
115.160 through
115.166 of this chapter after a hearing conducted pursuant to §
32.04 of this code of ordinances shall, upon such a finding, be subject to a
fine of not less than $50, nor more than $750, at the discretion of the Hearing
Officer. Each day that a violation continues after the day notice of the
violation and summons have been served in accordance with the terms and
provisions hereof shall be deemed a separate offense.
      (2)   In the event the licensee of an establishment defined in §
115.160 of this chapter fails to pay any fine imposed, after a hearing and
conviction for a violation of §§
115.160 through
115.166 of this chapter, within 30 days of the date of the imposition of the
fine, the business registration and license for the establishment shall be
immediately suspended until payment is made.
      (3)   (a)   In the event the licensee of an establishment defined in §
115.160 of this chapter is convicted of three or more violations of §§
115.160 through
115.166 of this chapter for violations occurring within any 90-day period, the
licensee of the establishment shall be required to appear before the Community
Development Committee of the City Council for a hearing to show cause why the
business registration and license should not be suspended or revoked. After
such hearing, the Community Development Committee may act to suspend or revoke
the license.
         (b)   If the Community Development Committee finds sufficient cause to
suspend or revoke the establishment’s business registration and license, the
establishment shall cease operations for the period specified by the Community
Development Committee. If the establishment desires to appeal the decision of
the Community Development Committee, it shall apply to the Mayor, in writing,
for a hearing before the Mayor and City Council. The Mayor and City Council may
affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the Community Development Committee.
(Prior Code, § 115.999) (Ord. 03-470, passed 12-9-2003)
CHAPTER 116: JUNK AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
Section
Junk Dealers
   
116.01   Definition
   
116.02   License required
   
116.03   Restrictions
Secondhand Dealers
   
116.15   Issuance of license
   
116.16   License fee
   
116.17   Bond
   
116.18   Dealing without license prohibited
   
116.19   Record of purchases
   
116.20   Inspection of records
   
116.21   Licensee not permitted to hold pawnbroker license
   
116.22   License to state where business to be carried on
   
116.23   Change of location
   
116.24   Purchase from minors prohibited
   
116.25   Hours of business
   
116.26   Articles to be held ten days before sale
   
116.27   Dealer to report lost or stolen goods
   
116.28   Inspection and supervision of dealers
   
116.29   Prohibited acts; revocation of license
Scrap Metal
   
116.40   Purpose
   
116.41   Definition
   
116.42   Scrap metal dealer’s license
   
116.43   Electronic database requirements
   
116.44   Purchase of HVAC scrap metal; requirements
   
116.45   Restricted purchase exceptions
   
116.46   Purchase of scrap metal requirements
   
116.47   Exceptions
   
116.48   Penalties
 
   
116.99   Penalty
JUNK DEALERS
§ 116.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   JUNK DEALER. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity who
collects, procures, obtains and/or sells items which have been discarded,
thrown away or set out for collection by the city’s Sanitation Department or
any other garbage collection service.
(Prior Code, § 116.01) (Ord. 88-143, passed 10-11-1988)
§ 116.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Every junk dealer shall obtain a license from the City Clerk and pay as a
fee for said license the sum of $25.
(Prior Code, § 116.02) (Ord. 88-143, passed 10-11-1988)
§ 116.03 RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any junk dealer to collect, obtain, possess
or pick up any recyclable item placed for collection at a residence as part of
the city’s recycling program.
   (B)   All junk dealer licenses issued with the city shall contain a
statement in regard to the aforementioned restriction, as well as a statement
advising the licensee of the boundaries of the area within the city in which
the city’s recycling program is being conducted.
(Prior Code, § 116.03) (Ord. 88-143, passed 10-11-1988) Penalty, see §
116.99
SECONDHAND DEALERS
§ 116.15 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   The City Council may grant licenses to persons who produce satisfactory
evidence of good character to carry on the business or conduct a secondhand
store in the city.
(Prior Code, § 116.15)
§ 116.16 LICENSE FEE.
   Licenses to secondhand dealers shall be issued for semiannual periods,
beginning on May 1 and November 1 in each year. The fee shall be $30 for each
period or fraction thereof, payable in advance.
(Prior Code, § 116.16) (Ord. 1669, passed 4-14-1952)
§ 116.17 BOND.
   Every person licensed shall, at the time of receiving the license, execute a
bond to the city. The bond shall have good and sufficient sureties approved by
the City Collector or City Clerk in the sum of $500 and conditioned for the due
observance of all ordinances of the city now in force or which may hereafter be
passed respecting dealers in secondhand articles.
(Prior Code, § 116.17)
§ 116.18 DEALING WITHOUT LICENSE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall carry on or conduct a secondhand store without being
especially licensed for such purpose. Any license issued under the provisions
of this subchapter shall designate the place in which the person so licensed
shall carry on such business. However, the business shall not be conducted in
any place other than that designated by the license.
   (B)   No person licensed under the provisions of this subchapter shall be
permitted to solicit business for a secondhand store upon any street or public
highway of the city.
(Prior Code, § 116.18) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.19 RECORD OF PURCHASES.
   Every person licensed shall keep a book in which shall be fairly written, at
the time of the purchase of any article or thing pertaining to such person’s
business, an accurate account and description of the article or thing
purchased, the price paid, the precise time of making the purchase and the name
and residence of the person from whom the purchase was made.
(Prior Code, § 116.19) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.20 INSPECTION OF RECORDS.
   The book shall, at all reasonable times, be open to the inspection of the
Mayor, Aldermen and any member of the police force.
(Prior Code, § 116.20) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.21 LICENSEE NOT PERMITTED TO HOLD PAWNBROKER LICENSE.
   No person licensed under the provisions of this subchapter shall, during the
period of his or her license, receive or hold a license to carry on the
business of a pawnbroker.
(Prior Code, § 116.21) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.22 LICENSE TO STATE WHERE BUSINESS TO BE CARRIED ON.
   Every license granted to any dealer in secondhand articles shall designate
the house or place in which the person receiving the license shall be
authorized to carry on the business.
(Prior Code, § 116.22)
§ 116.23 CHANGE OF LOCATION.
   (A)   In case any person licensed shall remove the place of business from
the place designated in the license, such person shall immediately give notice
to the City Collector and have the change noted upon the license.
   (B)   The number of the place of business shall be changed on the sides of
the vehicles used by the licensed dealer to correspond with the new place of
business.
(Prior Code, § 116.23)
§ 116.24 PURCHASE FROM MINORS PROHIBITED.
   No keeper of a secondhand store shall purchase any articles whatsoever from
any minors without the written consent of the minor’s parents or guardians.
(Prior Code, § 116.24) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.25 HOURS OF BUSINESS.
   No dealer in secondhand articles shall purchase any goods, articles or
things from any person between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 116.25) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.26 ARTICLES TO BE HELD TEN DAYS BEFORE SALE.
   No dealer in secondhand articles shall expose for sale, sell or dispose of
any article or articles within ten days of the time of purchasing the articles,
nor until the articles have been in the premises at least ten days.
(Prior Code, § 116.26) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.27 DEALER TO REPORT LOST OR STOLEN GOODS.
   Every dealer in secondhand articles who has received or is in possession of
any goods, articles or things which have been lost or stolen, or alleged or
supposed to have been lost or stolen, shall on demand exhibit the same to any
member of the Police Department or to any member of City Council.
(Prior Code, § 116.27) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.28 INSPECTION AND SUPERVISION OF DEALERS.
   The Chief of Police or any officer designated by the Chief shall have
general supervision over all dealers in secondhand articles. The Chief shall
also have power to inspect their respective places of business and all articles
or things kept therein whenever the Chief shall deem it necessary so to do.
(Prior Code, § 116.28)
§ 116.29 PROHIBITED ACTS; REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   (1)   No person conducting and maintaining a secondhand store shall
break up old boilers, iron or other junk by means of hammers, sledges or other
mechanical devices in a manner that will disturb the peace and quietude of the
residents in the immediate vicinity of the secondhand store.
      (2)   Such person shall not do any other act or acts which will disturb
the peace and quietude of any residents.
   (B)   No person shall conduct or maintain any such place of business in a
manner in which the premises and the sidewalks in front of the business are
kept and permitted to remain in an unsanitary condition.
   (C)   The Mayor of the city may revoke the license of any person violating
any of the provisions of this section or §
116.28 of this chapter, or for violating any other city ordinance relating to
the business of a secondhand dealer.
(Prior Code, § 116.29) Penalty, see §
116.99
SCRAP METAL
§ 116.40 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety,
welfare, peace and protection of private property of the citizens and
businesses of the city through the regulation of scrap metal dealers so as to
more effectively prohibit theft of scrap metal, and to regulate the sale of
scrap metal.
(Ord. 2025-019, passed 4-22-2025)
§ 116.41 DEFINITION.
   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated in this section:
   SCRAP METAL. Any ferrous or nonferrous metal that is no longer used for its
original purpose and is capable of being processed for reuse by a metal
recycling facility, including, but not limited to: iron, brass, wire, cable,
copper, bronze, aluminum, platinum, lead, solder, steel, stainless steel,
catalytic converters, or other similar obsolete ferrous or nonferrous
materials, but shall not include recyclable aluminum cans.
   SCRAP METAL DEALER. Any entity (person, firm, company, partnership,
association, or corporation) that purchases products containing ferrous or
nonferrous metals for recycling or resale,
(Ord. 2025-019, passed 4-22-2025)
§ 116.42 SCRAP METAL DEALER’S LICENSE.
   Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity conducting or
operating the business of a scrap metal dealer shall first obtain a scrap metal
dealer's license issued by the City of Blue Island.
(Ord. 2025-019, passed 4-22-2025)
§ 116.43 ELECTRONIC DATABASE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   By January 1, 2013, every scrap metal dealer shall install and
maintain a retrievable electronic database containing a consecutively numbered
record of each and every purchase.
   (B)   Any person selling, exchanging, or trading ferrous or nonferrous
materials shall present to the scrap metal dealer a valid driver's license and/
or a picture identification from a state or federal issuing agency.
   (C)   At the time of purchase, scrap metal dealers shall enter into the
electronic database all of the following information:
      (1)   Name, gender, date of birth, and residential address of seller;
      (2)   Date of the scrap metal purchase;
      (3)   Driver's license number and/or a picture identification number;
      (4)   Amount paid;
      (5)   Kind of metal purchased or received;
      (6)   Number of pounds of each kind; and
      (7)   License plate number of vehicle delivering material.
   (D)   Transaction record. The scrap metal dealer shall prepare a transaction
record containing all of the information required above. Buyer and seller must
sign the record.
   (E)   The electronic database, transaction records, and associated records
and photocopies shall be open to the inspection of the police or other officer,
during normal business hours without warrant or subpoena and shall be kept in
good faith and preserved on site by such dealer for a period of three years
from date of the scrap metal sale.
   (F)   The scrap metal dealer shall ask where the scrap metal was obtained
for the purpose of determining if purchasing scrap metal from the seller is a
lawful transaction. If the seller presents a bill of sale, receipt or other
document indicating lawful possession of the scrap metal, the dealer shall
photocopy such document and maintain it with the transaction information
otherwise required by this section.
   (G)   Declaration. The scrap metal dealer shall require a declaration signed
and dated by the person or persons from whom the scrap metal was purchased
which states the following:
   "I, the undersigned, affirm under penalty of law, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, that the property that is subject to this transaction is
not stolen property."
   (H)   No scrap metal dealer shall purchase or otherwise receive from a minor
under the age of 18 any scrap metal of any kind except aluminum cans.
   (I)   No transaction receipt or entry into the electronic database shall be
required for the sale and purchase of aluminum cans, regardless of the seller's
age.
(Ord. 2025-019, passed 4-22-2025)
§ 116.44 PURCHASE OF HVAC SCRAP METAL; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   It is an offense for a scrap metal dealer to knowingly accept any HVAC
components unless accompanied by written authorization for a licensed HVAC
business evidencing that the components were legally removed and the seller has
the legal right to sell the material.
   (B)   Payment for HVAC scrap metal shall be:
      (1)   No cash.
      (2)   Check or money order made payable to a licensed HVAC contractor
named by the seller.
      (3)   After a period of three business days from the date of the scrap
transaction such check or money order shall be mailed to the business address
of the HVAC contractor.
      (4)   Checks may not be converted by a scrap metal dealer or by any
related entity.
(Ord. 2025-019, passed 4-22-2025)
§ 116.45 RESTRICTED PURCHASE EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   It is an offense to knowingly sell or attempt to sell, and to
knowingly purchase or attempt to purchase, the following types of scrap metal:
      (1)   Materials sold by a business but brought by an individual, such as
new materials that are part of a manufacturing process.
      (2)   Property which is often used by government, utilities, railroads or
other specific industries such as guardrails, manhole covers, traffic signs,
railroad signs, copper gutters or downspouts, certain cables used only in high
voltage transmission lines, historical markers and cemetery plaques.
      (3)   Full-sized new materials such as those used in construction, and
equipment or tools used by contractors.
      (4)   Property which might not be new but is clearly suspect, such as
traffic signs or ten-foot lengths of copper or aluminum spouts of gutters.
      (5)   Materials which are clearly marked as property belonging to a
business or someone else other than the seller.
      (6)   Catalytic converters unless purchased directly from a vehicle
repair business.
      (7)   Copper wire that was burned in whole or in part to remove the
insulation unless the seller can produce written proof to the scrap metal
dealer that the wire was lawfully burned.
   (B)   An exception to this section is if the person attempting to sell the
scrap metal provides reasonable, written documentation that the seller is the
owner of the scrap metal or is an employee, agent, or other person authorized
to sell the scrap metal on behalf of the owner. The dealer shall make a photo
copy of any documentation provided and maintain it with the transaction record.
(Ord. 2025-019, passed 4-22-2025)
§ 116.46 PURCHASE OF SCRAP METAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Payment for scrap metal shall be:
      (1)   No cash.
      (2)   By check or money order made payable to the seller who conducted
the transaction.
      (3)   By check made payable to the business or company for all industrial
accounts.
      (4)   After a period of three business days from the date the scrap
transaction such check or money order shall be mailed to the seller's address
listed on the government issued identification card used in the transaction.
   (B)   Hold notice. If the scrap dealer suspects the scrap metal is stolen or
lost the dealer shall immediately notify the police department and provide the
seller's personal information. If there is reasonable suspicion that the
property may be stolen, a ten-day hold over will be placed on the property.
(Ord. 2025-019, passed 4-22-2025)
§ 116.47 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter do not apply to the following:
   (A)   Electrical contractors or licensed skilled craftspeople.
   (B)   Agencies or instrumentalities of the state of Illinois or the United
States.
   (C)   Units of local government that have contracted with the recyclable
metal dealer in the disposal of metal street signs.
   (D)   Common carriers with a license to haul.
   (E)   Licensed businesses or employees of licensed businesses regularly
engaged in the business of manufacturing recyclable metal at retail or
wholesale, and razing, demolishing, destroying or removing buildings.
   (F)   Transactions between licensed recyclable metal dealers.
   (G)   Purchases from public utilities if a bill of sale or other written
evidence of title to the recyclable metal is provided.
(Ord. 2025-019, passed 4-22-2025)
§ 116.48 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed
more than $750 per violation. Every transaction conducted by a scrap metal
merchant in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a
separate violation.
   (B)   In addition to the penalties described in this section, the city may
revoke any license or permit issued for the business of scrap metal merchant.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to preclude any applicable
criminal prosecution or civil remedies.
(Ord. 2025-019, passed 4-22-2025)
§ 116.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity who
violates the provisions of §§
116.01 through
116.03 of this chapter shall be fined not less than $50, nor more than $750,
for each such violation.
(Prior Code, § 116.99)
CHAPTER 117: LAUNDRIES AND DRY CLEANING
Section
Automatic Laundries
   
117.001   License required
   
117.002   Application for license
   
117.003   Maintenance regulations
   
117.004   License fee; food and beverage machines
Dry Cleaners and Dyers
   
117.015   Definitions
   
117.016   Inspection and certificate required
   
117.017   Sanitation requirements
   
117.018   Diseased persons not to be employed
   
117.019   Cleaning standards
   
117.020   Inspection for fire hazard
   
117.021   Certificate of inspection
   
117.022   Inspection fees
   
117.023   Term of certificate; renewal
   
117.024   Certificate for retail outlet
   
117.025   Periodic inspections; revocation or suspension of certificate
Self-Service Dry Cleaning
   
117.040   Definition
   
117.041   License required
   
117.042   Application for license
   
117.043   License fee; food dispensing machines not authorized
   
117.044   Installation and operation requirements
Laundries
   
117.055   License required
   
117.056   Application for license
   
117.057   License fee
   
117.058   Location of boundaries; building permit
Laundry Vehicles and Outlets
   
117.070   Definitions
   
117.071   License required
   
117.072   Application for license
   
117.073   License fee
   
117.074   Name to be displayed on vehicle
   
117.075   Sanitary requirements
AUTOMATIC LAUNDRIES
§ 117.001 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall own or operate any automatic
laundry store in the city without first having obtained a license so to do.
   (B)   For the purposes of this subchapter, an AUTOMATIC LAUNDRY STORE is
defined as any store, room or other enclosed place within any building where
more than three automatic laundry machines or automatic clothes dryers or
automatic combination laundry and clothes dryer machines, or any combination of
such machines in excess of three, all controlled and operated by means of
automatic coin metering devices, are located and open to use by the public.
(Prior Code, § 117.001) (Ord. 1862, passed 11-28-1960)
§ 117.002 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Any person desiring a license for an automatic laundry store shall make
application in writing therefor to the City Clerk. The application shall, among
other things, state the name and address of the person requesting such license,
the location of the store to be licensed, the number and the description of the
automatic laundry machines or automatic clothes dryers or automatic combination
laundry and clothes dryer machines or any combination of such machines to be
located in the store. In the case of an original application for a store not
theretofore legally in operation the application shall be accompanied by a set
of plans and specifications showing the manner in which such machines shall be
installed, showing all plumbing connections, electrical wire connections, and
provisions for ventilation, all of which shall be in compliance with the
Building Code, the Fire Code and other applicable ordinances of the city. In
the case of an initial application, the City Clerk shall submit the aforesaid
plans and specifications to the Building Commissioner of the city for the
Commissioner’s examination and approval before the issuance of any license
hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 117.002) (Ord. 1862, passed 11-28-1960)
§ 117.003 MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS.
   Every licensee to whom a license shall be issued shall cause the automatic
laundry store for which such license is issued to be maintained and operated so
as to satisfy the following requirements.
   (A)   The premises shall be kept in good repair and maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition as to floors, walls, woodwork, machinery and fixtures.
   (B)   All machinery and equipment shall be kept in good working condition
and shall be so installed and maintained so that the customers of said store
and the public generally, at no time have access to the utility serving the
equipment nor exposure to any unguarded moving parts of the machinery; except
that, the customers shall be permitted all necessary access to the operating
controls of the machines employed in the business.
   (C)   The store shall maintain under continuous operating conditions a
minimum temperature of 140°F for all hot water employed in the clothes washing
processes.
   (D)   The store shall be kept well lighted during all of the hours when the
store is open for business, If off-street parking is provided for automobiles
of customers of the store, the off-street parking area or areas shall be
surfaced with crushed stone or other suitable hard surface materials, shall be
level, shall be provided with adequate driveway or driveways for ingress or
egress and shall be well lighted during all the hours of darkness.
(Prior Code, § 117.003) (Ord. 1862, passed 11-28-1960) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 117.004 LICENSE FEE; FOOD AND BEVERAGE MACHINES.
   (A)   The annual license fee for an automatic laundry store shall be $50,
plus $5 for each automatic laundry machine, automatic clothes dryer, automatic
combination laundry and clothes dryer machine, or any combination of such
machines in excess of ten.
   (B)   Every license shall expire on April 30 next after its issuance.
   (C)   The license fee shall not cover, nor shall it authorize, the use or
maintenance in any laundry store of automatic food or beverage dispensing
devices or machines.
   (D)   Any automatic food or beverage dispensing device or machine which may
be installed or located in the laundry store shall be done in compliance with
and subject to the requirements of any ordinance of the city now or hereafter
in effect licensing and regulating automatic food or beverage dispensing
machines or devices.
(Prior Code, § 117.004) (Ord. 2322, passed 3-23-1976)
DRY CLEANERS AND DYERS
§ 117.015 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CLEANING AND DYEING ESTABLISH- MENT. Any place or vehicle where the service
of dry cleaning, wet cleaning as a process incidental to dry cleaning, dyeing,
spotting or finishing any fabric is rendered for hire or is sold, resold or
offered for sale or resale.
   CLEANING PLANT. Any cleaning and dyeing establishment equipped to perform
dry cleaning.
   DRY CLEANING. The process of cleaning fabrics by immersion and agitation, or
by immersion only, in volatile solvents (including, but not by way of
limitation, solvents of petroleum distillate type, the coal tar distillate type
and the chlorinated hydrocarbon type) and processes incidental thereto
(including, but without limitation, spotting, cleaning, wet cleaning and
finishing).
   FABRIC. Any article of wearing apparel, household furnishings, rugs,
textiles, fur and leather.
   FINISHING. The process of pressing or reshaping any fabric which is designed
to restore as nearly as possible the shape, dimensions and contour of the
fabric.
   PROPRIETOR. Any person by or for whom a cleaning plant is operated.
   RETAIL OUTLET. Any cleaning and dyeing establishment located within the city
where dry cleaning is sold, solicited or offered for sale directly to the
retail consumer. Includes any automobile, truck or other vehicle, operated
within the city, from which dry cleaning is sold, solicited or offered for sale
directly to the retail consumer.
   RETAILER. Any person or member of the cleaning and dyeing trade by or for
whom a retail outlet is operated.
   SPOTTING. The process designed to remove spots or stains which remain in a
fabric after it has been subjected to the other process of dry cleaning.
(Prior Code, § 117.015)
§ 117.016 INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.
   To promote and protect the public health of the city and to remove and
prevent fire hazards, every cleaning and dyeing establishment, cleaning plant
and retail outlet located within the city and every cleaning and dyeing
establishment which is not located within the city, but has a retail outlet
operating in the city shall be regularly inspected and shall obtain a
certificate of inspection as hereinafter provided.
(Prior Code, § 117.016) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 117.017 SANITATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Every building or premises used or occupied by a cleaning and dyeing
establishment, cleaning plant or retail outlet located within the city or used
or occupied by a cleaning and dyeing plant not located in the city, but which
has a retail outlet in the city shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition
as to its floors, sidewalls, ceilings, woodwork and fixtures and as to the
tools, machinery, equipment and storage facilities used and kept in any such
building or premises.
   (B)   At regular intervals and at other times as may be deemed necessary and
as shall be specified by the Commissioner of Health, the floors, sidewalls,
ceilings, woodwork and fixtures of any such building and premises and the
tools, machinery, equipment and storage facilities used or kept thereon shall
be washed or sprayed with a disinfectant in solution of other liquid form or
vapor approved by the Commissioner of Health.
(Prior Code, § 117.017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 117.018 DISEASED PERSONS NOT TO BE EMPLOYED.
   No person affected or afflicted with tuberculosis or any other infectious or
communicable disease shall be employed in any dry cleaning establishment,
cleaning plant or retail outlet located within the city or in any cleaning and
dyeing establishment or cleaning plant which is not located in the city but
which has a retail outlet therein. The Commissioner of Health of the city may
require each employee of such cleaning and dyeing plant, cleaning plant or
retail outlet to be examined by a licensed and practicing physician and may
require any proprietor or retailer to file in the office of the Commissioner of
Health a certificate of health and freedom from tuberculosis or other
infectious or communicable disease for each person employed by the proprietor
as a proprietor or retailer, which certificate shall be signed by a licensed
and practicing physician.
(Prior Code, § 117.018) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 117.019 CLEANING STANDARDS.
   (A)   No finished or unfinished dry cleaning sold, solicited or offered for
sale within the city shall show, upon the dry cleaned fabric being re-rinsed in
water-white solvent (one gallon to one pound of garment weight), sufficient
dirt or soil residue or other foreign deposits sufficient to darken dry solvent
below 15 Saybolt Chorometer.
   (B)   Finished dry cleaning sold, solicited or offered for sale within the
city shall be free from solvent and chemical odors.
   (C)   No chemical or other substance which is poisonous, injurious or
unwholesome to human beings and which is not essential to the service or
process of dry cleaning, dyeing, spotting or finishing shall be used in
rendering any such service or performing any such process in any cleaning and
dyeing plant located within the city or in any cleaning and dyeing plant or
cleaning plant which is not located within the city, but has a retail outlet
within the city.
   (D)   In case any such chemical or other substance which is poisonous,
injurious or unwholesome to human beings is used by any cleaning and dyeing
establishment or cleaning plant in rendering any such service or performing any
such process essential thereto, then such chemical or other substance shall be
completely removed from the fabric dry cleaned, dyed or spotted or finished or
such chemical or other substance shall be completely and entirely neutralized
and rendered harmless and innoxious to human beings before such fabric is
permitted to leave such establishment or plant for delivery to the person
entitled to the possession thereof upon completion of the process.
(Prior Code, § 117.019) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 117.020 INSPECTION FOR FIRE HAZARD.
   The Chief of the Fire Department of the city shall have the right to enter
any building or premises situated within the city and used or occupied by any
cleaning and dyeing establishment, cleaning plant or retail outlet in order to
examine same and to determine whether or not said building and premises, or any
material, article or fabric dry cleaned, dyed, spotted or finished as received,
used, kept, maintained or stored on the building or premises conforms to the
Fire Prevention Code within the city.
(Prior Code, § 117.020)
§ 117.021 CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION.
   (A)   Every proprietor or retailer of each cleaning plant located within the
city and of each cleaning and dyeing establishment and cleaning plant which is
not located within the city, but which has a retail outlet in the city, shall
make written application in duplicate to the City Clerk for the issuance to
applicant of a certificate of inspection.
   (B)   In the case of cleaning and dyeing establishments and cleaning plants
located within the city, one copy of the application shall be delivered to the
Commissioner of Health and the other copy shall be delivered to the Chief of
the Fire Department of the city. Within 15 days after the filing of such
application the Commissioner of Health and Chief of the Fire Department shall
cause an inspection to be made of the building and premises on which the
cleaning and dyeing establishment or cleaning plant is located, the floor,
sidewalls, ceiling, woodwork, fixtures, tools, machinery, equipment, storage
facilities and delivery trucks. The Commissioner of Health may require health
certificates to be filed for each employee of the applicant within 15 days
after the application is filed or at any time thereafter. The Commissioner of
Health may also require that any employee be examined by a competent licensed
physician practicing within the city. Upon the completion of their respective
inspections, the Commissioner of Health and Chief of the Fire Department shall
determine whether the establishment, plant or outlet mentioned in the
application, and examined by them, is used, maintained and operated in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter. If their determination is
negative, they shall deny the application. In case the Commissioner of Health
and Chief of the Fire Department are not able to agree, they shall submit the
facts disclosed by their respective investigations to the City Council, which,
upon being fully advised, shall decide whether or not the application shall be
allowed or denied.
   (C)   In the case of cleaning and dyeing establishments or cleaning plants
which are not located within the city, but which have a retail outlet located
in the city, one copy of the application shall be delivered to the Commissioner
of Health. Within 15 days after filing of the application, the Commissioner of
Health shall make or cause to be made an inspection of the building or premises
on which the cleaning and dyeing establishment or cleaning plant is located,
the floors, sidewalls, ceilings, woodwork, fixtures, tools, machinery,
equipment, storage facilities and any delivery vehicle. The Commissioner of
Health may require health certificates to be filed for each person employed by
the applicant in the establishment or plant and in any retail outlet located
within the city within 15 days after any application is filed or at any time
thereafter. The Commissioner may require that any employee be examined by a
competent licensed and practicing physician. Upon the completion of the
inspection, the Commissioner of Health shall determine whether the
establishment or plant or outlet mentioned in the application, and examined by
the Commissioner, is used, maintained and operated in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter. If his or her determination is in the affirmative,
he or she shall allow the application. If his or her determination is in the
negative, he or she shall deny the application. Any applicant whose application
is denied may take an appeal from the decision of the Commissioner of Health to
the City Council.
   (D)   In the case of retail outlets not situated in the same building or
premises with a cleaning and dyeing establishment or cleaning plant, an
inspection shall be made under the direction of the Commissioner of Health and
the Chief of the Fire Department for the purpose of determining whether the
outlet is used, maintained and operated in conformity with the provisions of
this subchapter. A certificate of inspection shall be issued upon the same
conditions and in the same manner as above prescribed for cleaning and dyeing
establishments and cleaning plants located within the city, and the application
for a certificate shall be in all respects the same as in the case of such
establishments or plants. Retail outlets situated on the same premises as a
cleaning and dyeing establishment or cleaning plant shall be inspected at the
same time and in the same manner as the establishment or plant. Where several
cleaning and dyeing establishments, cleaning plants or retail outlets are
operated by a single proprietor or in conjunction with each other, a single
application may be filed for a certificate of inspection for each
establishment, plant or retail outlet.
   (E)   All certificates of inspection shall be signed by the Mayor of the
city and shall be attested by the City Clerk.
   (F)   An applicant, if the applicant so requests, shall be personally heard
by the officials or representatives of the city who are required to pass upon
the application, prior to the determination. Upon appeal, if the applicant so
requests, an applicant shall be heard by the City Council prior to its
determination of the appeal.
   (G)   In case any application is denied either by the official or officials
to whom the same is presented in accordance with the provisions hereof, or by
the City Council upon appeal thereto, the applicant whose application is so
denied may file a new application; provided that, the application shall be
accompanied with a statement under oath that the facts which caused the denial
of the previous application no longer exist.
(Prior Code, § 117.021)
§ 117.022 INSPECTION FEES.
   (A)   At the time of filing an application for a certificate of inspection
for any cleaning and dyeing establishment or cleaning plant as above provided,
the applicant shall pay an inspection fee in the amount set forth in the
Building Department fee schedule for the inspection of any cleaning plant as
defied in §
117.015 of this chapter.
   (B)   No additional inspection fee shall be charged or paid for the
inspection of or issuance of a certificate of inspection for any retail outlet
situated in the same building or on the same premises as a cleaning and dyeing
establishment or cleaning plant in conjunction with which it is operated. The
inspection fee for any such retail outlet operated in conjunction with such
establishment or plant and not situated in the same building or on the same
premises shall be in the amount set forth in the Building Department fee
schedule. For the purposes of this section, each automobile, truck or other
vehicle operated within the city from which dry cleaning is sold, solicited or
offered for sale directly to the retail consumer shall be considered a separate
retail outlet and shall be subject to inspection and to the inspection fee in
the amount set forth in the Building Department fee schedule.
(Prior Code, § 117.022) (Ord. 2038, passed 3-23-1976)
§ 117.023 TERM OF CERTIFICATE; RENEWAL.
   Each certificate shall expire the April 30 next following the date on which
the certificate is issued. Application for renewal shall be filed on or before
the first Monday of the month during which it will expire. At the time of
filing a renewal application, an inspection fee shall be paid to the City Clerk
in the same amount as the application for the original certificate. Upon the
filing of an application for renewal of a certificate and payment of the
inspection fee, the application shall be investigated and the establishment,
plant, outlet and persons employed therein shall be inspected and investigated.
The procedure on application for renewal shall be in all things the same as the
application for the original certificate and the determination thereof.
(Prior Code, § 117.023)
§ 117.024 CERTIFICATE FOR RETAIL OUTLET.
   A certificate of inspection shall not be issued to or for any retail outlet
until and unless each cleaning and dyeing establishment or cleaning plant for
which it is a retail outlet has been issued a certificate of inspection. A
revocation, suspension or expiration of the certificate of inspection of any
cleaning and dyeing establishment or cleaning plant shall automatically act as
a revocation, suspension or expiration respectively of the certificate of
inspection of each retail outlet located within the city.
(Prior Code, § 117.024)
§ 117.025 PERIODIC INSPECTIONS; REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   The Commissioner of Health shall cause periodic investigations and
inspections to be made of cleaning and dyeing establishments, cleaning plants
and retail outlets for which certificates of inspection have been issued.
   (B)   Violation of any provision of this subchapter shall be cause for
revocation or suspension of a certificate of inspection. Upon notice and public
hearing, the Commissioner of Health may revoke any certificate of inspection
issued, or may suspend any certificate for a period of not more than 30 days.
An appeal may be taken to the City Council from any decision rendered by the
Commissioner of Health under the provisions of this section.
(Prior Code, § 117.025)
SELF-SERVICE DRY CLEANING
§ 117.040 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SELF-SERVICE DRY CLEANING STORE. Any store, room or other enclosed place
within any building where any number of self-service dry cleaning machines, all
controlled and operated by means of automatic coin-metering devices, are
located and open to use by the public.
(Prior Code, § 117.040) (Ord. 1919, passed 11-12-1962)
§ 117.041 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall own or operate any self-service dry cleaning establishment
in the city without first having obtained a license.
(Prior Code, § 117.041) (Ord. 1919, passed 11-12-1962) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 117.042 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Any person desiring a license for a self-service dry cleaning store shall
make application in writing to the City Clerk. The application shall, among
other things, state the name and address of the person requesting the license,
the location of the store to be licensed and the number and description of the
self-service dry cleaning machines to be located in the store. In the case of
an original application for a store not theretofore legally in operation, the
application shall be accompanied by a set of plans and specifications showing
the manner in which the machines shall be installed, showing all plumbing
connections, electrical wire connections and provisions for ventilation, all of
which shall be in compliance with the Building Code, the Fire Code and other
applicable ordinances of the city. In the case of an initial application, the
City Clerk shall submit the plans and specifications to the Building
Commissioner of the city for his or her examination and approval before the
issuance of any license.
(Prior Code, § 117.042) (Ord. 1919, passed 11-12-1962)
§ 117.043 LICENSE FEE; FOOD DISPENSING MACHINES NOT AUTHORIZED.
   The annual fee for a self-service dry cleaning store shall be $25, plus $25
for each self-service dry cleaning machine. Every license shall expire on the
April 30 next after its issuance. Upon the initial issuance of a license, the
fee shall be prorated from the first day of the month in which the license is
issued to the end of the then current license year. The license fee shall not
cover, nor shall it authorize, the use or maintenance in any self-service dry
cleaning store of an automatic food or beverage dispensing device or machine.
Any automatic food or beverage dispensing device or machine which may be
installed or located in the self-service cleaning store shall be installed in
compliance with and subject to the requirements or any ordinance of the city
now or hereafter in effect licensing and regulating automatic food or beverage
dispensing machines or devices.
(Prior Code, § 117.043) (Ord. 1919, passed 11-12-1962)
§ 117.044 INSTALLATION AND OPERATION REQUIREMENTS.
   Every licensee to whom a license shall be issued hereunder shall cause the
self-service dry cleaning store for which the license is issued to be
maintained and operated so as to satisfy the following requirements.
   (A)   Installation.
      (1)   Machines shall not be installed in buildings used in whole or in
part as dwellings.
      (2)   A satisfactory means of preventing any leaking liquid from escaping
the enclosure or room in which the dry cleaning equipment is installed shall be
provided. In order to accomplish this, a method must be provided for draining
or otherwise removing the solvent in the event of leakage. Such drain shall be
connected to an emergency solvent storage tank of sufficient capacity to hold
the maximum quantity of fluid contained in all the machines.
      (3)   An interlock system shall be provided on each machine to prevent
the loading door from being opened during the normal cycle. This system may be
either electrical or mechanical and so connected that, in the event of a power
failure, the machine fails safe.
      (4)   Exhaust ventilation stacks from the dry cleaning machines shall not
be located in proximity to combustion air intakes on gas or oil fired
equipment.
      (5)   The layout of each store shall be such that only the front or
customer side of the dry cleaning machines shall be readily accessible to the
customer area and that the maintenance portions of the machines shall not be
accessible from the customer area.
   (B)   Operation.
      (1)   An attendant shall be present and on duty during all operational
hours of each store.
      (2)   Only the solvent and supplies specified by the equipment
manufacturer shall be used; provided, however, that, in no event shall an
inflammable solvent be used in the dry cleaning machines.
      (3)   The solvent shall be stored in closed containers and transferred
from such containers in lines free of leaks or defects. All storage facilities
for solvent external from the dry cleaning machines shall meet the requirements
of the Fire Chief.
      (4)   Filter residue and other residues containing solvent shall be
handled and disposed of so as not to create a nuisance. A covered metal
container shall be used for temporary storage.
      (5)   The design of each dry cleaning machine shall be such that in the
normal course of operation no significant amount of solvent is retained in the
cleaned items upon completion of the dry cleaning cycle.
      (6)   (a)   Customer service areas of each store shall be provided with
general dilution ventilation (exhaust air flow rates) according to the
following schedule:
 
Number of Machines (C.F.M.) Minimum Air Flow Rate per Machine
1—3                       250
4—8                       200
9—16                      150
17 or more                  100
 
         (b)   This exhaust ventilation shall be in continuous operation during
all operational hours of each store.
      (7)   Maintenance areas of each store shall be provided with general
dilution ventilation (exhaust air flow rates) according to the following
schedule:
 
Number of Machines (C.F.M.) Minimum Air Flow Rate Per Machine
1—3                       350
4—8                       300
9—16                      250
17 or more                  200
 
      (8)   All exhaust ventilation equipment required under divisions (B)(6)
and (B)(7) above shall be in operation on a continuous basis during the hours
each store is open to the public. The fan wiring of the exhaust equipment shall
be such that the dry cleaning machines cannot be operated unless the fan system
is in operation.
      (9)   Each dry cleaning machine shall be provided with an exhaust system
capable of maintaining a minimum of 100 feet per minute face velocity through
the loading door whenever the door is open, which exhaust system shall be in
operation during all times of operation of the dry cleaning machine to which it
is affixed. The dual work connections from this system shall be sealed by
solder or tape and the discharge stack extended above the roof line.
      (10)   A supply of make-up air equal to or greater than the total volume
of air exhausted from the store shall be provided for the purpose of
eliminating negative pressure conditions.
      (11)   All machinery and equipment shall be kept in good working
condition and installed and maintained so that the customers of the store and
the public generally will neither have access to the maintenance area nor to
any unguarded moving parts of the machinery; except that, the customers shall
have access to the operating controls of the dry cleaning machines.
      (12)   The premises shall be kept in good repair and maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition. A step-by-step instruction list shall be posted
in a conspicuous place for customer use near the dry cleaning machines. All
maintenance personnel shall be instructed in the proper procedures for the
handling of solvents.
      (13)   Each store shall be kept well lighted during all of the hours when
it is open for business. If off-street parking is provided for automobiles of
customers of the store, the off-street parking area or areas shall be surfaced
with crushed stone or other suitable hard surface materials, shall be level,
shall be provided with adequate driveway or driveways for ingress or egress,
and shall be well lighted during all the hours of darkness.
(Prior Code, § 117.044) (Ord. 1919, passed 11-12-1962) Penalty, see §
10.99
LAUNDRIES
§ 117.055 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall conduct a laundry in the city without first obtaining a
license so to do.
(Prior Code, § 117.055) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 117.056 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Any person desiring to conduct a laundry in the city shall make application
therefor to the City Clerk, which application shall state the name of the
person owning and conducting such laundry and the location of the laundry and,
upon the payment of the license fee, shall be granted a license, attested by
the proper city authorities, authorizing the applicant to conduct a laundry at
the place designated in the application.
(Prior Code, § 117.056)
§ 117.057 LICENSE FEE.
   The license fee to be paid by such applicant shall be the sum of $25 per
annum and all licenses shall expire on April 30 following the date of issuance
of the license. If any license be granted for less than one year, the license
fee shall be reduced pro rata.
(Prior Code, § 117.057)
§ 117.058 LOCATION OF BOUNDARIES; BUILDING PERMIT.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall locate, build, construct or
maintain on any street, avenue or alley in the city, in any block in which one-
half of the buildings on both sides of the street, avenue or alley are used
exclusively for residence purposes, any building for a laundry to be run by
machinery, without the written consent of a majority of the property owners
according to frontage, on both sides of such street, avenue or alley.
   (B)   Written consent shall be obtained and filed with the City Clerk before
a permit is issued for the construction of any such building; provided that, in
determining whether one-half of the buildings on both sides of the street,
avenue or alley are used exclusively for residence purposes, any building
fronting upon another street, avenue or alley and located upon a corner lot
shall not be considered.
(Prior Code, § 117.058) Penalty, see §
10.99
LAUNDRY VEHICLES AND OUTLETS
§ 117.070 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LAUNDRY OUTLET. Any establishment located within the city (other than a
laundry vehicle and other than a laundry licensed under the provisions of §§
117.055 to
117.058 of this chapter), used for the purpose of soliciting, receiving,
collecting or distributing laundry within the city limits.
   LAUNDRY VEHICLE. Any wagon, automobile or other vehicle used for the purpose
of collecting or delivering laundry within the city limits.
(Prior Code, § 117.070) (Ord. 1508, passed 10-27-1941)
§ 117.071 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall establish, maintain, operate or cause to be operated any
laundry outlet or laundry vehicle within the city limits without first having
obtained a license for the same.
(Prior Code, § 117.071) (Ord. 1508, passed 10-27-1941) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 117.072 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Any person desiring to maintain or operate a laundry outlet or laundry
vehicle in the city shall make application to the City Clerk for a license so
to do, which application shall state the name of the person who owns or
operates the laundry outlet or laundry vehicle, as the case may be, and in the
case of a laundry outlet, the street address thereof, and in the case of a
laundry vehicle, the name and type of the vehicle and the street address of the
place where the same is kept or stored when not in use.
   (B)   Upon payment of the license fee, and upon compliance with the
requirements of this subchapter, a license shall be issued authorizing the
applicant to maintain or operate a laundry outlet or outlets or a laundry
vehicle or vehicles or both as the case may be, and the City Clerk shall issue
a suitable emblem which shall bear the words “laundry outlet” or “laundry
vehicle”, as the case may be, which such emblem shall be displayed in a
conspicuous place in the laundry outlet or shall be attached to such laundry
vehicle in a plainly conspicuous place.
(Prior Code, § 117.072) (Ord. 1508, passed 10-27-1941)
§ 117.073 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual license fee for each laundry outlet or laundry vehicle shall be
$10; provided, however, that, any person operating a laundry licensed under the
provisions of §§
117.055 to
117.058 of this chapter, who uses any vehicle in connection with such licensed
laundry, shall be entitled to receive a laundry vehicle license for each such
laundry vehicle for the sum of $5. No license shall be issued, except for the
full license fee.
(Prior Code, § 117.073) (Ord. 1508, passed 10-27-1941)
§ 117.074 NAME TO BE DISPLAYED ON VEHICLE.
   No vehicle of any kind shall be used for the purpose of collecting or
delivering laundry work, unless such vehicle shall carry upon two sides of the
same in plain, legible letters, at least one and one-half inches high, the name
of the laundry where the laundry work is actually done.
(Prior Code, § 117.074) (Ord. 1508, passed 10-27-1941) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 117.075 SANITARY REQUIREMENTS.
   All laundry outlets and laundry vehicles for the transportation of laundry
shall at all times be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and be properly
equipped with means to separate the laundered from the unlaundered articles.
Every laundry outlet and laundry vehicle shall have separate containers for
bedding, linen and wearing apparel which may be taken from places where
quarantine has been established or where persons are afflicted with or are
convalescing after a disease. Laundry outlets and laundry vehicles shall be
inspected under the direction of the Health Commissioner of the city as often
and at such times as the Health Commissioner may deem necessary or proper in
order to keep them in a proper sanitary condition.
(Prior Code, § 117.075) (Ord. 1508, passed 10-27-1941)
CHAPTER 118: CONTRACTORS AND BUILDERS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
Building Material Dealers
   
118.001   License required
   
118.002   Application for license
   
118.003   License fee
Contractors
   
118.015   Definition
   
118.016   License required
   
118.017   Application for license
   
118.018   License fee
   
118.019   Insurance required
Electrical Contractors
   
118.030   Definition
   
118.031   Registration required
   
118.032   Annual registration fee
   
118.033   Compliance with ordinances required
Lumberyards
   
118.045   License required
   
118.046   Application for license
   
118.047   License fee
Machine Shops
   
118.060   Definition
   
118.061   License required
   
118.062   License fees
   
118.063   Safety and health regulations
Roofers
   
118.075   Definition
   
118.076   Application for license
   
118.077   License fee; permitted activities
   
118.078   Exemption
BUILDING MATERIAL DEALERS
§ 118.001 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall sell or offer for sale cement, brick, stone, lime, plaster,
sand, sewer pipe or other building material in the city without obtaining a
license.
(Prior Code, § 118.001) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 118.002 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Any person desiring to sell or offer for sale any of the building
material mentioned in §
118.001 of this chapter shall make application to the City Clerk for a license.
   (B)   The application shall set forth the name of the applicant and the
place of the business.
   (C)   Upon the payment of the license fee, the City Clerk shall issue to the
applicant a license, attested by the proper city authorities, authorizing the
applicant to sell or offer for sale any of the building material mentioned in §
118.001 of this chapter; provided that, if any person has taken out a license
authorizing the sale of lumber or authorizing the conducting of a lumberyard,
no further license shall be required for the sale of the building material
described herein.
(Prior Code, § 118.002)
§ 118.003 LICENSE FEE.
   The license fee shall be $75 per annum, in accordance with the business
licensing fee schedule. All licenses shall expire on the April 30 next
succeeding the date of issuance of the license. If a license is granted for
less than one year, the license fee shall be reduced pro rata.
(Prior Code, § 118.003) (Ord. 2321, passed 3-23-1976)
CONTRACTORS
§ 118.015 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTRACTOR. One who enters into a contract for the erection or repair of
buildings, for the installing of heating and for plumbing, for the installing
of electric wiring or equipment, for the laying of sidewalks, or for the
painting of chattels or the interior or exterior of buildings, or for
paperhanging.
(Prior Code, § 118.015)
§ 118.016 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business of a contractor, as above defined,
without first obtaining a license so to do.
(Prior Code, § 118.016) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 118.017 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Any person desiring to engage in the business of a contractor, as above
defined, shall make application to the City Clerk for a license so to do. The
application shall state the name of the applicant, the applicant’s residence or
place of business, the kind of business engaged in, and such other information
as shall be desired by the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 118.017)
§ 118.018 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual license fee to be paid by the applicant desiring to be licensed
as a contractor shall be $60 per year; provided that, if the contractor engages
only in the applying of siding to the exterior of buildings or the repair or
construction of roofs or in the painting of the exterior or interior of non-
residential buildings, and/or paperhanging, the license shall be $30. If the
contractor engages only in the painting of the exterior or interior of
residential buildings, the contractor shall not be charged a license fee. All
licenses shall expire one year after the date of issuance.
(Prior Code, § 118.018) (Ord. 1669, passed 4-14-1952; Ord. 87-71, passed 3-10-
1987; Ord. 2025-030, passed 6-24-2025)
§ 118.019 INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   No contractor’s license shall be issued pursuant to this chapter until the
applicant for such license provides a Certificate of Insurance naming the city
as the Certificate holder. The minimum insurance requirements are $1,000,000
per occurrence for general liability and the statutory minimum for Workers
Compensation.
(Ord. 2025-030, passed 6-24-2025)
ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS
§ 118.030 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR. Any person engaged in the business of installing or
altering by contract electrical equipment for the utilization of electricity
for light, heat or power. But the term ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR shall not include
the installing or altering of radio apparatus or equipment for wireless
reception of sounds and signals; or apparatus, conductors or other equipment
installed for or by public utilities, including common carriers, which are
under the jurisdiction of the State Commerce Commission, for use in their
operation as public utilities; nor shall the term include the employees
employed by an ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR to do or supervise the contractor’s work.
(Prior Code, § 118.030) (Ord. 1591, passed 2-23-1948)
§ 118.031 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business of an electrical contractor as in §
118.030 of this chapter defined without first having registered with the City
Clerk and having paid the registration fee as herein required; provided,
however, that, an electrical contractor who is registered in another
municipality shall not be required to be registered or to pay the registration
fee as provided herein.
(Prior Code, § 118.031) (Ord. 1591, passed 2-23-1948) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 118.032 ANNUAL REGISTRATION FEE.
   The annual registration fee for every electrical contractor who shall
register with the City Clerk shall be $30 and the period of registration shall
be from May 1 to April 30 of the year following; providing that, any
registration made subsequent to May 1 shall expire on April 30 following such
registration.
(Prior Code, § 118.032) (Ord. 1591, passed 2-23-1948; Ord. 1669, passed 4-14-
1952)
§ 118.033 COMPLIANCE WITH ORDINANCES REQUIRED.
   Every electrical contractor shall comply with all ordinances of the city now
or hereafter in force with respect to buildings and their construction,
erection and alteration.
(Prior Code, § 118.033) (Ord. 1591, passed 2-23-1948) Penalty, see §
10.99
LUMBERYARDS
§ 118.045 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall keep, carry on, conduct or maintain a lumberyard or other
place where lumber is sold from a yard, car or place where lumber is stored for
the purpose of seasoning or drying the same, or where secondhand lumber is
stored or kept for sale, without first obtaining a license.
(Prior Code, § 118.045) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 118.046 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Any person desiring to keep, conduct or maintain a lumberyard or a place for
the sale, storing or keeping of lumber as described in §
118.045 of this chapter shall make application in writing to the City Clerk for
a license. The application shall set forth the name of the applicant and the
place where it is desired to keep the lumberyard or the place to be used for
the storage or sale of lumber. After the payment of the license fee, the City
Clerk shall issue to the applicant a license, attested by the proper city
authorities, authorizing the applicant to keep, conduct or maintain a
lumberyard or place for the storage or sale of lumber at the place designated
in the application.
(Prior Code, § 118.046)
§ 118.047 LICENSE FEE.
   The license fee shall be $25 per year. All licenses shall expire on the
April 30 next after the date of the issuance. If a license is granted for less
than one year, the license fee shall be reduced pro rata.
(Prior Code, § 118.047) (Ord. 1669, passed 4-14-1952)
MACHINE SHOPS
§ 118.060 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context, clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MACHINE SHOP. A work shop in which machines are made or metal parts thereof
are made or are repaired or where parts of machines or tools, implements,
gears, dies, screws or other metal articles are cut, filed, shaped, punched,
stamped or repaired by means of a lathe or other machinery.
(Prior Code, § 118.060) (Ord. 1667, passed 4-14-1952)
§ 118.061 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall conduct or operate a machine shop within the limits of the
city without first having obtained a license therefor.
(Prior Code, § 118.061) (Ord. 1667, passed 4-14-1952) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 118.062 LICENSE FEES.
   The annual fee for each machine shop license shall be based on the number of
persons engaged therein as follows:
 
Not more than 2 persons $25
3 to 10 persons         $35
11 to 25 persons        $50
Over 25 persons         $75
 
(Prior Code, § 118.062) (Ord. 1667, passed 4-14-1952)
§ 118.063 SAFETY AND HEALTH REGULATIONS.
   No building, structure or part thereof used for or in connection with any
machine shop shall be used so as to endanger the health or property of the
employees or of the public. The owner or operator of any machine shop shall
cause all floors and other surface around or beneath any machine or work bench
to be kept in good order and repair and shall have suitable and convenient
sanitary receptacles for receiving waste and cloths used in and about the
machine shop for the purpose of cleaning machines or parts thereof. The owner
or operator shall not permit any steel cuttings or machine parts to accumulate
on or about any machine or work bench so that the same may become detrimental
to the health or safety of any person therein engaged.
(Prior Code, § 118.063) (Ord. 1667, passed 4-14-1952) Penalty, see §
10.99
ROOFERS
§ 118.075 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ROOFER. Every person engaged in the business of constructing roofs or
repairing, recoating, altering or changing roofs of buildings or other
structures within the city.
(Prior Code, § 118.075)
§ 118.076 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Every roofer shall, before putting on any roof or repairing, recoating,
altering or changing any roof of any building or other structure within the
city, make application to the City Clerk for a roofer’s license.
(Prior Code, § 118.076) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 118.077 LICENSE FEE; PERMITTED ACTIVITIES.
   The application shall state the name of the applicant, the applicant’s
residence, place of business and such other information as may be pertinent and
upon the payment of a license fee of $25 per year there shall be issued to such
person a license permitting the licensee to engage in the city in the business
of roofer as herein defined; provided that, the license shall also entitle the
licensee to engage in the work of repairing the sides of buildings by affixing
prepared asphalt or asbestos or other similar materials thereto, but the
license shall not permit the licensee to engage in the business or activities
of a general contractor.
(Prior Code, § 118.077)
§ 118.078 EXEMPTION.
   (A)   If the applicant for a roofer’s license has been granted by the city a
general contractor’s license as required by §§
118.015 to
118.018 of this chapter, it shall not be necessary for such applicant to secure
a roofer’s license.
   (B)   The securing of such roofer’s license shall in no way affect the
provisions of the Building Code, with reference to the necessity of securing a
permit for the erection, enlargement, alteration or repair of any building in
the city, nor in any way affect the payment of the fees required by the
Building Code for such permit.
(Prior Code, § 118.078)
CHAPTER 119: VEHICLES; PARKING LOTS; FILLING STATIONS
Section
Filling Stations
   
119.001   Definition
   
119.002   License required
   
119.003   Application for license
   
119.004   License fees
   
119.005   Location and frontage consents
   
119.006   Change of location
   
119.007   Transfer of license prohibited
   
119.008   Smoking prohibited
   
119.009   Washing with flammable liquids restricted
   
119.010   Waste disposal
   
119.011   Building and fire regulations
Motor Vehicle Sales and Repair
   
119.025   Definitions
   
119.026   Premises to be kept clean and safe
   
119.027   Inspection
   
119.028   Smoking prohibited
   
119.029   License required
   
119.030   Application for license
   
119.031   License fees
   
119.032   Location restrictions for motor vehicle repair shops
   
119.033   Location restrictions for motor vehicle salesrooms
   
119.034   Equipment and operating regulations
Open Air Parking Garages
   
119.045   Definition
   
119.046   License required
   
119.047   Application for license
   
119.048   License fee
   
119.049   Safety and health regulations
Parking Garages
   
119.060   Definition
   
119.061   License required
   
119.062   Application for license
   
119.063   License fee
   
119.064   Expiration date of license
   
119.065   Location and number of vehicles
Public Carts, Wagons and Trucks
   
119.080   License required
   
119.081   Application for license
   
119.082   License fee
Valet Parking Services
   
119.095   Purpose
   
119.096   Definitions
   
119.097   License required
   
119.098   Application for license
   
119.099   Issuance of license; conditions
   
119.100   Transfer zone
   
119.101   General regulations
   
119.102   Specified storage areas
   
119.103   Nonliability of the city
   
119.104   Parking prohibited
   
119.105   Violations
Unscheduled Intercity Buses
   
119.125   Definitions
   
119.126   Applicability
   
119.127   Notice and application required
   
119.128   Processing and approval of application
   
119.129   Passenger loading and unloading day and hour restriction
   
119.130   Passenger loading and unloading location
   
119.131   Punctuality of passenger loading and unloading
   
119.132   Proof of approved application to load or unload a passenger
 
   
119.133   Penalty
FILLING STATIONS
§ 119.001 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FILLING STATION. Any building, structure, premises, enclosure or other place
within the city where a container or containers, tank or tanks, either portable
or stationary and containing either carbon, bisulfite, gasoline, naphtha,
benzol, hydrocarbon (gas drips) liquified petroleum gas, acetone, kerosene,
turpentine or other flammable liquids having a flash point below 165°F are kept
or located for sale, or distributing any such liquids from such container or
tank; provided, however, that, the provisions of this subchapter shall not
apply to any place where such flammable liquids are kept or sold for medicinal
purposes only.
(Prior Code, § 119.001) (Ord. 1525, passed 11-9-1942)
§ 119.002 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business of operating a filling station
without first having obtained a license therefor.
(Prior Code, § 119.002) (Ord. 1525, passed 11-9-1942) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 119.003 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   An application for a license shall be made upon a form to be prepared
and provided by the City Clerk.
   (B)   The application shall set forth the name and address of the owner or
operator of the filling station, the location of the filling station, a
description of each container or tank installed or to be installed upon the
premises and the capacity of each measured in gallons, the type of construction
of each building situated upon the premises.
   (C)   Every application shall be referred to the Building Inspector and the
Fire Marshal to determine whether the provisions of this subchapter and all
other applicable ordinances of the city are being complied with, and the
approval of such officers must appear upon the application before a license
shall be issued.
(Prior Code, § 119.003) (Ord. 1525, passed 11-9-1942)
§ 119.004 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   The annual license fee for such filling station shall be determined by
the number and capacity of the containers and tanks situated on the premises as
follows: $5 for containers or tanks having a total capacity of 100 gallons or
less; provided, however, that, where only kerosene is stored and where the
containers or tanks in one and the same premises have a total capacity of 100
gallons or less no license fee shall be charged; $5 for each portable wheel
tank; $10 for containers or tanks having a total capacity of more than 100
gallons, but not exceeding 400 gallons; $15 for containers or tanks having a
total capacity of more than 400 gallons but not exceeding 990 gallons.
   (B)   For containers or tanks having a total capacity of more than 990
gallons, the license fee shall be $25 for the first 1,065 gallons and an
additional fee of $2 for each additional 1,065 gallons capacity or fraction
thereof.
   (C)   For containers or tanks used exclusively as initial or bulk storage
containers or tanks, from which the same or distribution of any of the
flammable liquids mentioned in this subchapter is not made direct to consumers,
but is made at wholesale exclusively, the license fee for such initial or bulk
storage containers or tanks shall be $75 for each and every such bulk storage
container or tank having a capacity of not more than 100,000 gallons; $100 for
each such bulk storage container or tank having a capacity of not less than
100,001 gallons, but not more than 150,000 gallons; $125 for each such bulk
storage container or tank having a capacity of not less than 150,001 gallons
but not more than 200,000 gallons; $150 for each such bulk storage container or
tank having a capacity or more than 200,000 gallons; provided, however, that,
containers or tanks maintained on the premises of or on premises immediately
adjacent to retail distributing stations and supplying any of the flammable
liquids mentioned in this subchapter to such retail distributing station shall
be required to pay the fee provided for in division (B) above.
   (D)   Any person that is required to pay an annual license fee of $15 or
more, as above provided, shall be entitled to have a tank capacity not
exceeding 100 gallons for the storage of kerosene only, which capacity shall
not be counted in determining the total tank capacity of the filling station.
   (E)   The license shall expire on April 30 next after the issuance thereof
and, if issued for less than one year, the fee shall be reduced in proportion
to the unexpired portion of the license year remaining.
(Prior Code, § 119.004) (Ord. 1525, passed 11-9-1942; Ord. 1536, passed 11-18-
1943; Ord. 1669, passed 4-14-1952)
§ 119.005 LOCATION AND FRONTAGE CONSENTS.
   (A)   No tanks for the storage of flammable liquids shall be installed in
any lot or plot of ground where any of the boundaries of the lot or plot of
ground are within 200 feet of the nearest boundary of any lot or plot of ground
used for a school, hospital, church or theater.
   (B)   These provisions shall not be applicable to the installation of a tank
or tanks containing any flammable liquids when such liquids are used solely for
fuel for the purpose of heating the building or other structure in or in
conjunction with which such tank or tanks are installed.
(Prior Code, § 119.005) (Ord. 1525, passed 11-9-1942; Ord. 1538, passed 1-10-
1944) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 119.006 CHANGE OF LOCATION.
   (A)   If any person licensed to engage in the business of a filling station
shall, before the expiration of the license, desire to change the location of
the business, the licensee shall notify the City Clerk and shall furnish all of
the information which is required to be furnished on an original application
for license.
   (B)   Every application for change of location shall be approved by the
Building Inspector and Fire Marshal before a change in location shall be
authorized.
   (C)   The new location shall be subject to the same conditions and
restrictions as are prescribed for the premises for which the license was first
issued.
(Prior Code, § 119.006) (Ord. 1525, passed 11-9-1942) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 119.007 TRANSFER OF LICENSE PROHIBITED.
   No filling station license granted under the provisions of this subchapter
shall be assigned or transferred to any person other than the licensee named to
do business or act under the license.
(Prior Code, § 119.007) (Ord. 1525, passed 11-9-1942) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 119.008 SMOKING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall permit smoking in any filling station.
(Prior Code, § 119.008) (Ord. 1525, passed 11-9-1942) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 119.009 WASHING WITH FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS RESTRICTED.
   Gasoline, benzine, naphtha and similar flammable liquids shall not be used
for washing or cleaning purposes within any filling station nor in the open air
within a distance of 50 feet of any repair pit or any opening from any basement
space.
(Prior Code, § 119.009) (Ord. 1525, passed 11-9-1942) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 119.010 WASTE DISPOSAL.
   Waste oil or other flammable liquids shall be stored in metal containers
pending removal from the premises. No such waste shall be permitted to drain
into any sewer or storm water drainage system. Rags and soiled waste shall be
kept in metal containers.
(Prior Code, § 119.010) (Ord. 1525, passed 11-9-1942) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 119.011 BUILDING AND FIRE REGULATIONS.
   The construction and equipment of filling stations, including tanks, and the
requirements for safety clearances around the stations shall be made and
maintained in accordance with the provisions of the building code and other
applicable ordinances. Filling stations shall be inspected by the Fire Marshal
or the Fire Marshal’s duly authorized representative at least once every year.
(Prior Code, § 119.011) (Ord. 1525, passed 11-9-1942)
MOTOR VEHICLE SALES AND REPAIR
§ 119.025 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Unless a contrary intent is expressly shown, means all
species of self-propelled vehicles operated by gasoline or any kind of oil,
steam, electricity, alcohol or other substance or method and operated on the
public ways of the city other than on rails.
   MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR SHOP. Any building, structure, premises, enclosure or
other place where the business of repair work on or for motor vehicles or any
of their component parts, the replacing of or the adding of parts, the
polishing, washing, greasing, painting or refinishing of vehicles is carried
on.
   MOTOR VEHICLE SALESROOM. Any building, structure, premises, enclosure or
other place within the city where the business of dealing in new or secondhand
motor vehicles, or any parts or accessories, is conducted or operated.
(Prior Code, § 119.025) (Ord. 2275, passed 7-8-1975)
§ 119.026 PREMISES TO BE KEPT CLEAN AND SAFE.
   (A)   No owner, proprietor, lessee, manager or superintendent of any
salesroom, shop, garage or other place where workers are employed for wages in
and about motor vehicles shall cause, permit or allow the whole or any portion
of the salesroom, shop, garage or other place to be overcrowded or inadequate,
faulty or insufficient in respect to light, ventilation, heat and cleanliness.
Fresh air shall be supplied by ventilation in accordance with the building
provisions of the city.
   (B)   All such places of employment or service shall be kept in a clean
condition, and free as far as practicable from all gases, vapors, dust or other
impurities which are injurious to health which are generated by manufacturing
processes or the operation of motors or other machinery.
   (C)   Sufficient and separate properly ventilated water closets shall be
provided for male and female employees.
   (D)   Lockers for workers’ clothing shall be made of metal.
   (E)   All places of business where any spraying of paint or other
combustible or flammable liquids is conducted at any time shall be equipped
with a spray booth meeting the construction requirements of Ch. 94 of this code
of ordinances.
   (F)   All used vehicle tires shall be stored in an enclosed area of the
place of business. If the place of storage is located outside of a building, it
shall be enclosed by a chain link fence a minimum of eight feet high and shall
be equipped with locked gates.
(Prior Code, § 119.026) (Ord. 1551, passed 3-11-1946; Ord. 2226, passed 2-25-
1974) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 119.027 INSPECTION.
   The Building Commissioner, Plumbing Inspector, Chief of the Fire Department
and Health Officer shall inspect all motor vehicle repair shops and motor
vehicle salesrooms within the city as often as they shall deem necessary and
before any license is issued or reissued, to see that the provisions of this
subchapter and all other chapters and all of the requirements of the laws of
the state are complied with; and, if they find such premises in an unsanitary
or unsafe condition, they shall require such alterations or arrangements to be
made as may be necessary for the safety and health of the employees and
patrons, pursuant to the provisions of the laws of the city and such laws of
the state as may be in force concerning health, sanitary and safety measures.
(Prior Code, § 119.027) (Ord. 2275, passed 7-8-1975)
§ 119.028 SMOKING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall permit smoking in any public garage or places where
flammable material is stored.
(Prior Code, § 119.028) (Ord. 2275, passed 7-8-1975) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 119.029 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business of operating a motor vehicle repair
shop without having obtained a license.
(Prior Code, § 119.029) (Ord. 2290, passed 11-11-1975) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 119.030 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Any person desiring a license under the provisions of this subchapter shall
make an application in writing to the City Clerk stating the location and
general character of the business to be conducted and the number of persons to
be employed. The application shall identify the owner or owners, operator,
superintendent and manager of the business. The application shall be
accompanied by a copy of the articles of incorporation, in the event
application is made by a corporation, and by a copy of the partnership
agreement in effect at the time of application, if made by a partnership. The
application shall further be accompanied by a certificate that compliance has
been made with the Assumed Business Name Act, 805 ILCS 405/0.01 et seq., if
applicable to the business operation of applicants.
(Prior Code, § 119.030) (Ord. 2275, passed 7-8-1975)
§ 119.031 LICENSE FEES.
   Every license shall expire on the April 30 next after its issuance. The fee
for any license issued to a person commencing business after the beginning of a
license year shall be adjusted pro rata by quarters of the license year.
(Prior Code, § 119.031) (Ord. 2290, passed 11-11-1975)
§ 119.032 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS FOR MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR SHOPS.
   No motor vehicle repair shop shall be conducted or operated within 200 feet
of any building used as a hospital, church, or public or parochial school, or
the grounds thereof, or in a location that is zoned for first or second
residential purposes.
(Prior Code, § 119.032) (Ord. 1551, passed 3-11-1946) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 119.033 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS FOR MOTOR VEHICLE SALESROOMS.
   No person shall construct, conduct or operate any motor vehicle salesroom
within 200 feet of any building used as a hospital, church or public or
parochial school, or the grounds thereof, or in a location that is zoned for
first or second residential purposes.
(Prior Code, § 119.033) (Ord. 1551, passed 3-11-1946) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 119.034 EQUIPMENT AND OPERATING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No owner, proprietor, lessee, manager or superintendent of any motor
vehicle repair shop or motor vehicle salesroom shall cause, permit or allow the
same or any portion thereof to be over-crowded or inadequate, faulty or
insufficient with respect to light, ventilation, heat and cleanliness. Fresh
air shall be supplied by ventilation in accordance with the city building
ordinances.
   (B)   Every motor vehicle repair shop or motor vehicle salesroom shall be
kept in clean condition and free as far as practicable from all gases, vapors,
dust or other impurities which are injurious to health and generated by
manufacturing processes or the operation of motors or other machinery.
   (C)   Sufficient and separate properly ventilated water closets shall be
provided for male and female employees.
   (D)   Lockers for workers’ clothing shall be made of metal in a motor
vehicle repair shop.
   (E)   Every motor vehicle repair shop where any spraying of paint or other
combustible or flammable liquids is conducted at any time shall be equipped
with a spray booth meeting the construction requirements of the Fire Prevention
Code (see §
150.029), published by the American Insurance Association, adopted by the city.
   (F)   All used vehicle tires shall be stored in an enclosed area of each
motor vehicle repair shop. If the place of storage is located outside a
building, it shall be enclosed by a chain link fence a minimum of eight feet
high and equipped with locked gates. All other damaged automobile parts and
automobile equipment to be discarded shall be stored within an enclosed
building.
   (G)   Every motor vehicle repair shop shall be equipped with drains that are
intercepted before entering the city sanitary sewer system by three cast iron
basins in line called garage basins. Each basin being a minimum of 20 inches in
diameter and 30 inches in depth, and must be vented by a two-inch pipe through
the roof.
   (H)   A motor vehicle repair shop shall be permitted to operate only between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. of each day.
   (I)   In the operation of a motor vehicle repair shop, no motor vehicle
shall be permitted to be repaired on any public street, parkway, alley or
sidewalk. No motor vehicle, while in the custody or control of the motor
vehicle repair shop, shall be stored or parked in places prior to or after
being repaired at the motor vehicle repair shop.
(Prior Code, § 119.034) (Ord. 2275, passed 7-8-1975) Penalty, see §
10.99
OPEN AIR PARKING GARAGES
§ 119.045 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PUBLIC OPEN AIR PARKING GARAGE. Any lot, piece or parcel of ground not
enclosed within four walls and a roof, and being within the limits of the city
where automobiles, trucks or any similar self- propelled vehicles are parked or
stored for hire, but it shall not include motor vehicle repair shops as defined
in §
119.025 of this chapter. It shall include all such garages whether the same be
open for business regularly or intermittently.
(Prior Code, § 119.045) (Ord. 1668, passed 4-14-1952)
§ 119.046 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall keep, conduct or operate a public open air parking garage
without first having obtained a license so to do in the manner hereinafter
provided.
(Prior Code, § 119.046) (Ord. 1668, passed 4-14-1952) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 119.047 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Any person desiring to keep, conduct or operate a public open air parking
garage shall make application in writing to the City Clerk. The application
shall set forth the name of the applicant, the place of the applicant’s
residence and, if a corporation, the names of the officers and their places of
residence. The application shall also set forth the location and the dimensions
of the lot, piece or parcel of ground which it is proposed to use for a public
open air parking garage, and the location and size of all driveways proposed to
be used for ingress to or egress from the garage. In and by the application,
the applicant shall agree to abide by and comply with all existing ordinances
relating to the establishment, construction and maintenance of driveways.
(Prior Code, § 119.047) (Ord. 1668, passed 4-14-1952)
§ 119.048 LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   The annual license for such public open air parking garage shall be
$50 per year and each license shall expire on April 30 following its issuance.
   (B)   No license shall be issued for less than the full amount of the annual
license fee.
(Prior Code, § 119.048) (Ord. 1668, passed 4-14-1952)
§ 119.049 SAFETY AND HEALTH REGULATIONS.
   Every public open air parking garage shall comply with the following
regulations.
   (A)   The surface of the area within which vehicles are parked or stored
shall be well drained and so constructed or surfaced as to prevent the creation
of large amounts of dust.
   (B)   No refuse, rubbish or junk shall be allowed within the limits of any
such garage and each such garage shall be kept neat and clean and in a sanitary
condition at all times.
   (C)   If vehicles are to be permitted to enter or leave such garage during
the hours of darkness, adequate lighting shall be provided.
(Prior Code, § 119.049) (Ord. 1668, passed 4-14-1952) Penalty, see §
10.99
PARKING GARAGES
§ 119.060 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARAGE. Any barn, stable, building or other place within the city where
automobiles, autocars or any similar self-propelled vehicles are kept or let
for hire to any person, whether such vehicle so hired out or let with or
without an operator for same, or where such vehicles are kept ready for use and
where rent is paid to the keeper thereof for such keeping.
(Prior Code, § 119.060)
§ 119.061 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall keep, conduct or operate a garage in the city without first
obtaining a license so to do in the manner hereinafter provided.
(Prior Code, § 119.061) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 119.062 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Any person desiring to keep, conduct or operate a garage in the city
shall make application to the City Clerk. The application shall set forth the
name of the applicant and if an individual or individuals, the place of the
applicant’s residence and, if a corporation, the names of the officers and
their places of residence.
   (B)   The application shall also contain the location of the place at which
it is intended to keep the garage and the number of vehicles to be kept in such
garage for the purpose of letting for hire.
   (C)   The City Clerk shall thereupon issue or cause to be issued, a license,
upon payment by such applicant the rates hereinafter fixed.
(Prior Code, § 119.062)
§ 119.063 LICENSE FEE.
   For all garages where vehicles are kept ready for use and where rent is paid
to the keeper thereof for such keeping or where vehicles as described in §
119.060 of this chapter hereof are repaired, the license fee shall be $15 per
year.
(Prior Code, § 119.063)
§ 119.064 EXPIRATION DATE OF LICENSE.
   All such licenses shall expire on April 30, following the date of issuance,
and if issued for less than one year the amount of the license fee shall be
reduced pro rata. If a garage keeper shall, at any time before the expiration
of any license issued under the provisions of §
119.062 of this chapter, change his or her place of business, the keeper shall
give notice of such fact to the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 119.064)
§ 119.065 LOCATION AND NUMBER OF VEHICLES.
   Each license issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall set forth
the location of the garage and the number of vehicles which the licensees keep
or intend to keep at such licensed garage to be let or hired.
(Prior Code, § 119.065)
PUBLIC CARTS, WAGONS AND TRUCKS
§ 119.080 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business of hauling, transporting or conveying
parcels, furniture, trunks, baggage, goods, wares, merchandise or other
articles within the city for hire without securing a license.
(Prior Code, § 119.080) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 119.081 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Any person desiring to engage in the business of hauling, transporting
or conveying any or all of the articles mentioned in §
119.080 of this chapter shall make application to the City Clerk for a license.
The application shall set forth the name of the applicant and the number of
public cars, express wagons, furniture vans, trucks or drays owned or operated
by applicant.
   (B)   Upon the payment of a license fee, the City Clerk shall issue to the
applicant a license, attested by the proper city authorities, authorizing the
applicant to engage in the business of hauling, transporting or conveying any
or all of the articles mentioned in §
119.080 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 119.081)
§ 119.082 LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   The license fee to be paid therefor shall be as follows:
      (1)   For each one-horse express wagon, dray or public cart: the sum of
$5 per annum;
      (2)   For each two-horse express wagon, dray, public cart or moving van:
the sum of $10 per annum;
      (3)   For each automobile junkyard of moving van with the capacity of two
tons or less: the sum of $10 per annum; and
      (4)   For each automobile truck, dray or moving van, having a capacity
greater than two tons: the sum of $15 per annum.
   (B)   The licenses shall expire on April 30 next succeeding the date of
issuance of the license.
   (C)   If the license be granted for less than one year, the license fee
shall be reduced pro rata.
(Prior Code, § 119.082)
VALET PARKING SERVICES
§ 119.095 PURPOSE.
   The general purposes of this subchapter are:
   (A)   To provide for the safe operation of valet parking services where the
transfer and temporary parking of motor vehicles between customers and valet
parking services takes place on public streets or public property;
   (B)   To prohibit the obstruction of the ordinary flow of traffic and
designated “no parking” zones in the course of operating a valet parking
service; and
   (C)   To designate those places where valet parking services may be legally
provided by a business or its duly authorized parking contractor.
(Ord. 2014-047, passed 10-28-2014)
§ 119.096 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. Any commercial establishment which makes valet parking services
available to its customers and which receives or stores motor vehicles within
the city.
   CUSTOMER. Any person granting temporary custody of a motor vehicle to a
valet operator for the purpose of valet parking.
   DESIGNATED PARKING AREA. Those areas of the city as specified in this
chapter where a valet operator may store customer motor vehicles.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation,
association, joint stock company, trust, estate, political subdivision, or any
other legal entity, or its legal representative, agents or assigns.
   PROHIBITED PARKING AREA. Those areas of the city as specified in this
chapter where a valet operator is prohibited from storing customer motor
vehicles.
   TRANSFER ZONE. Any area used as the pick up, loading, unloading or discharge
points for valet parking services.
   VALET OPERATOR. Any person who employs one or more attendants for the
purpose of providing a valet parking service or who contracts his or her own
services, but not in the capacity of employee, to any business establishment
for the purpose of providing a valet parking service to such establishment.
   VALET PARKING OPERATION. The performance of valet parking services by any
business or valet operator.
   VALET PARKING OPERATOR LICENSE. A license issued pursuant to this chapter to
an operator for the conduct of valet parking services.
   VALET PARKING PLAN. A plan approved for operation of valet parking services
as provided in this chapter.
   VALET PARKING SERVICES. A parking service provided to accommodate customers
of any business establishment, which service is incidental to the business of
the establishment and by which a person on behalf of the establishment takes
temporary custody of the customer’s motor vehicle and moves, parks, stores or
retrieves the vehicle for the customer’s convenience. Provided, VALET PARKING
SERVICE does not include such parking service where all activities, including
loading, unloading, transfer, transport and storage, are conducted entirely
upon private, non-residentially zoned property.
   VALET TAG. An identification ticket to be displayed on all motor vehicles
while under the control of the valet operator stating the name of the business
being served, the name of the valet company and its phone number. At a minimum,
the valet tag shall measure at least four inches by six inches.
(Ord. 2014-047, passed 10-28-2014)
§ 119.097 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to offer or provide valet parking
services in the city without a valid valet parking operator license issued in
accordance with this chapter. A separate permit shall be required for each
business served.
(Ord. 2014-047, passed 10-28-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 119.098 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   An application for a valet parking operator license shall be filed
with the City Clerk by the valet operator or business on a form supplied by the
Clerk and shall include:
      (1)   The valet operator’s company name and license holder, address,
telephone and facsimile numbers, and email address;
      (2)   The business name, address, telephone and facsimile numbers, email
address and the name of the local manager for the business;
      (3)   A proposed valet parking plan which shall include a general
description of the proposed valet parking services in conformance with this
chapter. Valet parking services shall only be conducted in areas shown on an
approved valet parking plan including the site or sites upon which cars will be
temporarily stored and the locations of all transfer zones. A valet parking
plan should contain the following:
         (a)   The location of the transfer zone(s);
         (b)   The location of all valet parking spaces;
         (c)   The number of parking spaces to be reserved for valet parking;
         (d)   The location and drawings (pictures, renditions) of signs to be
used during valet parking operations;
         (e)   Valet parking, circulation routes and patterns;
         (f)   The time of valet parking operations; and
         (g)   Number of valet employees used to ensure operation of said valet
parking plan.
      (4)   The valet operator’s insurance company name, address, telephone
number, amount of coverage and effective dates of the policy;
      (5)   Copies of any leases or other written agreements pursuant to which
a business or valet operator is authorized to use real property which it does
not own for the temporary storage of customer vehicles;
      (6)   If a valet parking operation will be performed for the business by
a separate valet operator, a copy of a fully executed contract between the
business and the valet operator;
      (7)   Every valet operator shall procure and maintain insurance coverage
as provided herein, at its sole expense, at all times during which any valet
parking operation is being conducted and at all times any valet parking
operator license is in effect. Application shall include proof of the valet
operator’s insurance for protection from:
         (a)   Claims under the Workers’ Compensation Act, being 820 ILCS 305/
1 et seq.;
         (b)   Claims for bodily injury, including personal injury and death,
sickness or disease or death of any and all employees or of any person other
than such employees; and
         (c)   Claims or damages because of injury to or destruction of
property, including loss of use resulting therefrom which may arise from the
valet parking operation in the following specified amounts:
            1.   For worker’s compensation, the statutory limits;
            2.   For liability insurance for valet services which includes
automobile transport and storage as well as general liability, $1,000,000;
            3.   The valet operator shall name the city as an additional named
insured under the above liability policy which shall provide that no policy nor
any part thereof may be terminated or modified except upon 30 days’ prior
written notice to the city; and
            4.   The valet operator shall provide the city with a proper
insurance certificate, at his or her sole expense, at all times any valet
parking operation is being conducted and at all times any valet parking
operator license is in effect.
      (8)   An indemnification and waiver agreement, signed by the applicant,
promising to hold harmless and to defend the city or any of its agents,
officials and employees from and against any property damage, personal injury
or death that may result from granting of the valet parking operator license or
from the valet parking operation; and
      (9)   A license fee as provided by the city code.
   (B)   Applications for the renewal of a valet parking operator license shall
be made to the city on forms provided by the city for that purpose not less
than 60 days prior to the expiration of the valet parking operator license to
be renewed. The fee for a renewal shall be the same as for a new valet parking
operator license.
   (C)   Within ten days after a change in status of any of the information
required by this section, the business or valet operator shall file an amended
application for valet parking operator license in the office of the City Clerk
on a form supplied by the Clerk.
(Ord. 2014-047, passed 10-28-2014)
§ 119.099 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; CONDITIONS.
   Upon receipt of a completed application form, payment of all required fees
or fines that may be due pursuant to this chapter and compliance with all other
applicable requirements of this chapter, upon approval by the city, the city
shall issue a valet parking operator license. Such valet parking operator
license may contain such conditions and limitations as are necessary to promote
safe and sound passenger loading and unloading, vehicle transfer and traffic
movement as may be determined by the city.
(Ord. 2014-047, passed 10-28-2014)
§ 119.100 TRANSFER ZONE.
   (A)   No valet parking operator license, or renewal thereof, shall be issued
unless the applicant provides proof to the city that the business for which the
valet parking service is to be provided has made available a transfer zone of
at least one parking space and a maximum of two parking spaces unless a request
has been made and approval given for additional parking spaces immediately
adjacent to its premises for the pick up and delivery of the customers’
vehicles.
   (B)   No on street transfer zone shall be approved or utilized unless and
until all required signage has been established.
   (C)   All vehicles accepted for valet parking service shall be immediately
removed from the transfer zone and moved to the storage area specified in the
valet parking plan.
(Ord. 2014-047, passed 10-28-2014)
§ 119.101 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Compliance required. The holder of a valet parking operator license
shall at all times conduct valet parking operations in accordance with this
chapter and in accordance with an approved valet parking plan.
   (B)   Nontransferability of license. Each valet parking operator license
issued shall be nontransferable and shall be valid for one year, commencing on
May 1, and shall have designated thereon the name and address of the valet
operator and the business to be served by the valet operator.
   (C)   Responsibility of operator for employees. Operators shall be
responsible for the acts of their employees and agents in the conduct of the
valet parking service.
   (D)   Signs. Every business establishment for which a valet parking operator
license is issued shall, during the hours of service, display a valet parking
sign approved by the city. Every valet operator must post its name and the
rates, if any, onto the valet parking sign in four-inch lettering. All valet
parking signs shall comply with the following specifications and requirements:
      (1)   The entire sign assembly must be no larger than 24 inches by 36
inches, and the actual surface of the sign shall not exceed six square feet in
size;
      (2)   The sign must be constructed of durable, weatherproof materials;
      (3)   The sign cannot have sharp edges or any protrusions or features
that could be a hazard to pedestrians;
      (4)   The sign must be properly designed and heavy enough to withstand
typical winds without tipping over, rocking or sliding;
      (5)   The sign cannot have moving parts or electrical devices, including
lights;
      (6)   The sign cannot use any images resembling official signs or
anything else that can cause it to be confused with an official traffic-control
device;
      (7)   Only one sign is allowed per place of business;
      (8)   The sign shall only be displayed during hours when the valet
parking service is offered; and
      (9)   The sign must be placed within the designated transfer zone but in
no case shall it be more than 8 feet from the curb.
   (E)   Valet tag. Every valet operator shall place or cause the valet tag to
be placed so as to be conspicuously visible through the windshield of the
patron’s vehicle, which tag shall contain the following information in no less
than one inch letters: “This Vehicle Parked by [valet parking operator] for
Customer of [business establishment].”
   (F)   Attendant insignia. Each attendant of a valet parking operation shall,
while on duty, wear, conspicuously placed on the attendant’s clothing, an
insignia which identifies the valet parking operator or business for whom the
attendant is working.
   (G)   Receipt issued. All valet parking attendants must, upon taking custody
of a patron’s vehicle, issue a numbered receipt to each customer containing the
name, address and telephone number of the company providing the valet service,
a statement that the company has liability insurance as required by this
chapter and the charge for the valet service.
   (H)   Transfer zone or parking revoked or moved. The Community Development
Committee may, in its sole discretion, revoke or move a transfer or parking
zone or at any time, if it determines that the transfer or parking zone or its
location has increased traffic congestion or traffic hazards in the public
streets, or otherwise has impaired the public health, safety or welfare.
   (I)   Traffic regulations.
      (1)   The licensee and its agents, at all times, shall comply with all
traffic rules and regulations.
      (2)   No person may park any vehicle in any manner which violates the
provisions of this chapter or any other duly adopted city parking regulation.
      (3)   In conducting a valet parking operation, no person may obstruct the
normal flow of traffic or block or occupy a “no parking zone”
(Ord. 2014-047, passed 10-28-2014)
§ 119.102 SPECIFIED STORAGE AREAS.
   (A)   A valet operator may store customer motor vehicles only on private,
non-residential property, pursuant to a written lease, deed or agreement, in
locations outside the city or in designated parking areas. Except as specified
below as a designated parking area, all other locations within the city are
designated as prohibited parking areas.
   (B)   The following are designated parking areas:
      (1)   Blue Island commuter/Metra parking lots;
      (2)   Vermont and Grove Street City of Blue Island Parking Lot;
      (3)   High and York Street City of Blue Island parking lot;
      (4)   Blue Island Public Library parking lot; and
      (5)   Private property with proof of authorization, provided such private
property conforms to the following.
         (a)   Under no circumstances shall any residentially zoned property be
used as a designated parking area.
         (b)   Designated parking areas on private property shall be limited to
paved parking surfaces, constructed and maintained in conformance with all city
codes, including landscaping and screening and the International Property
Maintenance Code, as amended.
   (C)   Motor vehicles accepted for valet parking service shall not be parked
at any location within the city that has not been specifically approved for
valet parking operations in the valet parking plan.
(Ord. 2014-047, passed 10-28-2014)
§ 119.103 NONLIABILITY OF THE CITY.
   The city assumes no liability for any aspect of a valet parking operation or
for the failure or neglect of any person associated with such an operation.
(Ord. 2014-047, passed 10-28-2014)
§ 119.104 PARKING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall park a vehicle in a designated valet parking transfer zone
when the licensed valet parking service is in operation and the valet parking
license sign is clearly displayed.
(Ord. 2014-047, passed 10-28-2014)
§ 119.105 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Except as specified herein, any person violating any provision of this
chapter shall, upon a finding of guilty, be fined as provided by the city code
of ordinances.
   (B)   The valet operator shall be responsible for any parking fines and
penalties from illegally parked vehicles under the valet operator’s control or
displaying such valet operator’s valet tag.
   (C)   In the event the Director of Public Safety determines that an operator
has violated any provision of this chapter, the Director may, in lieu of
seeking sanctions as provided in division (A) above:
      (1)   Impose a fine as provided by the city code of ordinances; and
      (2)   Recommend the suspension or revocation of the valet parking
operator license to the Community Development Committee, who may, by majority
vote, revoke or suspend a valet license.
(Ord. 2014-047, passed 10-28-2014)
UNSCHEDULED INTERCITY BUSES
§ 119.125 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, and the interpretation and application
thereof, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have
the meanings given herein, unless the context in which they are used shall
indicate otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future, words in the singular number include the
plural number and words in the plural number include the singular number. Words
or phrases not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICATION. A form that the Police Chief makes available for receiving and
reviewing proposed intercity bus operations.
   APPROVAL. Written notice that the Police Chief has received, reviewed, and
determined that an application satisfies the requirements of the city and this
subchapter.
   CITY. The City of Blue Island, Cook County, Illinois.
   POLICE CHIEF. The City of Blue Island Police Chief, or Chief of Police, or
designee(s).
   REGULARLY SCHEDULED INTERCITY BUS. Any intercity bus that operates trips on
a predictable and recurring basis between two or more designated and authorized
locations or established routes, following a fixed schedule that is published
in advance and available to the general public, and provides transportation
service in exchange for payment of a fare.
   UNSCHEDULED INTERCITY BUS. Any intercity bus used for the transportation of
passengers originating from a location outside of the Chicago-Naperville-Joliet
area that is not a regularly scheduled intercity bus and operating pursuant to
written authorization of the Police Chief approving a specific schedule to
pick-up or drop-off passengers at an approved location in the city.
(Ord. 2024-005, passed 1-23-2024)
§ 119.126 APPLICABILITY.
   The application, review, and approval process pursuant to the limitations
and requirements of this subchapter for unscheduled intercity buses shall apply
to all operators seeking an unscheduled intercity bus service for a specified
date, time and location for the loading or unloading of passengers in
accordance with approved written authorization as herein required.
(Ord. 2024-005, passed 1-23-2024)
§ 119.127 NOTICE AND APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   The operator of any unscheduled intercity bus must make an application for
approval to arrive and load or unload passengers in the city on the appropriate
application form made available by the Police Chief. All applications for
unscheduled intercity bus service must be received by the Police Chief a
minimum of five full business days prior to the requested date of arrival
identified in the application. All applications shall include a proposed
passenger list, and the operator shall be required to perform background checks
on each passenger over the age of 18 and shall provide copies of the same to
the Police Chief as part of the application process. Each application for an
unscheduled intercity bus for the unloading of passengers must include an order
authorizing such unscheduled intercity bus for the unloading of passengers
executed by the head of the public body originating the transfer of or loading
of passengers.
(Ord. 2024-005, passed 1-23-2024)
§ 119.128 PROCESSING AND APPROVAL OF APPLICATION.
   Applications for unscheduled intercity buses will be reviewed on a first-
come, first-serve basis. No more than one application, regardless of operator,
shall be approved by the Police Chief for a specific date or location.
(Ord. 2024-005, passed 1-23-2024)
§ 119.129 PASSENGER LOADING AND UNLOADING DAY AND HOUR RESTRICTION.
   Approved unscheduled intercity buses shall load or unload passengers within
the city only between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. Monday through
Friday, and not at any time on a Saturday, Sunday, or designated federal, state
or city legal holiday.
(Ord. 2024-005, passed 1-23-2024)
§ 119.130 PASSENGER LOADING AND UNLOADING LOCATION.
   Approved unscheduled intercity buses shall only load or unload passengers at
a location authorized by the Police Chief, which shall be listed on the
approved application.
(Ord. 2024-005, passed 1-23-2024)
§ 119.131 PUNCTUALITY OF PASSENGER LOADING AND UNLOADING.
   For any given written approval, unscheduled intercity buses must arrive no
sooner than 15 minutes before, and no later than 30 minutes after, the approved
arrival time, otherwise the application shall be considered invalid. Any
loading or unloading of passengers outside of the aforesaid schedule window
shall result in a $750 fine per passenger upon the operator.
(Ord. 2024-005, passed 1-23-2024)
§ 119.132 PROOF OF APPROVED APPLICATION TO LOAD OR UNLOAD A PASSENGER.
   Every operator of unscheduled intercity buses must carry a physical or
electronic copy of an approved application and present it for inspection at the
location of loading or unloading passengers at the request of any employee of
the city.
(Ord. 2024-005, passed 1-23-2024)
§ 119.133 PENALTY.
   Any operator of an unscheduled intercity bus that attempts to or does in
fact load or unload passengers without an approved application shall be subject
to a $750 fine per passenger.
(Ord. 2024-005, passed 1-23-2024)
CHAPTER 120: TAXICABS
Section
General Provisions
   
120.01   Definitions
   
120.02   Jurisdiction
Licenses and Inspections
   
120.15   Application for license
   
120.16   Inspection before licensing vehicles
   
120.17   Inspection after licensing vehicles
   
120.18   City Council to establish rules for inspections
   
120.19   License card, plate and number
   
120.20   Name of owner only on door
   
120.21   Fees
   
120.22   Register of licensed vehicles
   
120.23   Inspections performed from time to time; written report
   
120.24   Suspension and revocation of licenses
   
120.25   Application for driver’s licenses
   
120.26   Form and term of driver’s license
   
120.27   Fees for driver’s license
   
120.28   Suspension or revocation of driver’s license
   
120.29   Record of driver’s licenses
Fares and Operations
   
120.40   Taximeters
   
120.41   Rates of fares
   
120.42   Prepayment of fare
   
120.43   Disputes as to fares
   
120.44   Overcharging prohibited
   
120.45   Articles lost in taxicabs
   
120.46   Opportunity to examine taximeters
   
120.47   Rate card to be fixed in vehicle
   
120.48   Bond to be given by owner
 
   
120.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 120.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   TAXICAB. Any public passenger vehicle equipped with a taximeter and licensed
as a taxicab.
   TAXIMETER. A mechanical instrument or device by which the charge for hire of
a public taxicab is mechanically calculated, either for distance traveled or
for waiting time, or for both, and upon which such charge shall be indicated by
means of figures.
(Prior Code, § 120.01) (Ord. 1552, passed 3-11-1946)
§ 120.02 JURISDICTION.
   The City Council shall have power to authorize its employees, agents or
officers to license and inspect taxicabs, to inspect and seal taximeters, to
examine applicants for licenses to drive the taxicabs. The City Council is
authorized to appoint or designate the necessary employees, agents or officers
to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 120.02) (Ord. 1552, passed 3-11-1946)
LICENSES AND INSPECTIONS
§ 120.15 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   No taxicab shall ply upon the streets of the city without first obtaining a
license from the City Clerk. A license shall be issued as of the calendar year,
and shall be effective for such period of time, unless sooner suspended or
revoked as herein provided by the City Council. Applications for licenses for
taxicabs shall be made by the owner upon blank forms to be furnished by the
City Clerk. The application shall contain the full name and address of the
owner, the class of the vehicle for which the license is desired, the length of
the time the vehicle has been in use, the number of persons it is capable of
carrying and, if a motor-driven vehicle, the motor power thereof.
(Prior Code, § 120.15) (Ord. 1552, passed 3-11-1946) Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.16 INSPECTION BEFORE LICENSING VEHICLES.
   No vehicle shall be licensed until it has been thoroughly and carefully
inspected and examined and found to be in a thoroughly safe condition for the
transportation of passengers and found to be clean and of good appearance. Such
inspection and examination shall be made by the Chief of Police of the city or
by a member of the Police Department appointed by the Chief of Police. The
Chief of Police shall cause to be examined any taximeter attached to any
vehicle and determine its accuracy before issuing a license. In addition
thereto no vehicle shall be licensed unless and until the vehicle has been
submitted to a safety test and a certificate of safety has been issued by the
Division of the State Highway Police of the Department of Public Safety.
(Prior Code, § 120.16) (Ord. 1552, passed 3-11-1946; Ord. 2046, passed 9-27-
1967) Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.17 INSPECTION AFTER LICENSING VEHICLES.
   Every licensed vehicle shall be submitted to a safety test to be
administered quarterly by a qualified automobile repair shop, approved by the
City Council License Committee. A certificate of safety shall be issued to each
such vehicle after each inspection, and shall be affixed to the windshield of
such vehicle. In addition thereto, the City Health Officer shall inspect each
such vehicle quarterly for cleanliness and good appearance. Any license which
has been issued may be suspended or revoked in any case where such vehicle is
found to be unfit or unsuited for public patronage as herein provided.
(Prior Code, § 120.17) (Ord. 2480, passed 10-9-1979) Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.18 CITY COUNCIL TO ESTABLISH RULES FOR INSPECTIONS.
   The City Council is authorized and empowered to establish reasonable rules
and regulations for the inspection of public vehicles and their appurtenances,
construction and condition of fitness.
(Prior Code, § 120.18) (Ord. 2046, passed 9-27-1967)
§ 120.19 LICENSE CARD, PLATE AND NUMBER.
   (A)   If, upon inspection, a taxicab is found to be of lawful construction
and in proper condition in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and
the rules and regulations established hereunder, and upon payment of the
license fees hereinafter set forth, the same shall be licensed by delivering to
the owner a card of such size and form as may be prescribed by the City Clerk.
The card shall contain the official license number of the taxicab, together
with the date of inspection of the same and a statement to the effect that, in
case of any complaint, the City Clerk shall be notified, giving the license
number of the taxicab. Such card shall be signed by the City Clerk and shall
contain blank spaces upon which an entry shall be made of the date of every
inspection of the vehicle by the inspector. License cards shall be of a
distinctly different color each year and, in the case of taxicabs driven by
mechanical power, the license number assigned hereunder shall in each case be
the same as that assigned to the vehicle for that year, pursuant to law.
   (B)   Where practicable, the City Clerk shall assign to each taxicab the
same license number given to that taxicab the previous license year and
likewise where the taxicab is a replacement of a previously licensed taxicab
that is being withdrawn from service. In event of a new or additional taxicab
which is not being put into service as a replacement, a new number shall be
assigned. In all cases, the license number so assigned to each particular
taxicab shall be plainly painted in legible numbers at least six inches in
height on the main panel of the rear door on each side of the taxicab and also
upon the rear of such taxicab.
   (C)   There shall also be affixed to a conspicuous and indispensable part of
each taxicab a small plate not exceeding six inches in diameter, which shall
bear the license number of the vehicle. The design of the plates shall be
changed annually.
(Prior Code, § 120.19) (Ord. 1552, passed 3-11-1946; Ord. 1565, passed 2-10-
1947) Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.20 NAME OF OWNER ONLY ON DOOR.
   Every vehicle licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall have the
name of the owner only thereof plainly painted in letters that are at least two
inches in height in the center of the main panel of the rear door of the
vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 120.20) (Ord. 1552, passed 3-11-1946) Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.21 FEES.
   The annual license fee to be paid for each taxicab shall be $25; provided
that, in case of a license issued on or after July 1 in any year hereafter the
fee shall be $150. All licenses shall expire on December 31 following their
issuance.
(Prior Code, § 120.21) (Ord. 1552, passed 3-11-1946)
§ 120.22 REGISTER OF LICENSED VEHICLES.
   The City Clerk shall keep a register of the name of each person owning or
operating a vehicle licensed under this chapter, together with the license
number and the description, make and necessary dimensions of such vehicles,
with the date and complete record of inspections made of it. The records shall
be open to the inspection of the public at all reasonable times, and shall be
public records, extracts of which may be certified for use as evidence by the
City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 120.22) (Ord. 1552, passed 3-11-1946)
§ 120.23 INSPECTIONS PERFORMED FROM TIME TO TIME; WRITTEN REPORT.
   All taxicabs may be inspected by the officers, agents or employees of the
city from time to time and, upon written complaint, shall be inspected as often
as necessary. Reports in writing of all inspections shall be made promptly to
the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 120.23) (Ord. 1552, passed 3-11-1946)
§ 120.24 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSES.
   Licenses granted under this chapter may be revoked or suspended at any time
by the Mayor or the City Council if the vehicle shall not be in good condition
and appearance, clean and safe. Licenses when so suspended or revoked shall not
be reissued until the vehicle and all appurtenances shall be put in fit
condition for use by the public to the satisfaction of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 120.24) (Ord. 1552, passed 3-11-1946)
§ 120.25 APPLICATION FOR DRIVER’S LICENSES.
   (A)   Every person driving a taxicab must be licensed as such.
   (B)   Each applicant for a driver’s license must:
      (1)   Be of the age of 18 years or over;
      (2)   Be of sound physique, with good eyesight and not subject to
epilepsy, vertigo, heart trouble or any other infirmity of body or mind which
might render such person unfit for the safe operation of a public taxicab;
      (3)   Be able to read and write the English language;
      (4)   Be clean in dress and person and not be addicted to the use of
intoxicating liquors;
      (5)   Produce on forms to be provided by the City Clerk, affidavits of
the applicant’s good character from two reputable citizens of the city who have
known the applicant personally and observed the applicant’s conduct during one
year next preceding the date of the applicant’s application, and a further
testimonial, on a form provided for that purpose, from the applicant’s last
employer, unless in the estimation of the City Clerk, sufficient reason is
given for its omission; and
      (6)   Fill out upon a blank form to be provided by the City Clerk a
statement giving the applicant’s full name, residence, place of residence for
five years previous to moving to the applicant’s present address, age, color,
height, color of eyes and hair, place of birth, length of time the applicant
has resided in the city, whether a citizen of the United States, places of
previous employment, whether married or single, whether the applicant has ever
been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, whether the applicant has been
summoned to court, whether the applicant has previously been licensed as a
driver or chauffeur and if so, whether the applicant’s license has ever been
revoked and for what cause, which statement shall be signed and sworn to by the
applicant and filed with the City Clerk, as a permanent record.
(Prior Code, § 120.25) (Ord. 1552, passed 3-11-1946) Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.26 FORM AND TERM OF DRIVER’S LICENSE.
   (A)   Upon satisfactory fulfillment of the foregoing requirements, there
shall be issued to the applicant by the City Clerk a license, which shall be in
such form as to contain the photograph and signature of the licensee and blank
spaces upon which a record may be made of any arrest of or serious complaint
against the driver.
   (B)   Any licensee who defaces, removes or obliterates any official entry
made upon the licensee’s license shall be punished by the revocation of the
license.
   (C)   Driver’s licenses shall be issued as of January 1 in each and every
year, and shall be valid to and including December 31 next succeeding.
(Prior Code, § 120.26) (Ord. 1552, passed 3-11-1946)
§ 120.27 FEES FOR DRIVER’S LICENSE.
   The following license fees shall be paid for drivers’ licenses:
   (A)   For each original license: $3; and
   (B)   For each renewal thereof: $1.
(Prior Code, § 120.27) (Ord. 1552, passed 3-11-1946)
§ 120.28 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF DRIVER’S LICENSE.
   (A)   (1)   Driver’s licenses may be suspended or revoked at any time by the
Mayor or the City Council.
      (2)   Any suspension shall be noted on the license, together with a
statement of the reasons therefor, and the driver shall be deprived of his or
her badge by the official suspending or revoking such license.
      (3)   When the license is suspended or revoked by an official other than
the City Council, the driver’s badge and a note of the revocation or suspension
shall be forwarded to the City Council, the badge to be returned at the
expiration of the period for which the license was suspended. A second
suspension for the same reason or, in any case, a third suspension of a
driver’s license shall revoke the license.
   (B)   No driver whose license has been revoked shall again be licensed as a
public taxicab driver in the city, unless upon the presentation of reasons
satisfactory to the City Council or, in a case where a license has been
suspended or revoked by the Mayor, the approval of the Mayor shall be necessary
to the restoration or reissue of such license.
   (C)   The City Council shall notify the Police Department whenever such a
license is revoked.
(Prior Code, § 120.28) (Ord. 1552, passed 3-11-1946)
§ 120.29 RECORD OF DRIVER’S LICENSES.
   (A)   There shall be kept by the City Clerk a complete record of each
license issued to a driver, and of all renewals, suspensions and revocations
thereof.
   (B)   The record shall be kept on file with the original application of the
driver for a license.
(Prior Code, § 120.29) (Ord. 1552, passed 3-11-1946)
FARES AND OPERATIONS
§ 120.40 TAXIMETERS.
   (A)   When required. Every taxicab shall have affixed thereto a taximeter of
a size and design approved by the City Council.
   (B)   Inspection. No license shall be issued to a taxicab until the
taximeter attached thereto shall have been inspected and found to be accurate.
   (C)   Inaccuracy. No person shall use or permit to be used upon any taxicab
a taximeter which shall be in such condition as to be over 5% incorrect to the
prejudice of any passenger.
   (D)   Wheel operated, prohibited. No taximeter affixed to a taxicab shall be
operated from any wheel to which the power is applied.
   (E)   Illumination of dial. After sundown the face of every taximeter shall
be illuminated by a suitable light, so arranged as to throw a continuous,
steady light thereon.
   (F)   Case to be sealed. No person shall use or permit to be used, or drive
for hire a taxicab equipped with a taximeter the case of which is unsealed and
not having its cover and gear intact.
   (G)   False signal. No driver of a taxicab equipped with a taximeter or
other similar device while carrying passengers or under employment shall
display the signal affixed to such taximeter or other similar device in such
position as to denote such vehicle is not employed, or in such position as to
denote that he or she is employed at a rate of fare different from that to
which the driver is entitled under the provisions of this chapter.
   (H)   Unapproved taximeter. No person shall drive a taxicab to which is
attached a taximeter that has not been duly inspected and approved as herein
provided.
(Prior Code, § 120.40) (Ord. 1552, passed 3-11-1946) Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.41 RATES OF FARES.
   (A)   General. No person, firm or corporation owning, operating or
controlling any motor vehicle operated as a taxicab within the limits of the
city shall charge to exceed the following rates to be determined by the
taximeter:
      (1)   Flag rate: this rate is the permitted rate to be charged regardless
of distance traveled: $1;
      (2)   For each succeeding one-tenth of one mile or fraction thereof for
one person: $0.13;
      (3)   For each one minute of waiting time or fraction thereof: $0.10;
      (4)   For each additional passenger for entire trip: $0.10;
      (5)   Trunks: $0.25;
      (6)   Meter and one-half on all legal holidays;
      (7)    Surcharge on trips in town: $0.10; and
      (8)   Surcharge on out-of-town trips: 10%.
   (B)   Waiting time.
      (1)   Waiting time shall include the time when the taxicab is not in
motion, beginning with the arrival at the place to which it has been called, or
the time consumed while standing at the direction of the passenger.
      (2)   No charge shall be made for time lost for inefficiency of the
taxicab or its operator or time consumed by premature response to a call.
   (C)   Receipts. If demanded by the passenger, the driver in charge of a
taxicab shall deliver to the person paying for the hiring of the same at the
time of the payment a receipt in legible type or writing containing the name of
the owner, or the taximeter number and any items for which a charge is made,
the total amount paid and the date of payment.
(Prior Code, § 120.41) (Ord. 1552, passed 3-11-1946; Ord. 2046, passed 9-27-
1967; Ord. 2244, passed 7-8-1974; Ord. 2385, passed 1-10-1978; Ord. 2480,
passed 10-9-1979; Ord. 90-202, passed 1-23-1990) Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.42 PREPAYMENT OF FARE.
   (A)   Every driver of a taxicab has the right to demand payment of the legal
fare in advance and may refuse employment unless prepaid, but no driver of a
taxicab shall otherwise refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person upon
request anywhere in the city unless previously engaged or unable to do so.
   (B)   No driver of a licensed taxicab shall carry any other person than the
first passenger first employing a taxicab without the consent of that
passenger.
(Prior Code, § 120.42) (Ord. 1552, passed 3-11-1946) Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.43 DISPUTES AS TO FARES.
   (A)   All disputes concerning fares shall be determined by the officer in
charge of the city police station.
   (B)   Failure to comply with that determination shall subject the offending
party to a charge of disorderly conduct.
(Prior Code, § 120.43) (Ord. 1552, passed 3-11-1946)
§ 120.44 OVERCHARGING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall charge or attempt to charge any passenger a greater rate of
fare than that to which the taxicab is entitled under the provisions of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 120.44) (Ord. 1552, passed 3-11-1946) Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.45 ARTICLES LOST IN TAXICABS.
   Any article left in or upon any vehicle mentioned in §
120.01 of this chapter shall be delivered to the desk sergeant at the police
station at the city.
(Prior Code, § 120.45) (Ord. 1552, passed 3-11-1946)
§ 120.46 OPPORTUNITY TO EXAMINE TAXIMETERS.
   It shall be the duty of the operator or driver of every taxicab, the
occupant of which is being charged taximeter rates, to announce the charge at
the termination of the service to the person hiring the taxicab, and to give
the person an opportunity to examine the taximeter as to the charge shown.
(Prior Code, § 120.46) (Ord. 1552, passed 3-11-1946)
§ 120.47 RATE CARD TO BE FIXED IN VEHICLE.
   There shall be fixed in each vehicle mentioned in §
120.01 of this chapter, which is used for the conveyance of passengers for
hire, a card containing the name of the owner of the vehicle and number of the
owner’s license and the rates of fare established. The card shall be so fixed
that it can be conveniently read by any person riding in such vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 120.47) (Ord. 1552, passed 3-11-1946)
§ 120.48 BOND TO BE GIVEN BY OWNER.
   Every owner of a vehicle described in §
120.01 of this chapter shall file with the City Clerk either:
   (A)   A bond or bonds to the amount of $5,000 for each taxicab operated by
the owner. The bond or bonds shall have either personal sureties, which bond or
bonds shall be approved in the same manner as other bonds on which personal
sureties are offered or a solvent and responsible surety company. The bond or
bonds shall be conditioned that the owner of the vehicle will pay all final
judgments recovered against the owner for any injury to or death of any person
resulting from the negligence of the owner or the owner’s agent in the
operation of the vehicle, and the bond or bonds shall by terms inure to the
benefit of the person recovering any such judgment; or
   (B)   A policy or policies of insurance in a solvent and responsible company
authorized to do business in the state insuring the owner of the vehicle
against liability for any injury to or death of any person resulting from the
negligence of such owner or the owner’s agent in the operation of such vehicle.
The policy or policies of insurance shall be in the sum of $5,000 for all
vehicles operated by the owner and shall provide for payment and satisfaction
of any final judgment rendered against the owner of the vehicle for such injury
or death.
(Prior Code, § 120.48) (Ord. 1552, passed 3-11-1946)
§ 120.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any owner or driver of a vehicle not licensed and equipped in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, or of a vehicle the license of
which has been suspended or revoked, who engages in the business of operating a
taxicab or taxicabs, or solicits for hire passengers upon the streets within
the city, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less
than $50, nor more than $750.
   (B)   Any person not having been duly licensed as required by the motor
vehicle laws of the state or any such person whose license as such driver has
been revoked or suspended driving for hire a vehicle as defined in §
120.01 of this chapter shall, upon conviction, thereof, be punished by a fine
of not less than $50, nor more than $750.
   (C)   In addition to the fine authorized hereinabove, any licensee shall be
subject to the suspension or revocation of his or her license upon any
conviction for any violation of this chapter or as otherwise herein provided.
   (D)   Any owner or driver of a vehicle violating or failing to comply with
the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not
less than $50, nor more than $750, for each offense and a separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
(Prior Code, § 120.99) (Ord. 1552, passed 3-11-1946; Ord. 2046, passed 9-27-
1967; Ord. 2480, passed 10-9-1979)
CHAPTER 121: SCAVENGERS, PEDDLERS AND MERCHANTS
Section
Scavengers
   
121.01   Definition
   
121.02   Application for license
   
121.03   Restrictions
   
121.04   License revocation
   
121.05   Effective date
Peddlers and Solicitors
   
121.20   Definitions
   
121.21   License required
   
121.22   Application for license
   
121.23   Issuance of license; fee
   
121.24   Regulation of solicitors for charitable solicitation
   
121.25   Reserved
   
121.26   Regulations applicable to all soliciting and peddling
   
121.27   Permitted places of peddling and soliciting
   
121.28   Itinerant vendors; food peddlers
   
121.29   Revocation of license
Commission Merchants and Dealers
   
121.40   Definition
   
121.41   License required
   
121.42   Application for license
   
121.43   License fee
 
   
121.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Contractors and Builders; Construction, see
Ch. 118
   Junk and Secondhand Dealers, see
Ch. 116
SCAVENGERS
§ 121.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SCAVENGER or JUNK DEALER. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or
other entity who collects, procures and/or obtains items whether by a motor
vehicle or by a push cart which have been discarded, thrown away or set out for
collection by the city’s Public Works Department or any other trash collection
service.
(Prior Code, § 121.01) (Ord. 12-165, passed 2-28-2012)
§ 121.02 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Application for a scavenger’s license shall be made upon a form provided by
the City Clerk’s office. Every person, firm, corporation, partnership or other
entity shall truthfully state in full the information requested on the
application (set out in Exhibit A to the ordinance codified herein). The
application shall be investigated by the Police Department to verify the
requested information. Upon verification of the requested information and upon
payment of the yearly license fee of $100, a non-transferrable license shall
issue within 14 days of the application. A placard or sticker will be issued to
the licensee showing the expiration date of the license which must be displayed
in the vehicle’s front window or attached to the cart when the licensee is
engaged in scavenging or junk dealing activities.
(Prior Code, § 121.02) (Ord. 12-165, passed 2-28-2012)
§ 121.03 RESTRICTIONS.
   The following restrictions shall apply when a licensee is engaged in
scavenging or junk dealing activities.
   (A)   No licensee shall collect, obtain, possess or pick up any item or
items placed in a recyclable bin.
   (B)   No licensee shall trespass on private property.
   (C)   No licensee shall operate a vehicle where the load protrudes more than
18 inches over the bed of the vehicle.
   (D)   No licensee shall operate a motor vehicle without covering and
securing the load.
   (E)   No licensee shall park a vehicle with scavenged goods on any city
street or city parking lots.
   (F)   No licensee shall engage in scavenging or junk dealing activities
between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 121.03) (Ord. 12-165, passed 2-28-2012) Penalty, see §
121.99
§ 121.04 LICENSE REVOCATION.
   Any license issued according to this subchapter maybe revoked after proper
notice and hearing before the Judiciary Committee or other appropriate
committee upon a finding of a violation of this subchapter, or any other
ordinance of the city, or any state or federal law.
(Prior Code, § 121.04) (Ord. 12-165, passed 2-28-2012)
§ 121.05 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage, approval and publication in pamphlet form as provided by law. A full,
true and complete copy of this subchapter shall be published in pamphlet form,
by authority of the City Council as corporate authorities.
(Prior Code, § 121.05) (Ord. 12-165, passed 2-28-2012)
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
§ 121.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. Any person or entity that has filed an application for a
commercial or noncommercial solicitation permit as hereinafter provided.
   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION.
      (I)   Any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, or eleemosynary person or
one purporting to be such which solicits and collects funds for charitable
purposes and includes each local, county, or area division of such charitable
organization, provided such local, county or area division has authority and
discretion to disburse funds or property otherwise than by transfer to any
parent organization;
      (2)   A not-for-profit organization incorporated pursuant to 805 ILCS
110/0.01 and 805 ILCS 110/35; or
      (3)   Any other organization that has been granted tax-exempt status from
the State of Illinois or the Internal Revenue Service pursuant to Section 501
(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.
   CHARITABLE PURPOSE. Any charitable, benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, or
eleemosynary purpose.
   CHARITABLE SOLICITATION. Any person seeking to obtain gifts or contributions
of money, clothing or any other valuable thing for the support or benefit of
any charitable or nonprofit association, organization, corporation or project
who engages in the activities of soliciting or canvassing upon any premises
within the city.
   COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION. Solicitation which is not conducted for any
charitable purpose or political purpose, or on behalf of any charitable
organization, as those terms are defined herein.
   ITINERANT VENDOR. Every itinerant merchant and every person who, by himself,
herself or by another, within the limits of the city, engages in or conducts a
temporary or transient business of selling goods, wares or merchandise with the
intention of continuing in such business in the city for a period of not more
120 days, and who, for the purpose of carrying on such business, uses, leases
or occupies, either in whole or in part, a room, building or other structure,
for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares or merchandise, shall be
deemed an ITINERANT VENDOR of merchandise. All regulations applicable to
peddlers shall apply to itinerant vendors, except §
121.27 of this chapter.
   NONCOMMERICAL SOLICITATION. Solicitation for a charitable purpose or
political purpose or on behalf of a charitable organization as those terms are
defined herein.
   NONRESIDENTIAL PREMISES. All buildings, structures, and units in the city
occupied for nonresidential purposes.
   PEDDLER. Every person who shall sell or offer for sale, barter or exchange
any goods, wares, merchandise or other commodities, traveling from place to
place on, along or upon the streets of the city, or who shall sell and deliver
from any wagon, pushcart or other vehicle going from place to place, any goods,
wares, merchandise, meat, poultry, fish, cheese, lard, vegetables, bread,
bakery products or other commodities.
   POLITICAL PURPOSE. Any activity in support of bona-fide candidates for
public office, or any matter related to the election, nomination, or
performance of public officials, or issues presented to the electorate at any
election.
   RESIDENCE. Every separate living unit in the village occupied for
residential purposes by one or more persons, contained within any type of
building or structure.
   SOLICITING. 
      (1)   The act of any person traveling by foot, vehicle or any other type
of conveyance who goes from residence to residence, business to business, from
place to place or in or along any highway, street or sidewalk within the city
either:
         (a)   Requesting. either directly or indirectly, money, credit, funds,
contributions, personal property or anything of value;
         (b)   Collecting money, funds, contributions, personal property or
anything of value solicited telephonically or electronically;
         (c)   Taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of any goods,
wares, merchandise or services of any kind or description for future delivery
or for services to be performed in the future, in person or by the in-person
distribution of flyers and leaflets; and
         (d)   Selling and making immediate delivery any goods, wares,
merchandise or services of any kind or description, commonly referred to as
"peddling". Solicitation shall be deemed completed when attempted, whether or
not the person making the solicitation actually receives any contribution,
whether monetary or otherwise, or makes any sale or other transaction in the
process of soliciting.
      (2)   SOLICITING shall not include: any person not requesting, either
directly or indirectly, money, credit, funds, contributions, personal property
or anything of value:
         (a)   A person communicating or otherwise conveying ideas, views or
beliefs or otherwise disseminating oral or written information to a person
willing to directly receive such information, provided that such information is
of a political, religious or charitable nature;
         (b)   A person seeking to influence the personal belief of the
occupant of any residence or business in regard to any political or religious
matter;
         (c)   A person seeking to obtain, from an occupant of any residence or
business, an indication of the occupant's belief in regard to any political or
religious matter;
         (d)   A person conducting a poll, survey or petition drive in regard
to any political matter; and
         (e)   A person carrying, conveying, delivering or transporting dairy
products newspapers or other goods to regular customers on established routes
or to the premises of any person who had previously ordered such products or
goods and is entitled to receive the same. Solicitation shall also not include
seeking or obtaining nominal contributions such as gifts, food, candy or
contributions of money as is customarily and commonly known as "trick-or-treat"
in the celebration of Halloween day.
(Prior Code, § 121.20) (Ord. 2650, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 2023-034, passed 6-
27-2023)
§ 121.21 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   The City Administrator and his/her designee shall have the following
powers and duties, which shall at all times be performed without consideration
of the content or viewpoint of the information being distributed by a
solicitor:
      (1)   To administer and rule upon the applications for, and the issuance,
renewal, suspension, denial and revocation of permits as set forth in this
chapter.
      (2)   To take such further actions as the City Administrator and his/her
designee shall deem necessary to carry out the purposes and intent of this
chapter and to exercise such additional powers in furtherance thereof as are
implied or incident to those powers and duties expressly set forth in this
chapter.
   (B)   Solicitation licenses.
      (1)   A commercial or non-commercial solicitation license shall be
required to solicit within the city.
      (2)   Solicitation without permit prohibited. lt shall be unlawful for
any person not in possession of a current and valid commercial or noncommercial
solicitation license to solicit within the city at any time after the effective
date of this chapter.
      (3)   Solicitation without permit displayed. It shall be unlawful for any
person to solicit within the city at any time if a current and valid commercial
or non-commercial solicitation license is not displayed in plain view on the
person who is soliciting after the effective date of this chapter.
      (4)   Solicitation in violation of license prohibited. lt shall be
unlawful for any holder of a commercial or non-commercial solicitation license
to solicit except in the manner authorized by, and in compliance with, the
provisions of this chapter.
      (5)   Assignment or transfer of license prohibited. It shall be unlawful
for any holder of a commercial or non-commercial solicitation license to assign
or transfer a commercial or non-commercial solicitation license.
(Prior Code, § 121.21) (Ord. 2650, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 2023-034, passed 6-
27-2023) Penalty, see §
121.99
§ 121.22 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Application for a license shall be made upon a form provided by the
City Administrator or his/her designee. The applicant shall verify under oath
or other similar affirmation that the statements made by the applicant in the
application are true, complete and accurate. In addition to the information
required by the application of a business license, the applicant shall
truthfully state in full the information requested on the application, to wit:
      (1)   Name and address of present place of residence and length of
residence at such address; business address if other than residence address;
also Social Security number;
      (2)   Address of place of residence during the past three years, if other
than present address;
      (3)   Physical description of the applicant;
      (4)   Name and address of the person, firm or corporation or association
by whom the applicant is employed or represents, and the length of time of such
employment or representation;
      (5)   Name and address of employer during the past three years, if other
than the present employer;
      (6)   Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of
the soliciting in which the applicant will engage;
      (7)   Period of time for which the license is sought;
      (8)   The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application
for license under this chapter, if
any;
      (9)   Whether a license issued to the applicant by the city, or any other
municipality, has ever been revoked;
      (10)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of
any of the provisions of this subchapter or ordinance of any other Illinois
municipality regulating soliciting;
      (11)   Evidence that the applicant is authorized to solicit for the
organization represented; and
      (12)   Whether the applicant has been convicted of a felony within the
preceding ten years, or convicted of a misdemeanor or ordinance violation
within the preceding five years, and the nature of the offense.
   (B)   If, during the pendency of any application for, or during the term of
any commercial solicitation permit there is any change in any material
information given in the application for such license, the applicant shall
promptly notify the City Administrator or his/her designee in writing of such
change.
   (C)   A commercial solicitation license shall expire 90 days after the date
of issuance.
   (D)   A commercial solicitation license may be renewed by the applicant by
reaffirming that the information in the prior application remains true,
complete and accurate, or by submitting a new application, with any information
that has changed from the prior application, and provided that the applicable
requirements contained in this section are satisfied.
(Prior Code, § 121.22) (Ord. 2650, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 2023-034, passed 6-
27-2023)
§ 121.23 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; FEE.
   The application for license shall be investigated by the Police Department
and City Administrator or his/her designee. If the requirements contained in
this chapter are not satisfied, the City Administrator or his/her designee
shall deny the application and state the reasons in writing for such denial. If
during the investigation or if the application discloses a conviction of a
misdemeanor or a felony, the prior revocation of a license or a conviction of
any ordinance regulating peddlers or solicitors, and if the conviction of a
felony has occurred within the last ten years and if the conviction of a
misdemeanor or ordinance violation or revocation of a license has occurred
within the last five years, and if the conviction bears a reasonable
relationship to the peddling and soliciting activities by the licensee, then
the license shall not be issued. The fee for a commercial solicitation license
shall be $250.
(Prior Code, § 121.23) (Ord. 2650, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 2023-034, passed 6-
27-2023)
§ 121.24 REGULATION OF SOLICITORS FOR CHARITABLE SOLICITATION.
   (A)   (1)   Charitable solicitors for funds must comply with the
Solicitation for Charity Act, 225 ILCS 460/0.01 et seq., if applicable, and
must register with the City Clerk at least three days prior to soliciting
funds.
      (2)   The applicant in registering must furnish all the information
required in the application for license provided in §
121.22 of this chapter and evidence of compliance with 225 ILCS 460/0.01 et
seq., if applicable, but no license fee or license shall be required.
   (B)   Solicitors for funds for organizations that have had a fixed place of
operation in the city for over two years shall be exempt from registering under
this section; provided, said organization has on file in the city, at a place
accessible to the City Clerk, a list of names and addresses of its solicitors
available for inspection; and, providing that, said organization is in
compliance with the act to regulate solicitors referred to in this section.
(Prior Code, § 121.24) (Ord. 2650, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 2023-034, passed 6-
27-2023)
§ 121.25 RESERVED.
§ 121.26 REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL SOLICITING AND PEDDLING.
   (A)   No person shall engage in solicitation or peddling upon any private
property after having been asked by the owner or occupant thereof to leave such
property.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in peddling or
solicitation upon any private premises or residence or business located thereof
if such premises or residence or business is posted against solicitation or
peddling by means of a notice prominently displayed upon which is printed the
legend.
“NO SOLICITORS OR PEDDLERS”
      (2)   For purposes of the preceding sentence, a private property shall be
deemed to be posted against solicitation or peddling if there is exhibited, on
or near the main entrance to the property or on or near the main door to any
structure located thereon, a sign at least three inches by four inches in size
and with the letters at least one-third the height, which bears the above
legend.
      (3)   Signs complying with the foregoing requirements may be obtained, at
cost, at the office of the City Collector by persons requesting the same.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct solicitation of
employment, business, contributions or sales of any kind or collect money for
such from the occupant of any vehicle traveling upon any street or highway
when:
      (1)   The solicitation or collection causes the person performing the
activity to enter onto the traveled portion of a street or highway;
      (2)   The solicitation or collection involves the person performing the
activity to be located upon any median area which separates traffic lanes for
vehicular travel in opposite directions; or
      (3)   The person performing the activity is located such that vehicles
cannot move into a legal parking area to safely conduct the transaction.
   For purposes of this section, the traveled portion of the street or highway
shall mean that portion of the road normally used by moving motor vehicle
traffic.
   (D)   Notwithstanding the prohibition contained in paragraph (C) above, it
shall be lawful for a charitable organization, as defined in Section 2 of the
Charitable Games Act (230 ILCS 30/2) and §
121.20 of this chapter, to solicit for charitable purposes, including
solicitations taking place on public roadways from passing motorists, if all of
the following requirements are met:
      (1) The persons to be engaged in the solicitation are law enforcement
personnel, firefighters, or other persons employed by the city to protect the
public safety of the city, and that are soliciting solely in an area that is
within the city, or the persons to be engaged in the solicitation are
authorized by the charitable organization to solicit on its behalf, and all of
such persons are at least 18 years of age.
      (2) The charitable organization files an application with the city. The
application shall be filed not later than ten business days before the date
that the solicitation is to begin and shall include all of the following:
         (a)   The date or dates and times of day when solicitation is to
occur.
         (b)   The location or locations where the solicitation is to occur,
along with a list of three alternate locations listed in order of preference.
         (c)   The manner and conditions under which the solicitation is to
occur.
         (d)   Proof of a valid liability insurance policy in the amount of at
least $1,000,000 insuring the charity and city against bodily injury and
property damage arising out of or in connection with the solicitation.
   The city may impose reasonable conditions in writing that are consistent
with the intent of Section 11-80-9 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/
11-80-9) and are based on articulated public safety concerns. If the city
determines that the applicant's location cannot be permitted due to significant
safety concerns, such as high traffic volumes, poor geometries, construction,
maintenance operations, or past accident history, then the city may deny the
application for that location and must approve one of the three alternate
locations following the order of preference submitted by the applicant on the
alternate location list.
      (3)   Any solicitation conducted by persons on behalf of a charitable
organization that is not limited to law enforcement personnel, firefighters, or
other person employed to protect the public safety of the city, shall be
limited to two days per calendar year.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in commercial
solicitation, or charitable solicitation or any other type of solicitation
prior to 10:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. local time for the period of November 1
through and including April 30; and prior to 10:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m.
local time for the period of May 1 through and including October 31.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to cheat, deceive or
fraudulently misrepresent any product or the price thereof, whether through
himself, herself or through an employee, while acting as a peddler or solicitor
in the city, or to barter, sell or peddle any goods, merchandise or wares other
than those specified in the application for a license.
   (G)   No solicitor or peddler shall interfere with either vehicular or
pedestrian traffic on the public right-of-way.
   (H)   No peddler or solicitor shall peddle or solicit by shouting or by
using any sound device in connection with peddling or soliciting; including
bells or amplifying systems.
(Prior Code, § 121.26) (Ord. 2650, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 11-152, passed 12-13-
2011; Ord. 2023-034, passed 6-27-2023) Penalty, see §
121.99
§ 121.27 PERMITTED PLACES OF PEDDLING AND SOLICITING.
   (A)   So that there is not an unreasonable interference with pedestrian and
vehicular traffic and so that the activities of the peddler or solicitor do not
unreasonably burden any particular property owner, business or area, no person
may peddle or solicit for a period in excess of 30 minutes within the same
block in any day.
   (B)   A BLOCK is defined as that portion of a street, including both sides
measured between two other streets, that either intersect or junction with said
street.
(Prior Code, § 121.27) (Ord. 2650, passed 3-27-1984) Penalty, see §
121.99
§ 121.28 ITINERANT VENDORS; FOOD PEDDLERS.
   All itinerant vendors and all peddlers of food shall comply with all
applicable regulations of the city code, as well as all other applicable laws
relating to itinerant vendors and food peddlers.
(Prior Code, § 121.28) (Ord. 2650, passed 3-27-1984) Penalty, see §
121.99
§ 121.29 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   Any license issued to a peddler or solicitor according to this chapter may
be revoked by the City Administrator or his/her designee after proper notice
and hearing, because of any violation of this chapter, or of any other
ordinance of the city, or of any state or federal law, or whenever the
registrant shall cease to possess the qualifications and character required in
this chapter for the original registration.
(Prior Code, § 121.29) (Ord. 2650, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 2023-034, passed 6-
27-2023)
COMMISSION MERCHANTS AND DEALERS
§ 121.40 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMISSION MERCHANT or COMMISSION DEALER. One who negotiates, buys, sells,
trades, leases or handles for others on a commission basis, any grain,
provisions, produce, live stock, goods, wares, merchandise or other commodity;
provided that a dealer in real estate shall not come under the provisions of
this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 121.40)
§ 121.41 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business of a commission merchant or
commission dealer without first securing a license so to do.
(Prior Code, § 121.41)
§ 121.42 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Any person desiring to engage in the business of commission merchant or
commission dealer, as above defined, shall make application to the City Clerk
for a license so to do. The application shall state the name of the applicant,
the place where the business is to be carried on and any other information
desired by the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 121.42)
§ 121.43 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual license fee to be paid by such applicant shall be $50 per year,
in accordance with the fee schedule. All licenses shall expire on April 30
after date of issuance and any license issued for a period of less than one
year shall be reduced pro rata.
(Prior Code, § 121.43) (Ord. 1669, passed 4-14-1952)
§ 121.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision of §§
121.01 through
121.05 of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than
$50, nor more than $250, for each offense.
   (C)   Any person or entity who shall be guilty of a violation of any of the
provisions of §§
121.20 through
121.24 or
121.26 through
121.29 shall be subject to a fine of not less than $75 and not more than $750.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed for every day a violation
continues. The provisions of this section shall not limit any other remedies
authorized by law.
(Prior Code, § 121.99) (Ord. 12-165, passed 2-28-2012; Ord. 2023-034, passed 6-
27-2023)
CHAPTER 122: CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICES
Section
Customer Protection
   
122.001   Purpose and scope
   
122.002   Adoption of Consumer Service and Privacy Protection Law; amendments
   
122.003   Enforcement
   
122.004   Customer credits
   
122.005   Effective date
Provider Fee and PEG Access Support Fee
   
122.020   Findings
   
122.021   Definitions
   
122.022   Cable/video service provider fee imposed
   
122.023   PEG access support fee imposed
   
122.024   Applicable principles
   
122.025   No impact on other taxes due from holder
   
122.026   Audits of cable/video service provider
   
122.027   Late fees and payments
   
122.028   Effective date
Cable Communications Franchises
   
122.040   Title
   
122.041   Purposes
   
122.042   Definitions
   
122.043   Grant of franchise
   
122.044   Requirement of a franchise
   
122.045   Franchise nonexclusive; limiting number of franchises
   
122.046   Franchise area
   
122.047   Term of the franchise
   
122.048   Franchise applications
   
122.049   Surety or guaranty agreement required
   
122.050   Contents of franchise agreement
   
122.051   Franchise fees
   
122.052   Assignment or transfer of franchise
   
122.053   Franchise renewal
   
122.054   Right to purchase system
   
122.055   Continuity of service
   
122.056   Procedures in the event of termination or expiration
   
122.057   Regulatory authority
   
122.058   Regulatory responsibility
   
122.059   Technological, service and performance review
   
122.060   Rates
   
122.061   Security fund
   
122.062   Construction and completion security
   
122.063   Insurance
   
122.064   Indemnification
   
122.065   System design
   
122.066   Emergency override
   
122.067   Service to franchise area
   
122.068   Extension of system
   
122.069   Cablecasting facilities
   
122.070   Interconnection
   
122.071   Institutional network
   
122.072   System construction schedule
   
122.073   As built maps and drawings
   
122.074   Construction standards
   
122.075   Technical standards
   
122.076   System tests
   
122.077   Street occupancy
   
122.078   Provision of service
   
122.079   Services to be provided
   
122.080   Public sector subscriber service
   
122.081   Public, educational and government access channels and facilities
   
122.082   Cable channels for commercial use
   
122.083   Open books and records
   
122.084   Records and reports required
   
122.085   Annual reports
   
122.086   Copies of federal and state reports
   
122.087   Liquidated damages
   
122.088   Franchise violation; notice and procedure
   
122.089   Franchise revocation and termination
   
122.090   Other remedies
   
122.091   Rights of individuals
   
122.092   Consumer protection and customer service provisions
   
122.093   Rights reserved to the city
   
122.094   Equal opportunity employer
   
122.095   No waiver by the city
 
   
122.999   Penalty
CUSTOMER PROTECTION
§ 122.001 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   Findings.
      (1)   The city has the authority to adopt ordinances and to promulgate
rules and regulations that pertain to its government and affairs and that
protect the public health, safety and welfare of its citizens.
      (2)   This subchapter is adopted pursuant to the Cable and Video Customer
Protection Law (220 ILCS 5/22-501 et seq.) authorizing a city to enforce all of
the customer service and privacy protection standards of the section.
      (3)   The city desires to enforce the customer service and privacy
protection standards with respect to complaints received from residents as
provided by the Cable and Video Customer Protection Law.
   (B)   Adoption of Cable and Video Customer Protection Law, 220 ILCS 5/22-501
et seq. All prior city cable televisions ordinances, including Ord. 2450, 01-
360, 2001-375, 2001-376 and 2001-377, are hereby amended by the adoption of
this subchapter, and where inconsistent with this subchapter, this subchapter
shall supersede said prior ordinance or ordinances, as follows: Cable and Video
Customer Protection Law.
(Prior Code, § 122.001) (Ord. 07-104, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 122.002 ADOPTION OF CONSUMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW; AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Adoption. The regulations of 220 ILCS 5/22-501 et seq. are hereby
adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video providers
offering services within the city’s boundaries.
   (B)   Amendments. Any amendment to the Cable and Video Customer Protection
Law that becomes effective after the effective date of this subchapter shall be
incorporated into this subchapter by reference and shall be applicable to cable
or video providers offering services within the city’s boundaries. However, any
amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities
shall not be incorporated into this subchapter by reference without formal
action by the corporate authorities of the city.
(Prior Code, § 122.002) (Ord. 07-104, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 122.003 ENFORCEMENT.
   The city does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of
the customer service and privacy protection standards of the Cable and Video
Protection Law, 220 ILCS 5/22-501 et seq. with respect to complaints received
from residents within the city.
(Prior Code, § 122.003) (Ord. 07-104, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 122.004 CUSTOMER CREDITS.
   (A)   The city hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for
violations.
   (B)   Those credits shall be as provided for in the provisions of 220 ILCS
5/22-501 et seq. and applied on the statement issued to the customer for the
next billing cycle following the violation or following the discovery of the
violation.
   (C)   The cable or video provider is responsible for providing the credits
and the customer is under no obligation to request the credit.
(Prior Code, § 122.004) (Ord. 07-104, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 122.005 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage
and approval and publication as required by law. The provisions of this
subchapter as to incumbent cable operators take effect January 1, 2008.
(Prior Code, § 122.005) (Ord. 07-104, passed 10-9-2007)
PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS
SUPPORT FEE
§ 122.020 FINDINGS.
   (A)   Findings.
      (1)   The city has the authority to adopt ordinances and to promulgate
rules and regulations that pertain to its government and affairs and that
protect the public health, safety and welfare of its citizens.
      (2)   This subchapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of 220 ILCS
5/21-100 et seq., the Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007, Public
Act 95-0009 (the “Act”).
      (3)   This subchapter is intended to establish the service provider fee
and the PEG access support fee the Act authorizes municipalities to impose on a
holder under 220 ILCS 5/21-801.
   (B)   Adoption. All prior city cable televisions ordinances, including Ord.
2450, 01-360, 2001-375, 2001-376 and 2001-377, are hereby amended by the
adoption of this subchapter, and where inconsistent with this subchapter, this
subchapter shall supersede said prior ordinance or ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 122.020) (Ord. 07-105, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 122.021 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CABLE SERVICE. The term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).
   COMMISSION. The Illinois Commerce Commission.
   GROSS REVENUES.
      (1)   All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without
limitation, cash, credits, property and in-kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or
video service within the holder’s cable service or video service area within
the city.
      (2)   GROSS REVENUES shall include the following:
         (a)   Recurring charges for cable or video service;
         (b)   Event-based charges for cable service or video service,
including, but not limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand charges;
         (c)   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service
equipment;
         (d)   Service charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation and
repair charges;
         (e)   Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service
or video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service
termination charges;
         (f)   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges
and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent
payments;
         (g)   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its
affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation
of the holder’s network to provide cable service or video service within the
city. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the city
divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant regional
or national compensation arrangement;
         (h)   Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the
operation of the holder’s network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder’s network,
such as a “home shopping” or similar channel, subject to this division (2)(h);
         (i)   In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled
or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities or applications,
the portion of the holder’s revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from
its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business; and
         (j)   The service provider fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b).
      (3)   GROSS REVENUES do not include any of the following:
         (a)   Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad
debt, subject to 220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(l)(vi);
         (b)   Refunds, discounts or other price adjustments that reduce the
amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state-issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit or discount is
attributable to cable service or video service;
         (c)   Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received for a services not classified as cable service or video service,
including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services, or the provision of directory or Internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to non-
cable service or non-video service in accordance with the holder’s books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable
laws, rules, regulations, standards or orders;
         (d)   The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which
the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the
purchaser’s subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that
it will resell the service within the city and pay the fee permitted by 220
ILCS 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service;
         (e)   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the
subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal or any other
governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state-issued
authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales
and use taxes;
         (f)   Security deposits collected from subscribers; and
         (g)   Amounts paid by subscribers to “home shopping” or similar
vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part
of the cable service or video service.
      (4)   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the
calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the
payment of the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) which would otherwise be
paid by the cable service or video service.
   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-
401.
   PEG. Public, education and governmental.
   PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE. The amount paid under this subchapter and 220 ILCS
5/21-801(d) by the holder to the city for the service areas within its
territorial jurisdiction.
   SERVICE. The provision of “cable service” or “video service” to subscribers
and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the Commission
pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
   SERVICE PROVIDER FEE. The amount paid under this subchapter and 220 ILCS 5/
21-801 by the holder to a city for the service areas within its territorial
jurisdiction.
   VIDEO SERVICE. Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is
required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which
is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public
right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including Internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by
a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video
programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to
access content, information, electronic mail or other services offered over the
public Internet.
(Prior Code, § 122.021) (Ord. 07-105, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 122.022 CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED.
   (A)   Fee imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable
service or video service in the city.
   (B)   Amount of fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be 5% of the
holder’s gross revenues.
   (C)   Notice to the city. The holder shall notify the city at least ten days
prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or video
service in the city.
   (D)   Holder’s liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay the service
provider fee to the city. The holder’s liability for the fee shall commence on
the first day of the calendar month following 30 days after receipt of the
ordinance adopting this subchapter by the holder. This subchapter shall be sent
by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the holder’s application
notice sent pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6) to the city.
   (E)   Payment date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed,
the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall
include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
   (F)   Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the city in which a fee is paid.
   (G)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) with credit
for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the amount of such
credit from the fees that operator owes under division (B) above.
(Prior Code, § 122.022) (Ord. 07-105, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 122.023 PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED.
   (A)   PEG fee imposed. A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any
holder that is providing cable service or video service in the city in addition
to the fee imposed pursuant to §
122.022 of this chapter.
   (B)   Amount of fee. The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby
shall be 1% of the holder’s gross revenues or, if greater, the percentage of
gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the city or its designee
for PEG access support in the city.
   (C)   Payment. The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the city
or to the entity designated by the city to manage PEG access. The holder’s
liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date set forth
in §
122.022(D) of this chapter.
   (D)   Payment due. The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed,
the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall
include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
   (E)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) shall pay, at
the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for PEG access that
would have been due during the remaining term of the agreement had it not been
terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by an incumbent cable
operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be credited against the fees
that that operator owes under division (B) above.
(Prior Code, § 122.023) (Ord. 07-105, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 122.024 APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES.
   All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made
pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.
(Prior Code, § 122.024) (Ord. 07-105, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 122.025 NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from
any tax that is or may later be imposed by the city, including any tax that is
or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to
cable service or video service. A state-issued authorization shall not affect
any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the city’s simplified
municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any
telephone service provided by the holder. A state-issued authorization shall
not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local
unit of government’s 9-1-1 or E9-1-1 fees, taxes or charges.
(Prior Code, § 122.025)(Ord. 07-105, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 122.026 AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER.
   (A)   Audit requirement.
      (1)   The city will notify the holder of the requirements it imposes on
other cable service or video service providers to submit to an audit of its
books and records. The holder shall comply with the same requirements the city
imposes on other cable service or video service providers in its jurisdiction
to audit the holder’s books and records and to recompute any amounts determined
to be payable under the requirements of the city.
      (2)   If all local franchises between the city and cable operator
terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the city pursuant
to the Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.
      (3)   No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord
that the amounts are correct.
   (B)   Additional payments. Any additional amount due after an audit shall be
paid within 30 days after the city’s submission of an invoice for the sum.
(Prior Code, § 122.026) (Ord. 07-105, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 122.027 LATE FEES AND PAYMENTS.
   All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances
adopted by the city pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights
Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 122.027) (Ord. 07-105, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 122.028 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage
and approval and publication as required by law.
(Prior Code, § 122.028) (Ord. 07-105, passed 10-9-2007)
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISES
§ 122.040 TITLE.
   This subchapter may be cited as the “Blue Island Cable Communications
Enabling Ordinance”.
(Prior Code, § 122.040) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.041 PURPOSES.
   The purposes of this subchapter are:
   (A)   To establish franchise procedures and standards which encourage the
growth and development of cable systems within the city and which assure that
cable systems are responsive to the needs and interests of the local community;
   (B)   To assure that the city can continue to fairly and responsibly protect
the public health, safety and welfare;
   (C)   To establish a local policy concerning cable communications;
   (D)   To promote competition in cable television service;
   (E)   To establish local authority with respect, to the regulation of cable
systems to ensure that any cable operator will abide by all local ordinances,
rules and regulations;
   (F)   To provide for the development of cable communications as a means of
communication for and between the citizens and the public institutions of the
city;
   (G)   To provide for the payment of franchise fees to the city for the use
of the city streets and public ways in the construction and operation of a
cable communications system, and to compensate the city, to the extent
permitted by law, for costs both directly related and incidental to the
awarding of the cable television franchise;
   (H)   To provide for remedies and to prescribe penalties for violations of
this subchapter and for. any and all franchise agreements granted hereunder;
   (I)   To provide for consumer protection in regard to the construction and
operation of a cable system;
   (J)   To provide for the regulation, where allowed, of rates and fees
charged by a company under this subchapter; and
   (K)   To ensure that cable television subscribers receive high quality cable
communications service.
(Prior Code, § 122.041) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.042 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the singular number include the plural number, and words in
the plural number include the singular number. The words “shall” and “will” are
mandatory and “may” is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their
common and ordinary meaning.
   AFFILIATE(S). When used in relation to any person, means another person who
owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or
control with, such person.
   “AS BUILT” MAPS. Maps showing the completed cable system facilities in the
franchise area.
   “AS BUILT” DRAWING. A document submitted to the city that accurately locates
the cable, system facilities constructed or located within public ways of the
city.
   BASIC CABLE SERVICE. Any service tier which includes the retransmission of
local television broadcast signals and the public, educational and government
access channels.
   CABLE ACT. The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, being 47 U.S.C. §§
521 et seq., the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of
1992, being 47 U.S.C. §§ 609 et seq., Pub. Law No. 102-385, and the
Telecommunications Act of 1996, being 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq., as the same may
be amended from time to time.
   CABLE OPERATOR. Any person or group of persons who:
      (1)   Provides cable service over a cable system and directly, or through
one or more affiliates, owns a significant interest in such cable system;
      (2)   Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement,
the management and operation of such a cable system; or
      (3)   Operates an open video system or multi-channel video system, as
defined in the Cable Act.
   CABLE SERVICE.
      (1)   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or
other programming services;
      (2)   Subscriber interaction, if any which is required for the selection
or use of such video programming or other programming service; and
      (3)   To the extent consistent with the Cable Act, the term CABLE SERVICE
shall include high speed Internet access, and other data transfer services.
   CABLE SYSTEM (SYSTEM OR CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM). A facility, consisting
of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation,
reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service
which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers
within the city.
   CHANNEL (CABLE CHANNEL). A portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum
which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television
channel as a television channel is defined by the Federal Communications
Commission by regulation.
   COMMERCIAL BUSINESS UNIT. Any commercial building or establishment that is
not a dwelling unit.
   COMMERCIAL USE. The channel capacity designated for commercial use as
defined and required by federal law by persons unaffiliated with the cable
operator.
   COMPANY. The natural person, partnership, domestic or foreign corporation,
association, joint venture, or organization of any kind granted a franchise by
the city under this subchapter and its lawful successors, transferees or
assignees.
   CONVERTER. An electronic device which converts signals from one form to
another.
   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES. The Mayor and City Council of the city.
   CUSTOMER SERVICE REPRESENTATIVE (CSR). An individual employed by the cable
company to answer the telephone, write, service and installation orders, answer
subscribers’ questions, receive and process payments, and perform other
subscriber service-related activities.
   DENSITY. The number of dwelling units that, when measured by a cable plant
mile, meets the numerical requirement established in this subchapter or the
franchise agreement, so as to require the operator to provide cable service.
   DOWNSTREAM CHANNEL. The direction of signal transmission from the headend to
the subscriber terminals.
   DROP CABLE OR SERVICE DROP. The coaxial or fiber cable that connects the
feeder portion of the distribution system to the subscriber’s premises.
   DWELLING UNIT. A single-family residential building or a unit in a multi-
family residential building.
   EDUCATIONAL ACCESS CHANNEL. A cable television channel, or channels,
specifically designated for non-commercial use by the local non-commercial
educational institutions.
   FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION (FCC). The present federal agency of that
name as constituted by the Communications Act of 1934, being 47 U.S.C. §§ 201
et seq., or any legally appointed or elected successor.
   FRANCHISE. The authorization, or grant issued by the city which authorizes
the construction and operation of the cable system within the city.
   FRANCHISE AGREEMENT. That separate contract by which the corporate
authorities grant the company the right and franchise to operate a cable system
within the city.
   FRANCHISE AREA. That portion of the city for which a franchise is granted
under the authority of this subchapter. Except as otherwise required by
applicable law, the FRANCHISE AREA shall be the corporate limits of the city
including all territory thereafter annexed to the city.
   FRANCHISE FEE. The fee that a company is required to pay to the city
pursuant to this subchapter for the right, privilege and franchise to
construct, install, maintain and operate a cable communications system within
the streets and public ways of the city for the purpose of providing cable
service to persons in the city. FRANCHISE FEE does not include:
      (1)   Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability (including any
such tax, fee or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or
their services, but not including a tax, fee or assessment which is unduly
discriminatory against cable operators or cable subscribers);
      (2)   Capital costs which are required by the franchise to be incurred by
the cable operator for public, educational or governmental access facilities;
      (3)   Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of
the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit,
insurance, indemnification, penalties or liquidated damages; or
      (4)   Any fee imposed under Title 17, United States Code, being 17 U.S.C.
§§ 101 et seq.
   GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNEL. That channel, or channels, set aside for the
exclusive non-commercial use of local government as determined by the city.
   GROSS REVENUES. All revenue received by a company, or its affiliates,
derived directly or indirectly from and in connection with the operation of the
company’s cable system to provide cable service within the city, including, but
not limited to, revenues, fees, receipts or charges from or for: basic tier
cable service; any tier of video programming service other than basic service;
any optional, premium, per- channel or per program service; high speed Internet
access service, provision of data services provided such services carried over
the cable system are cable service as defined by Title VI of the Cable Act,
being 47 U.S.C. §§ 522 et seq., digital music service, any installation,
disconnection, re-connection, change-in-service or other customer service;
rentals of converters, remotes or other customer premises equipment; commercial
leased channels or channel access; advertising sales revenue, including a per
subscriber share of revenues received for advertising carried on one or more
cable systems in addition to the company’s cable system within the city;
revenues from home shopping channels; the sales of programming guides; and such
other revenue sources as may now exist or hereafter develop, provided that such
revenues, fees, receipts or charges may lawfully be included in the gross
revenue base on which the city may calculate and collect franchise fees. GROSS
REVENUES shall not include any amounts refunded to subscribers, any unpaid
subscriber or advertiser accounts and any sales tax, telecommunications tax,
utility message tax or other taxes imposed directly upon any subscriber or user
by the city, the state or other governmental unit and collected by the company
on behalf of and for remittance to the city, the state or other governmental
unit. As used in this subchapter, annual gross revenues shall, mean gross
revenues attributable to a 12-month accounting period, or portion thereof.
   GUARANTY. An agreement or promise to answer for the debt, default or
miscarriage of another. Secondarily responsible for debt, default or
miscarriage.
   HEADEND. The control center of a cable system, where incoming signals are
amplified, converted, processed and combined into a common cable along with any
origination cablecasting, for transmission to subscribers. HEADEND usually
includes antennas, preamplifiers, frequency converters, demodulators,
modulators, processors, and other related equipment.
   INSTALLATION. The connection from system feeder cable to the subscriber’s
converter or terminal and the provision of service.
   INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK (I-NET). A communications network comprised of
frequencies (upstream) that connect schools, and units of local government, and
the like to the cable system headend for transmission downstream to the
subscriber network and/or a closed non-public network. The I-NET may be
constructed of a separate trunk line or may be incorporated as a certain set of
frequencies on the subscriber trunk line.
   INTERCONNECT. The process whereby two or more cable systems are connected.
   LOCAL ORIGINATION CHANNEL. A channel which carries programming that is
produced by the operator or its designated agent, or a channel which carries
programming determined by the operator to reflect the needs, interests and
concerns of the communities served.
   PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNEL. A cable television channel specifically designated as
a channel available to the public for the production of non-commercial
television programming operating under rules established by the city.
   PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL OR GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNELS (PEG ACCESS CHANNELS). The
channel capacity designated for public, educational or governmental access
programming.
   PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL OR GOVERNMENT ACCESS FACILITIES (PEG ACCESS FACILITIES).
The facilities and equipment utilized for the production and playback of
public, educational and government access programming.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any real property owned by the city or any other
governmental unit that is not otherwise defined herein as a public way. A
franchise granted under this subchapter does not authorize the use of any
public property by the company.
   PUBLIC WAY. The surface, the airspace above the surface, and the area below
the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk,
boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, parkways or other public right-of-way now or
hereafter held by the city which shall entitle the city and the company to the
use thereof for the purpose of installing and maintaining the company’s cable
system.
   SCHOOLS. All public and private elementary and secondary schools, junior
colleges, colleges, and universities which have been granted a certificate of
recognition by the Illinois State Board of Education, pursuant to state
statutes, and which are located within the franchise area.
   SUBSCRIBER. Any person who elects to subscribe to, for any purpose, a
service provided and authorized by the company by means of or in connection
with the cable system, and who pays the charges therefor.
   TRANSFER (FRANCHISE TRANSFER). Any transaction or series of transactions
which, singularly or collectively, result in the sale, assignment or transfer
of all or a majority of the assets of the company, or the cable system, or a
change of 25% or more of the ownership or working control of the company, of
the ownership or working control of the franchise, or of the ownership or
working control of affiliated entities having ownership or working control of
the company, the franchise or cable system. FRANCHISE TRANSFERS require city
approval as provided in this subchapter. Transactions between affiliates of the
company are not exempt from city approval, except as specifically provided in a
franchise agreement between the city and the company.
   TRAP. A passive devise used to block a channel or channels from being
received by a cable subscriber (negative trap), or used to remove an
interfering carrier from a channel that a subscriber wants to receive (positive
trap).
   TRUNK (TRUNK LINE). The main distribution lines leading from the headend of
the cable system to the various areas where feeder lines (cables) are attached
to distribute signals to the subscribers.
   UPSTREAM CHANNEL. The direction of signal transmission from the subscriber
terminals to the headend.
(Prior Code, § 122.042) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.043 GRANT OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   In the event that the city shall grant to a company a nonexclusive,
franchise to construct, operate, maintain and reconstruct a cable
communications system within the franchise area, or a renewal of an existing
franchise, said franchise or renewal shall constitute both a right and an
obligation to provide the services of a cable communications system as required
by the provisions of this subchapter and the franchise agreement. The franchise
agreement shall include those provisions of the company’s application for
franchise or application for renewal that are finally negotiated and accepted
by the city and the company.
   (B)   Any franchise granted under the terms and conditions contained in this
subchapter shall be consistent with federal and state laws and regulations.
   (C)   Any franchise granted is hereby made subject to the general provisions
of this subchapter now in effect or hereafter made effective. Nothing in the
franchise shall be deemed to waive the requirements of the city regarding
permits, fees to be paid or manner of construction.
   (D)   The company shall acknowledge that its rights under this subchapter
and the franchise are subject to the police power of the city to adopt and
enforce generally applicable ordinances necessary to the health, safety and
welfare of the public; and the company shall agree to comply with all generally
applicable laws and ordinances enacted by the city pursuant to such power.
(Prior Code, § 122.043) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.044 REQUIREMENT OF A FRANCHISE.
   (A)   No person shall construct, install, maintain or operate a cable system
within the city, or within any public ways of the city, unless a franchise has
first been obtained pursuant to this subchapter, and unless such franchise is
in full force and effect.
   (B)   Such franchise shall not take the place of any other license or permit
which may be legally required of the company in order to conduct such a
business, or to construct or install buildings, structures, facilities or
equipment within the city.
(Prior Code, § 122.044) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001) Penalty, see §
122.999
§ 122.045 FRANCHISE NONEXCLUSIVE; LIMITING NUMBER OF FRANCHISES.
   (A)   Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The city may grant any
number of franchises subject to applicable federal and state law. The city may
limit the number of franchises granted, based upon, but not necessarily limited
to, the requirements of applicable law and specific local considerations such
as:
      (1)   The capacity of the public ways to accommodate multiple cables in
addition to the cables, conduits and pipes of the utility systems, such as
electrical power, telephone, gas and sewerage; and
      (2)   The disadvantages that may result from cable system competition,
such as the requirement for multiple pedestals on residents’ property, and the
disruption arising from numerous excavations of the rights-of-way.
   (B)   In the event the city grants an additional franchise to use and occupy
the public right-of-way for the purposes of operating a cable system, the
additional franchise shall be granted pursuant to the terms and conditions of
state level playing statute 65 ILCS 5/11-42-11.
(Prior Code, § 122.045) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.046 FRANCHISE AREA.
   Except as otherwise required by applicable law, the franchise area for any
franchise granted by the city shall be the corporate limits of the city
including all territory thereafter annexed to the city.
(Prior Code, § 122.046) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.047 TERM OF THE FRANCHISE.
   The term of the franchise shall be as established, in the franchise
agreement and shall take full effect and be in full, force, from and after the
effective date of the franchise agreement, and the same shall continue in full
force and effect for the term specified in the franchise agreement unless
otherwise extended, terminated or revoked for cause as allowed pursuant to the
provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 122.047) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.048 FRANCHISE APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   The application for a cable television franchise must contain, at a
minimum, the following information:
      (1)   A clear description of the identity of the applicant including
names and residence and business addresses of all officers and directors of the
applicant and/or persons having an ownership interest of 5% or greater;
      (2)   A legal description and/or clear identification of the area
intended to be serviced by the applicant;
      (3)   A detailed description of the physical facility proposed, including
channel capacity, technical design, performance characteristics and headend
which shall include, but not be limited to the following:
         (a)   A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served
including identification of trunk line locations, and if requested, a
computerized map in a format compatible with the city’s computer software;
         (b)   A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed
classifications of rates and charges to be made against subscribers and all
rates and charges as to each of said classifications, including installation
charges and cable service charges;
         (c)   A detailed, informative and referenced statement describing the
actual equipment and operational standards proposed by the applicant;
         (d)   A copy of the form of any agreement, undertaking or other
instrument proposed to be entered into between the applicant and any
subscriber; and
         (e)   A detailed statement setting forth in its entirety any and all
agreements and undertakings, whether formal or informal, written, oral, or
implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person,
firm or corporation which materially relate or pertain to or depend upon the
application and the granting of the franchise;
      (4)   Detailed projected financial pro forma for a period of ten years
showing projected number of subscribers, rates, all system revenues, operating
expenses, capital expenditures, depreciation schedules, and income statements.
All information is to be presented in the format required by the city;
      (5)   Proof of financial support for the system construction as evidenced
by a letter from the lending institution and/ or other financial entity;
      (6)   A description of applicant’s prior operational experience including
a list of other franchises held by the applicant identified by state, city and
the date of franchise expiration;
      (7)   A detailed description of the customer service and technical
support operations;
      (8)   Representations that the general partner, any principal or partner,
or principal stockholder has never been convicted of a crime involving moral
turpitude, or is presently under indictment charging such a crime; the
applicant and/or its parent corporation is not, nor has been, a party to
litigation, or cause of action, in any court of law or proceeding by the
Securities and Exchange Commission, the FCC or any other governmental body, or
administrative agency relevant to the holding of any franchise agreement, or
actions of the applicant in any business endeavor; and
      (9)   Any additional information that the city deems relevant.
   (B)   A fee as determined by the city for analysis of the application is
required to accompany the application for an initial franchise. A condition of
any initial franchise granted pursuant to this subchapter shall be the company’
   (C)   Upon receipt of a complete application for an initial franchise, a
public hearing shall be held at a time and date approved by the corporate
authorities. Within 90 days after the close of the public hearing, the
corporate authorities shall make a decision based upon the technical, financial
and legal qualifications of the applicants, the applicants performance in other
franchise areas and such other information as the Board deems relevant. No
provision of this subchapter shall be deemed, or construed, as to require the
corporate authorities to grant a franchise.
   (D)   Any grant of a franchise shall become effective through the execution
by the city and the company of a franchise agreement subject to the terms and
conditions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 122.048) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.049 SURETY OR GUARANTY AGREEMENT REQUIRED.
   The city may require a company to provide a surety or guaranty agreement
which establishes that the parent company, or one or all general partners,
accepts liability for the debt and performance of the partnership upon the
partnership’s default.
(Prior Code, § 122.049) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.050 CONTENTS OF FRANCHISE AGREEMENT.
   (A)   In addition to those matters required to be included in the franchise,
agreement by virtue of this subchapter, the franchise agreement shall contain
such further conditions or provisions as may be included in the company’s
proposal and/or negotiated between the city and the company, except that no
such conditions or provisions shall be such as to conflict with any provisions
of this subchapter or other applicable law.
   (B)   Each franchise agreement shall also contain the following express
representation by the company:
      (1)   The company has carefully read the terms and conditions of this
subchapter and the franchise agreement and accepts all of such terms and
conditions and agrees to abide by the same;
      (2)   The company acknowledges that it has carefully read the terms and
conditions of this subchapter and expressly waives any claims that any
provisions thereof are unreasonable or arbitrary or void, except as to those
provisions which are pre-empted now or hereafter by superseding provisions of
federal or state law;
      (3)   The company acknowledges that it has not been induced to accept the
franchise by any promise, oral or written, by or on behalf of the city or by
any third person, regarding any term or condition of this subchapter or the
franchise agreement not expressed therein; and
      (4)   The company represents that no promise or inducement, oral or
written, has been made to any city employee, agent or official regarding
receipt of the franchise.
(Prior Code, § 122.050) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.051 FRANCHISE FEES.
   (A)   The company shall pay to the city a franchise fee in an amount of 5%
of the company’s annual gross revenues.
   (B)   Payment of the franchise fee is in addition to and exclusive of any
and all authorized taxes, business license fees, permit fees, levies or
assessments previously in effect or subsequently adopted by the city so long as
said taxes, fees, levies or assessments are of general applicability.
   (C)   To the extent permitted by applicable law or regulations, franchise
fees in excess of 5% may be enacted by appropriate amendment to this subchapter
by the corporate authorities and collected by the city after 60 days written
notice to the company.
   (D)   Franchise fees are to be paid quarterly and not later than 60 days
following the last day of the quarter. The franchise fees are to be mailed by
certified mail, or may be hand delivered, to the City Manager’s office.
   (E)   Each franchise fee payment shall be accompanied by a verified
financial statement in a format as set forth in the franchise agreement that
clearly states the gross revenues for the quarter said payment is rendered. The
financial statement shall be signed by the company’s controller, or other
employee knowledgeable of the accuracy of the figures used in the computation
and the corresponding payment to the city.
   (F)   Any franchise fee which remains unpaid in whole or in part after the
date specified in this subchapter shall be delinquent and shall thereafter
accrue interest as set forth in the franchise agreement.
   (G)   The city shall have the right to inspect the company’s income records,
worksheets, journals, financial statements and other such financial records as
may be necessary and appropriate to verify the accuracy of the franchise fee
payments or other payments owed to the city. The city may use its own personnel
or may hire an outside certified public accountant to conduct an audit or
“agreed upon procedures” financial review to recompute and verify the franchise
fee payment and compliance with the financial terms of this subchapter. Any
additional amounts due to the city as a result of an audit shall be paid with
applicable interest within 30 days following written notice to the company.
Said notice shall include a copy of the audit report.
   (H)   Upon termination of the franchise and/or at the expiration of the term
provided thereof, or otherwise, the company shall continue to make the
quarterly statements and certifications as provided in this section until such
time as all payments due the city under this subchapter have been paid and
accounted for to the reasonable satisfaction of the city.
(Prior Code, § 122.051) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.052 ASSIGNMENT OR TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   The company’s franchise shall not be assigned or transferred without
the prior written consent of the city. As used in this section, the terms
assigned and transferred shall mean any transaction or series of transactions
defined as a transfer in this subchapter.
   (B)   No consent from the city is required prior to the granting of a
security interest in any of the company’s assets by pledge, mortgage or other
hypothecation to secure an indebtedness.
   (C)   The company shall notify the city in writing of any foreclosure or any
other judicial sale of the franchise or of a substantial part of the assets of
the company or of the cable system. Such notification shall be considered by
the city as notice of a franchise transfer and the provisions of this section
governing the application for city consent to the transfer shall apply.
   (D)   The company, and any proposed assignee or transferee of the franchise,
shall submit a written application to the city containing or accompanied by
such information as is required in accordance with applicable law and FCC
regulations.
   (E)   For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such
franchise transfer, the city may inquire into the legal, financial, technical
and other qualifications of the prospective transferee or controlling party to
operate and maintain the system, to comply with all franchise obligations for
the remainder of the franchise term, and to promptly cure any present or
ongoing franchise violations or defaults. The company and the prospective
transferee or controlling party shall provide such information as reasonably
requested by the city in connection with such inquiry.
   (F)   The consent of the city shall not be unreasonably delayed or denied.
As prescribed by the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 537), the city shall be deemed to
have consented to a proposed transfer if the city fails to render a final
decision on the request for approval of the proposed transfer within 120 days
following the city’s receipt of the written application for consent to the
transfer, unless the city and the applicant agree in writing to extend the time
for the city to review the application and to grant or deny its consent.
(Prior Code, § 122.052) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.053 FRANCHISE RENEWAL.
   Franchise renewal shall be as prescribed by applicable law. The city and
company, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal negotiations at any time
during the term of the franchise.
(Prior Code, § 122.053) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.054 RIGHT TO PURCHASE SYSTEM.
   The city shall have the right to purchase the system under the conditions
set forth in the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. § 547), as follows:
   (A)   If a renewal of a franchise is denied and the city acquires ownership
of the cable system or effects a transfer of ownership of a cable system to
another person, such acquisition or transfer shall be at fair market value,
determined on the basis of the cable system valued as a going concern but with
no value allocated to the franchise itself.
   (B)   If a franchise is revoked for cause and the city acquires ownership of
the cable system or effects a transfer of ownership of the cable system to
another person, such acquisition shall be at an equitable price within the
meaning of the Cable Act.
(Prior Code, § 122.054) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.055 CONTINUITY OF SERVICE.
   (A)   Subject to applicable federal and state law, the company shall
continue to provide cable service for a reasonable period of time not to exceed
24 months following the expiration of the term of the franchise or the
effective date of any revocation or termination of the franchise.
   (B)   In the event of a change of franchisee, or in the event a new operator
acquires the system, the company shall cooperate with the city, new franchisee
or operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During
such period, the company shall be entitled to the revenues for any period
during which it operates the system and shall be entitled to reasonable costs
for its services when it no longer operates the system.
   (C)   In the event the company fails to operate the cable system for 72
consecutive hours without prior approval of the city or without just cause, the
city may, at its option, operate the cable system or designate an operator
until such time as the company restores cable services. If the city is required
to fulfill this obligation for a company, the company shall reimburse the city
for all reasonable costs or damages that are the result of the company’s
failure to perform.
   (D)   During any period in which the company continues to provide service as
provided in division (A) hereof, the company is entitled to all revenues
collected, less any franchise fees or other monies owed to the city.
   (E)   During any period of time in which the company continues to provide
service as provided in division (A), the city will assist and use its best
efforts to assist the company in providing a satisfactory basis for the company
to continue providing services under the franchise agreement; provided,
however, that the company is not required during any such period to provide or
continue to provide service if the revenues collected are less than the
operating costs incurred by the company.
(Prior Code, § 122.055) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.056 PROCEDURES IN THE EVENT OF TERMINATION OR EXPIRATION.
   (A)   In the event a franchise expires without right of renewal, is revoked,
or is otherwise terminated, the company shall remove the tangible assets of its
system from the city’s rights-of-way within one year unless the company
receives permission to abandon some or all of its system or has received
permission to transfer the system.
   (B)   In removing its plant, structures and equipment, the company shall at
its own expense restore and repair any property damaged during the removal
process and shall leave all streets and public ways in as good condition as
prevailed prior to the company’s removal of its equipment and appliances,
without affecting the electrical, telephone or other cable wires or
attachments. The city shall inspect and approve the condition of the streets
and public ways after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance as
provided herein, and the security fund, shall continue in full force and effect
during the period of removal and until full compliance by the company with all
the terms and conditions of this section.
   (C)   In the event of a failure by the company to complete any work required
by this section, the city may cause such work to be done and the company shall
then reimburse the city for the costs thereof within 30 days after receipt of
an itemized list of such cost, or the city may recover such costs through the
security fund or letter of credit provided by the company.
(Prior Code, § 122.056) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.057 REGULATORY AUTHORITY.
   The city shall exercise appropriate regulatory authority under the
provisions of this subchapter and applicable law. The city may, at its sole
option, delegate some or all of its regulatory authority under this subchapter
or the franchise agreement to a joint regulatory agency, provided that only the
corporate authorities may revoke a franchise pursuant to this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 122.057) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.058 REGULATORY RESPONSIBILITY.
   The city, acting alone or acting jointly with other franchising authorities,
may exercise or delegate regulatory responsibility, including, but not limited
to, the following areas:
   (A)   Administering and enforcing the provisions of the cable television
franchise(s);
   (B)   Coordination of the operation of public, educational and government
access channels and facilities;
   (C)   Providing technical, programming and operational support to public
agency users, such as government departments, schools and health care
institutions;
   (D)   Establishing procedures and standards for use of channels dedicated to
PEG access use, if provided for in any franchise agreement;
   (E)   Planning expansion and growth of public benefit cable services;
   (F)   Analyzing the possibility of integrating cable communications with
other local, state or national telecommunications networks; and
   (G)   Formulating and recommending long-range telecommunications policy.
(Prior Code, § 122.058) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.059 TECHNOLOGICAL, SERVICE AND PERFORMANCE REVIEW.
   At city’s sole option, upon 30 days’ written notice to the company, the city
and the company shall meet and/or conduct public review of the performance and
quality of service of the system.
   (A)   Topics for discussion and review may include, but shall not be limited
to, services provided, application of new technologies, system performance,
programming, developments in the law, and technical and economic feasibility of
system expansion or upgrading. Either the city or the company may select
additional topics for discussion.
   (B)   Within 30 days after the conclusion of the review, the city may issue
a report with respect to the adequacy of system performance and quality of
service. If inadequacies are found, the city may direct the company to correct
the inadequacies within a reasonable period of time.
   (C)   Failure of the company, after due notice, to correct any inadequacies
found during the review may be a violation of a specific provision of the
franchise or this subchapter. The city may, at its sole discretion, exercise
any remedy within the scope of this subchapter considered appropriate.
(Prior Code, § 122.059) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001) Penalty, see §
122.999
§ 122.060 RATES.
   (A)   The company shall establish rates for its service categories that
shall be applied fairly and uniformly to all subscribers in the franchise area.
   (B)   The company shall maintain and file with the city, a complete schedule
of subscriber rates including all fees and charges for services. The company
shall notify the city at least 30 days prior to any change in rates.
(Prior Code, § 122.060) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.061 SECURITY FUND.
   On the effective date of the franchise, the company shall establish a
permanent security fund with the city in the amount of $50,000 in cash, an
irrevocable letter of credit, corporate surety bond or other instrument which
complies with the requirements of this subchapter and is approved by the City
Attorney, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. The security fund
shall be maintained at the sole expense of the company so long as any part of
the system is located within the public ways of the city.
   (A)   The fund shall serve as security for the full and complete performance
of this subchapter and the franchise agreement, including payment of any costs,
expenses, damages or loss the city pays or incurs because of any act or
omission attributable to the company that constitutes a violation, default or
failure to comply with the codes, ordinances, rules, regulations or permits of
the city, and the payment of any liquidated damage amounts, penalties,
judgments, fees or taxes due the city.
   (B)   In the case of any default or failure of the company to pay any
liquidated damages, penalties, judgments, fees or taxes due the city in
connection with the construction, operation or maintenance of the cable system
and the provision of cable service within the city pursuant to the franchise,
the city may assess the security fund pursuant to the applicable procedures set
forth in §
122.088, or in the franchise agreement.
   (C)   The company shall promptly pay any undisputed liquidated damages,
penalties, judgments, fees or taxes due the city. If the company fails to pay
any undisputed amounts due the city within 30 days after written notice from
the city, the city may withdraw the amount stated in the notice from the
security fund.
   (D)   The company shall replenish the security fund to its full amount
within 30 days after written notice from the city that monies have been
withdrawn from the fund.
   (E)   The rights reserved to the city with respect to the security fund are
in addition to all other rights and remedies of the city, whether reserved by
this subchapter or authorized by law, and no action or proceeding to exercise
rights with respect to the security fund shall constitute an election of
remedies or a waiver of any other rights the city may have.
(Prior Code, § 122.061) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.062 CONSTRUCTION AND COMPLETION SECURITY.
   (A)   Prior to commencing any work within public ways of the city that
exceeds $25,000 in value, the company shall furnish the city with a
construction bond written by a corporate surety authorized to do business in
the state, equal to 100% of the estimated cost of the system, or portions of
the system, to be constructed, modified, repaired or replaced within the public
ways of the city, or $100,000, whichever is less. Such instrument shall be in a
form acceptable to the city.
   (B)   The construction security shall remain in force until 60 days after
substantial completion of the work, as determined by the City Engineer,
including restoration of public ways and other public or private property
affected by the construction. After expiration of said 60-day period, the
construction security shall be released and the instrument shall be canceled.
   (C)   The construction security shall guarantee:
      (1)   Timely completion of construction;
      (2)   Construction in compliance with applicable plans, permits,
technical codes and standards;
      (3)   Proper location of the facilities in the public ways of the city as
specified in plans approved by the city; and
      (4)   Restoration of the public ways and any other public property
affected by the construction within the public ways.
   (D)   Notwithstanding the construction security provided by the company, the
company is responsible for completion of all construction work, including
restoration, in accordance with the permit and approved plans for such work,
and the material requirements of this subchapter and the franchise agreement.
Any default or breach in performance of such work shall be promptly cured by
the company.
(Prior Code, § 122.062) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.063 INSURANCE.
   (A)   As a part of the indemnification provided by the provisions of this
subchapter, but without limiting the same, the company shall upon award of the
franchise and prior to commencement of construction of the system, file with
the City Clerk, and at all times thereafter maintain in full force and effect
at its sole expense, evidence of a policy or policies for the following.
      (1)   Commercial general liability insurance. Comprehensive or commercial
general liability insurance, including, but not limited to, coverage for bodily
injury, personal injury and property damage shall be maintained at the sum(s)
of $5,000,000 per occurrence and $10,000,000 aggregate.
      (2)   Business automobile liability. Comprehensive automobile liability
including, but not limited to, non-ownership and hired car coverage as well as
owned vehicles with coverage for bodily injury and property damage, shall be
maintained at the sum(s) of $3,000,000 per accident.
      (3)   Property loss. Fire insurance with coverage for extended perils on
the franchise property used by the company in the conduct of franchise
operations in an amount adequate to enable the company to resume franchise
operations following the occurrence of any risk covered by this insurance.
      (4)   Worker’s compensation insurance. In such coverage, with statutory
limits as may be required by the state.
   (B)   The policy or policies shall specifically recognize and cover the
indemnification provisions of this subchapter. The city and its officers,
agents and employees shall be named as an additional insured, and the policy or
policies shall contain cross-liability endorsements. Said insurance shall
provide that the insurance provided by the company shall be primary and that
any provision of any contract of insurance or other risk protection benefit or
self-insurance policy purchased or in effect or enacted by the city and any
other insurance or benefit shall be in excess thereof.
   (C)   The insurer or insurers shall have Best Insurance Rating of at least
A-, VII or the highest rating attributable to insurance carriers by a
recognized rating agency and shall be authorized to write the required
insurance, and shall be approved by the state.
   (D)   The policy or policies of insurance shall be maintained by the company
in full force and effect during the entire term of the franchise. All
certificate(s) shall contain the following endorsement:
“Should any of the above described policies be canceled before the expiration
date thereof, the issuing company will mail 30 days prior written notice to the
holder named on the certificate.”
   (E)   In the event of the cancellation of any insurance policy required
herein or upon the company’s failure to procure said insurance, the city shall
have the right to terminate the franchise agreement or, alternatively, to
procure, such insurance and charge the cost thereof to the company. Such costs
may be paid from the security fund established in this subchapter or from the
construction bond, or by any other means deemed appropriate by the city.
(Prior Code, § 122.063) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.064 INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   As a condition of any franchise granted pursuant to this subchapter,
the company shall agree to defend, indemnify and hold the city and its
officers, agents and employees free and harmless from and against any and all
claims, actions, suits, damages, costs, expenses and liabilities, including the
reasonable fees and expenses of their attorneys, expert witnesses and
consultants, court costs and fines, which may be incurred by them, asserted
against them, or sought to be imposed upon them, individually, jointly or
severally, and which arise directly or indirectly out of or are connected in
any way with the grant of the franchise or the construction, installation,
maintenance, operation or condition of the company’s cable system pursuant to a
franchise granted hereunder except to the extent those damages, claims, awards
and judgments arise from the sole negligence of the city, its officers, agents
and employees, including but not limited to:
      (1)   Any negligent, tortious or wrongful act or omission of the company,
and its officers, agents, employees, contractors or subcontractors resulting in
personal injury, bodily injury, sickness or death to any person, or in loss or
damage of any kind to the property of any person including the company and its
officers, agents, employees, licensees and invitees;
      (2)   Any negligent, tortious or wrongful act or omission of the company,
and its officers, agents, employees, contractors or subcontractors resulting in
damage to, loss of, destruction or unauthorized use of any trademark, trade
name, copyright, patent or other intangible property rights of any person
including libel, slander and invasion of privacy; or
      (3)   Loss or damage of any kind related to company’s failure to comply
with the provisions of this subchapter, or of the franchise agreement, or of
any federal, state or local law or regulation applicable to the company or the
cable system.
   (B)   As a condition of any franchise granted pursuant to this subchapter,
the company shall assume for its officers, agents, employees, contractors and
subcontractors all risk of dangerous or hazardous conditions in, on or about
any public ways of the city, except for latent conditions actually caused by
the willful or negligent acts of the city or its employees.
   (C)   The indemnity obligation of the company shall not extend to injuries,
judgments or liabilities to the extent they arise out of the negligence or
willful misconduct on the part of the city, or its officers, agents or
employees while acting on behalf of the city.
   (D)   As a condition of any franchise granted pursuant to this subchapter,
the company shall agree that, except to the extent caused by the gross
negligence, malicious or intentional wrongful acts, or the willful misconduct
of the city, or its officers, agents or employees while acting on behalf of the
city, the city and its officers, agents or employees shall not be liable to the
company for any claims for damage to, or loss of, all or any part of company’s
cable system arising out of any public work, public improvement, alteration of
any municipal structure, change in the grade or line of any public way of the
city, the elimination, discontinuing or closing of any public way of the city,
or other exercise by the city of its lawful authority over the public ways.
   (E)   As a condition of any franchise granted pursuant to this subchapter,
the company shall recognize the city’s right to exercise its police powers over
the public ways of the city in case of fire, disaster or other emergency as
reasonably determined by the city, and agree that the city shall not be liable
to the company for any damage to the company’s cable system or other property
when such damage results from the exercise by the city of its police powers in
order to protect the public in case of fire, disaster or other emergency. When
practicable, as determined by the city, the city agrees to consult with the
company prior to the exercise by the city of such police power, where the
exercise may affect the company’s cable system and to permit the company to
take necessary actions to protect the public and the company’s cable system or
other property.
(Prior Code, § 122.064) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.065 SYSTEM DESIGN.
   The cable communications system shall be constructed in accordance with the
design, construction and rebuild requirements contained in the franchise
agreement.
(Prior Code, § 122.065) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.066 EMERGENCY OVERRIDE.
   The company’s system shall have an audio emergency override system that can
be activated by the city. The override shall be capable of providing an audio
signal over all NTSC channels of the company’s system. Additionally, the
company may in a franchise agreement be required to provide an audio/video
override. The city shall be solely responsible for the content of all
transmissions over the emergency override. The company shall not be liable for
any claim or cause of action arising from the city’s transmission, or failure
to transmit, over the emergency override. The city agrees to indemnify and hold
the company harmless from any damages or penalties arising out of the
negligence of the city, its employees or agents in using such service.
(Prior Code, § 122.066) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.067 SERVICE TO FRANCHISE AREA.
   The company shall design a cable system in such a manner as to have the
capability to pass by every single-family dwelling unit and multiple-dwelling
unit building, within the franchise area. Service shall be provided to business
locations under the terms and conditions set forth in the franchise agreement.
Cable system construction and provision of service shall be non-discriminatory,
and the company shall not delay or defer service to any part of the franchise
area on the grounds of economic preference. Service shall be provided to
subscribers in accordance with the schedules specified in the franchise
agreement.
(Prior Code, § 122.067) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.068 EXTENSION OF SYSTEM.
   (A)   The company shall initially construct or rebuild the cable system so
that cable service from the newly constructed or rebuilt system is extended and
can be provided within a reasonable time to any dwelling unit that exists
within the franchise area.
   (B)   After completion of initial construction or rebuild of a cable system,
the company shall extend the system to and offer the services of the system to
potential subscribers within any area of the city, including subdivisions which
are hereafter developed or annexed within the corporate limits of the city,
where there are at least a total of 20 residential dwelling units with
occupancy permits per cable plant mile. The company shall design, construct and
operate the system in accordance with the schedules specified in the franchise
agreement.
(Prior Code, § 122.068) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001) Penalty, see §
122.999
§ 122.069 CABLECASTING FACILITIES.
   The company shall provide cablecasting facilities in accordance with the
requirements set forth in the franchise agreement.
(Prior Code, § 122.069) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.070 INTERCONNECTION.
   (A)   The cable system shall be designed in such a manner as to allow the
company to interconnect with adjacent cable systems operated by the company or
by the company’s parent company, affiliate or subsidiary. The company shall
interconnect between said systems, which shall permit the sharing of
programming on public, educational, and government access channels, and for
emergency purposes as set forth in the franchise agreement.
   (B)   Subject to the limitation of applicable federal and state law, the
city may require the company to participate in interconnecting the cable
television system to other cable systems as set forth in the franchise
agreement.
(Prior Code, § 122.070) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.071 INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK.
   (A)   All companies shall, as part of any application for an initial or
renewed franchise, propose the design and construction of an institutional
network that shall connect school and local government unit buildings and
facilities designated by the city and that meets the identified needs of the
city for the purpose of transmitting two-way telecommunications signals among
the designated school and local government entities.
   (B)   The institutional network shall be capable of carrying voice, full
motion video, audio and data communications.
   (C)   The company shall design, construct, operate and maintain the
institutional network as provided in the franchise agreement.
(Prior Code, § 122.071) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.072 SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE.
   (A)   The company shall comply with the requirements of the system
construction schedule contained in the franchise agreement.
   (B)   The company shall provide the city with monthly reports of all
construction and system activation during the initial construction or rebuild
of the cable system. Reports shall identify the location to which service is
proposed, the time at which the construction, will be completed, the time for
activation of the service line, the date the area has been turned over to
marketing, and other information which will assist the city in determining that
the company is extending service to the entire franchise area. After initial
construction or rebuild of the cable system is completed, the company shall
provide an annual report of system construction, if any. The company and the
city shall meet for periodic construction conferences.
(Prior Code, § 122.072) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.073 AS BUILT MAPS AND DRAWINGS.
   (A)   The company shall provide to the city three sets of as built maps and
drawings of the cable system in document form, and one set in electronic form,
within 90 days after initial construction or rebuild of the cable system is
substantially completed.
   (B)   Within 60 days after completion of any construction or work that
results in any addition, extension, rebuild or removal of the system within the
public ways of the city, the company shall furnish the city with three sets of
as built maps and drawings in document form, and one set in electronic form,
accurately depicting the location of all cables, wires, and facilities
constructed or relocated as part of such work.
   (C)   The as built maps and drawings submitted in document form shall be in
a reproducible medium reasonably acceptable to the city, and shall be on sheets
not to exceed 24 inches by 36 inches and drawn at a scale of one inch to 20
feet.
   (D)   The as built maps and drawings submitted in electronic form shall use
the state plane coordinate system, shall be in auto cad or other format
approved by the city, and shall be on three and one-half inch floppy disks or
other electronic storage medium approved by the city.
   (E)   The as built maps and drawings submitted to the city in electronic
form will be used to create atlas information and will be documented into an
overall utilities atlas. If the company desires, it may provide separate sets
of electronic form as built maps and drawings, one set for the city’s public
records, and one set containing any proprietary information that the city would
agree to protect from public disclosure, as provided in §
122.083.
(Prior Code, § 122.073) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.074 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   City codes and permits. The company shall comply with all applicable
city construction codes, permit procedures and ordinances regulating public
ways. The city shall be entitled to charge reasonable permit and inspection
fees to recover the special nonrecurring inspection costs imposed by the
construction or rebuild of the cable system. Any fees or charges paid, so long
as generally applicable to entities, including, but not limited to, like users
of the public right-of-way and not discriminatory, shall be paid in addition to
the franchise fee.
   (B)   Compliance with safety codes. All construction practices shall be in
accordance with all applicable sections of federal and state occupational
safety and health acts and any amendments thereto as well as all state and
local codes where applicable.
   (C)   Compliance with codes. All installation of electronic equipment shall
be of a permanent nature, durable and installed in accordance with the
provisions of the National Electrical Code, the National Electrical Safety
Code, the Illinois Commerce Commission’s rules for construction of electric
power and communication lines, and all applicable federal, state and local
codes.
   (D)   Construction standards and requirements. All of the company’s plant
and equipment, including but not limited to the antenna site, headend and
distribution system, towers, house connections, structures, poles, wire, cable,
coaxial cable, fiber optic cable, fixtures and appurtenances, shall be
installed, located, erected, constructed, rebuilt, replaced, removed, repaired,
maintained and operated in accordance with good engineering practices, so as
not to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
      (1)   Initial construction or system rebuild communications. During the
initial construction or rebuild of the cable system, the company shall provide
advance written notice to residents when performing construction in the public
easements, utility easements or otherwise on private property in the area in
which they live, utilizing door hangers, letters or bill stuffers.
      (2)   Other construction communications. The company shall provide
advance written or other notice to residents when performing scheduled system
construction in the public easements, utility easements or otherwise on the
resident’s private property. Said notice may utilize door hangers, letters,
bill stuffers or personal communication from a company representative to a
resident. Further, the company shall use it best efforts to notify residents
when performing non-scheduled system construction, including unanticipated work
associated with a service call or service interruption.
   (E)   Safety and nuisance requirements. The company shall at all times
employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted
methods and devices preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause
damage, injury or nuisance to the public.
   (F)   Personnel. The company is responsible for all of its personnel,
including its contractors, agents, employees and subcontractors engaged in
system construction and maintenance.
   (G)   General duties. The company shall, before commencing any construction
in the public ways, comply with all requirements of J.U.L.I.E.
(Prior Code, § 122.074) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.075 TECHNICAL STANDARDS.
   The company shall construct, install, operate and maintain its system in a
manner consistent with all applicable laws, ordinances, construction standards,
governmental requirements, FCC technical standards and any detailed standards
set forth in the franchise agreement. In addition, the company shall provide to
the city, upon request, a written report of the results of the company’s
periodic proof of performance tests conducted pursuant to FCC and franchise
standards and guidelines.
   (A)   Twenty-four hour operation. The system shall be designed and shall be
maintained to provide 24-hour continuous operation.
   (B)   Uniform and strong signals. Subject to the FCC standards the system
shall produce, for reception on subscriber’s receivers, which are in good
working order, a picture which is free from any significant interference or
distortion.
(Prior Code, § 122.075) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.076 SYSTEM TESTS.
   If there are recurring problems or complaints, the company will perform
reasonable tests at the request, of the city, including partial repeat tests,
different test procedures, or tests involving a specific subscriber’s terminal,
at the company’s expense. The city may require the company to prepare a report
to the city on the results of those tests, including a report identifying any
problem found and steps taken to correct the problem. The company will endeavor
to arrange for such, special tests so as to minimize hardship or inconvenience
to subscribers.
(Prior Code, § 122.076) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.077 STREET OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   The company should utilize existing poles, conduits and other
facilities whenever practicable, and shall not construct or install new,
different or additional poles, conduits or other facilities on public property
until the written approval of the city is first obtained, which approval shall
not be unreasonably withheld. The company shall not acquire any vested interest
in any location for any pole or wire holding structure, and such poles
conduits, or other facilities shall be temporarily or permanently removed,
relocated, changed or altered by the company on the same terms and conditions,
if any, established by the city for telephone and electric utilities.
   (B)   All installations shall be underground in those areas of the city
where public utilities providing both telephone and electric service are
underground at the time of installation. In areas where either telephone or
electric utility facilities are aboveground at the time of the installation,
the company may install its service aboveground, provided that at such time as
those facilities are required to be placed underground by the city, or are
placed underground, the company shall likewise place its services underground
on the same terms and conditions, if any, established by the city for telephone
and electric utilities. Where not otherwise required to be placed underground,
the company’s system shall be located underground at the request of the
adjacent property owners, provided that the excess cost over aerial location
shall be borne by the property owner making the request. All cable passing
under the roadways shall be installed in conduit.
   (C)   The company shall notify the city at least ten days before
commencement of any construction in any streets within the city. The city shall
cooperate with the company in granting any permits required, providing such
grant and subsequent construction by the company shall not unduly interfere
with the use of such streets and that the proposed construction shall be done
in accordance with all applicable provisions of the city codes.
   (D)   All transmission lines, equipment and structures shall be so installed
and located as to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable
convenience of property owners, and at all times shall be kept and maintained
in a safe, adequate and substantial condition and in good order and repair. The
company shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain
in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and
accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries or nuisances to the
public. Suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares or other devices shall be
used at such times and places as are reasonably required for the safety of all
members of the public. Any poles or other fixtures placed in any street or
public way by the company shall be placed in such manner as not to interfere
with the usual travel on such street or public way.
   (E)   The company shall restore to the city standards and specifications, at
its own expense and in a manner approved by the city, any damage or disturbance
caused to any street, public way or to public property as a result of its
operations or construction on its behalf. The company shall guarantee and
maintain such restoration for a period of one year against defective materials
or workmanship. The company shall restore any damage or disturbance to private
property which may result from operations or construction by it or on its
behalf to the property’s pre-construction condition.
   (F)   Whenever, in case of fire, disaster or other emergency, it becomes
necessary in the judgment of the city’s officials to remove or damage any of
the company’s facilities, no charge shall be made by the company against the
city for restoration and repair, unless such acts amount to malicious conduct
by the city.
   (G)   The company shall have the authority after receiving written
permission from the city to trim trees on public ways of the city at its own
expense as may be necessary to protect its wires and facilities. Such work
shall comply with the applicable requirements of the city code and any other
city rules and regulations.
   (H)   The company, at its own expense, shall protect, support, temporarily
disconnect, relocate, or remove, any property of the company when in the
opinion of the Mayor or his or her designee, the same is required by reason of
traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, street construction, change
or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes,
power lines, signal lines, transportation facilities, tracks or any other type
of structure or improvement by governmental agencies, whether acting in a
governmental or a proprietary capacity.
   (I)   At the request of any person holding a valid building moving permit
issued by the city or other appropriate governmental authority and upon at
least 48 hours’ notice, the company shall temporarily raise, lower or cut its
wires as may be necessary to facilitate such move. The direct expense of such
temporary changes, including standby time, shall be paid by the permit holder,
and the company shall have the authority to require payment in advance.
   (J)   The company shall make no paving cuts or curb cuts unless absolutely
necessary, and then only after written permission has been given by the city.
   (K)   All cables passing under any roadway shall be installed in conduit,
unless the construction permit issued for such work contains an express waiver
of this requirement and approval of an alternative installation.
(Prior Code, § 122.077) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.078 PROVISION OF SERVICE.
   After service has been established by activating trunk and feeder cables for
any area meeting the density requirements as set forth in the franchise
agreement, the company shall provide service to any requesting potential
dwelling unit subscriber within the area within 30 days from the date of
request, provided such subscriber provides appropriate identification and pays
any outstanding balance due on previous accounts and any advance charges
required for new service.
(Prior Code, § 122.078) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.079 SERVICES TO BE PROVIDED.
   The company shall provide the broad categories of video programming and
other services in order to meet community needs, as specified in the franchise
agreement.
(Prior Code, § 122.079) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.080 PUBLIC SECTOR SUBSCRIBER SERVICE.
   (A)   The company will provide at least one drop and one outlet at each
school building and local unit of government building as set forth in the
franchise agreement at no charge. The company may charge the school or local
unit of government for the actual costs for internal cable wiring within the
school or local unit of government building for the installation of the outlets
in excess of the number agreed to in the franchise agreement. Costs shall be
for actual costs of materials and the company’s labor. The company shall work
with the school or local unit of government in determining the design of the
installation.
   (B)   The company shall provide such number of outlets to the institutional
network at each school and/or local unit of government buildings identified by
the city, as provided in the franchise agreement or other applicable agreement.
   (C)   The company shall provide such equipment for the cablecasting of live
and/or prerecorded programming from schools and local unit of government
buildings as set forth in the franchise agreement or other applicable
agreement.
(Prior Code, § 122.080) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.081 PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNELS AND FACILITIES.
   (A)   The company shall establish and provide dedicated access channels for
public, educational and government access. The number of such channels shall be
as set forth in the franchise agreement.
   (B)   The company shall be required to provide PEG access facilities and
equipment as specified in the franchise agreement.
(Prior Code, § 122.081) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.082 CABLE CHANNELS FOR COMMERCIAL USE.
   The company shall designate channel capacity for commercial use as required
by applicable law.
(Prior Code, § 122.082) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.083 OPEN BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   (A)   Upon written request, the city may inspect the books, records, maps
and other documents in the control or possession of the company that directly
pertain to the franchise when reasonably necessary: to enforce this subchapter
or to assess compliance with the franchise; to exercise any lawful regulatory
power of the city; or as may other wise be necessary or appropriate in
connection with any proceeding the city may or must conduct under applicable
law with respect to the company’s cable system. The company shall produce the
requested books, records and maps at the company’s local office in the Chicago
metropolitan area not later than 30 days after the request for production.
Requests for extensions of time to respond shall not be unreasonably denied.
Records shall be exempt from inspection pursuant to this section to the extent
required by applicable laws regarding subscriber privacy.
   (B)   To the extent provided herein, trade secrets and proprietary,
privileged or confidential information obtained from or provided by the company
that would cause competitive harm to the company if disclosed will not be
publicly disclosed by the city, subject to the provisions of division (D) of
this section.
   (C)   Any such information claimed to be so privileged, and that part of any
document claimed to contain such privileged information (“confidential
information”), shall be appropriately marked by the company as a trade secret,
or as privileged, confidential or proprietary commercial information, and shall
be accompanied by a written request for nondisclosure upon submission of the
information to the city. Nondisclosure requests shall identify the portion of
the materials claimed to be privileged from disclosure and shall contain a
plain statement of the reasons for withholding the information from public
inspection.
   (D)   The city shall protect the confidential information from disclosure to
third parties with the same degree of care afforded to its own confidential and
proprietary information. Information shall not be considered to be privileged,
confidential or proprietary to the extent that it is or becomes publicly
available other than through the city; it is required to be disclosed by a
governmental or judicial order; it is required to be disclosed by statute or
other applicable law. Upon request, the city shall enter into a written
confidentiality agreement incorporating these conditions prior to inspection of
any records claimed to be privileged from disclosure as provided in division
(C) of this section.
(Prior Code, § 122.083) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.084 RECORDS AND REPORTS REQUIRED.
   (A)   The company shall provide the following quarterly reports in a form
acceptable to the city:
      (1)   A report showing the number of service calls by type during the
preceding quarter;
      (2)   A report showing the number of outages during, the preceding,
quarter; and
      (3)   A report stating the subscriber totals for each category of service
for the city including current subscribers, new subscribers, reconnects,
disconnects, secondary connects and pay units.
   (B)   The company shall provide the city such other or additional
information as the city may request from time to time, provided that such other
or additional information relates to the scope of the city’s regulatory
authority.
(Prior Code, § 122.084) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.085 ANNUAL REPORTS.
   Within 120 days after the close of the company’s fiscal year, the company
shall submit a written annual report in a form approved by the city. Such
report shall include, without limitation, the following information:
   (A)   A copy of the company’s annual report, if any, and it’s parent
company’s annual report;
   (B)   A list of the company’s officers, members of its board of directors,
and any general partners of the company;
   (C)   A list of stockholders or other equity investors holding 5% or more of
the voting interest in the company and its parent;
   (D)   A list of residential areas in the company’s service area where
service is not available, and a schedule for providing service, if applicable;
   (E)   A verified annual financial statement which shall accurately present
the company’s annual gross revenues for the 12-month period and all franchise
fee payments for the 12-month period; and
   (F)   Current subscriber manual or handbook and related materials, any rules
and procedures published by the company for I-Net users.
(Prior Code, § 122.085) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.086 COPIES OF FEDERAL AND STATE REPORTS.
   Upon request, the company shall submit copies of any public document issued
by or filed with, any federal or state regulatory agencies which are non-
routine in nature that will materially and directly affect the company’s cable
television operations within the franchise area.
(Prior Code, § 122.086) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.087 LIQUIDATED DAMAGES.
   (A)   Franchise agreement. The company’s failure to perform certain
obligations under this subchapter or the franchise, agreement, or its failure
to do so in a timely manner, may result in damage to the city that is difficult
to determine. The franchise agreement may set forth a liquidated sum or sums to
be reasonably paid in light of the anticipated loss caused by a breach or
failure to perform and, in the event of such breach or failure to perform, the
company shall pay such amounts to the city as liquidated damages.
   (B)   Assessment of liquidated damages. Before assessing liquidated damages
against the company, the city shall give written notice to the company, and an
opportunity to cure the breach or failure to perform as provided in the
franchise agreement. Unless different procedures or time periods are prescribed
in the franchise agreement, the procedures and time periods for imposing
liquidated damages shall be the same as the procedures set forth herein for
determining and remedying franchise violations.
(Prior Code, § 122.087) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.088 FRANCHISE VIOLATION; NOTICE AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   General. The company shall comply with the requirements of this
subchapter and the franchise agreement at all times during the term of its
franchise.
   (B)   Material violations. If the city has reason to believe that the
company has committed a material violation of this subchapter or the franchise
agreement, the city may act to remedy the violation in accordance with the
procedures set forth below. A material violation shall include:
      (1)   Construction or operation in the city or in the public ways of the
city without a required permit, license or authorization;
      (2)   Construction or operation at an unauthorized location;
      (3)   Unauthorized franchise transfer;
      (4)   Material misrepresentation by or on behalf of the company in any
application to the city or in any report or document required to be filed with
the city;
      (5)   Failure to construct, complete, relocate or remove all or any part
of the cable system as required by this subchapter or the franchise agreement;
      (6)   Failure to provide the services, facilities or resources required
by this subchapter or the franchise agreement;
      (7)   Failure to pay taxes, franchise fees, costs or penalties when and
as due the city;
      (8)   Failure to file required documents, applications or reports,
including financial reports, with the city;
      (9)   Failure to deliver evidence of the company’s insurance coverage as
specified in §
122.063;
      (10)   Failure to file and maintain with the city all required bonds;
      (11)   Failure to establish and maintain the security fund required
pursuant to §
122.061;
      (12)   Failure to restore any amount withdrawn from the security fund,
within the time specified in §
122.061;
      (13)   Failure to commence or complete construction within the time
specified in the franchise agreement hereof;
      (14)   Systemic failure to comply with the customer service standards as
required by §
122.092;
      (15)   Failure to comply with the material provisions of this subchapter;
or
      (16)   Failure to comply with the material terms of the franchise
agreement.
   (C)   Notice of material violations. Written notice shall be given to the
company setting forth the nature of the material violation and a reasonable
period of time for the company to correct the violation. Unless the city
determines that the violation is of such a nature that a lesser period of time
is warranted for remedying the violation, the company shall be given 30 days
after receipt of such notice to remedy the violation.
   (D)   Answer to notice of violations. Within 30 days, or such other period
of time specified by the city in its notice to the company, the company shall
respond in writing to the city:
      (1)   That it contests the city’s notice of violation and requests an
opportunity to be heard as provided herein. The company shall submit supporting
documentation with its response to the notice;
      (2)   That it contests the city’s notice of violation for the reasons
that the violation was beyond the reasonable control of the company and
requests an opportunity to be heard as provided herein. The company shall
submit supporting documentation with its response to the notice; and
      (3)   That the company will remedy the violation within the time
specified by the city in its notice to the company.
      (4)   If the company contends that an extended period of time is
reasonably needed to remedy the violation, it shall submit a written request
for an extension, together with supporting documentation that the company
cannot reasonably remedy the violation within the time period specified by the
city in its notice to the company. The city shall not unreasonably deny an
extension of time to remedy the violation. If the city grants the extension,
the company shall proceed to remedy the violation within the extended time
prescribed, provided that the company also informs the city on a regular basis
of the steps being taken to remedy the violation.
   (E)   Hearing. The city shall give the company not less than 14 days written
notice of the date, time and place of the public hearing to be held before the
corporate authorities. At the public hearing, the corporate authorities shall
hear and determine the issues and render its findings and its decision. If a
hearing officer has been appointed by the city, the hearing officer shall hear
the relevant evidence and shall render a record of the administrative hearing
and recommended findings and decision to the corporate authorities.
   (F)   Determination. If the company fails to submit a written response to
the city’s notice of violation as provided in division (D) above, or if the
company fails to remedy the violation within the time period specified by the
city in its notice to the company, or any extensions thereto granted by the
city, or if the corporate authorities are persuaded after a hearing that the
company has committed a material violation as provided herein, the corporate
authorities may, after giving the company an opportunity to be heard:
      (1)   Order the company to remedy the violation within a reasonable
period of time specified by the corporate authorities;
      (2)   Assess liquidated damages against the company in accordance with
the franchise agreement; or
      (3)   Impose any lesser sanction permitted by the franchise agreement.
(Prior Code, § 122.088) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.089 FRANCHISE REVOCATION AND TERMINATION.
   (A)   A franchise granted by the city pursuant to this subchapter is subject
to revocation in the event of any substantial breach of the franchise agreement
or default in performance of the company’s performance of the franchise. The
following events, acts or omissions on the part of the company may be
considered cause for revocation of the franchise and termination of the
franchise agreement:
      (1)   Repeated failure, after notice and an opportunity to cure, to
comply with the material provisions of this subchapter;
      (2)   Repeated failure, after notice and an opportunity to cure, to
comply with the material terms of the franchise agreement;
      (3)   Repeated failure to cure material violations of this subchapter or
the franchise agreement within a reasonable time after notice from the city;
      (4)   Material fraud or misrepresentation in obtaining the franchise;
      (5)   Willful failure to pay taxes, franchise fees, costs or penalties
when and as due the city;
      (6)   Willful failure to maintain required insurance coverage;
      (7)   Failure to restore system wide service after 48 consecutive hours
of interrupted service, provided the company’s failure to restore system wide
service is not caused by circumstances or events beyond the company’s
reasonable control; and
      (8)   Insolvency or bankruptcy of the company.
   (B)   Notice of substantial breach. Written notice shall be given to the
company setting forth:
      (1)   The nature of the substantial breach or default by the company;
      (2)   A written demand that the company correct the violation; and
      (3)   Notice that any failure to correct the remedy the substantial
breach or default within 30 days, or such other period of time as may be
stipulated in the franchise agreement, may be cause for revocation of the
franchise.
   (C)   Answer to notice of breach. Within 30 days after the city’s written
notice to the company, the company shall respond in writing to the city,
together with documentation in support of its response:
      (1)   That it contests the city’s notice of substantial breach and
requests an opportunity to be heard as provided herein;
      (2)   That corrective action has been implemented by the company and the
substantial breach or default has been cured; and
      (3)   That corrective action has been implemented by the company and is
being actively and diligently pursued in accordance with a written corrective
action plan to be submitted to the city.
   (D)   Hearing. If requested by the company, or if the city is not satisfied
that sufficient corrective action is being actively and expeditiously pursued
by the company to remedy the substantial breach or default, the city shall
schedule a public hearing to hear and determine the issues and to consider
whether sufficient cause exists to revoke the franchise. The city shall give
the company not less than 14 days’ written notice specifying the city’s intent
to consider the revocation of the company’s franchise pursuant to this
subchapter, and the date, time and place of the public hearing to be held
before the corporate authorities, or a hearing officer appointed by the
corporate authorities. If a hearing officer has been designated, the hearing
officer shall hear the relevant evidence and shall render a record of the
administrative hearing and recommended findings and decision to the corporate
authorities.
   (E)   Determination. After hearing the relevant evidence or considering the
administrative record of the hearing, the corporate authorities shall determine
whether or not a substantial breach or default by the company has occurred,
whether it has been cured or a satisfactory corrective action plan has been
submitted and is being actively and diligently pursued, and whether cause
exists to revoke the franchise. The company shall be given an opportunity to be
heard in connection with those issues. If the corporate authorities are
persuaded that a substantial breach or default has occurred, the corporate
authorities shall consider the nature, circumstances, extent and gravity of the
substantial breach or default, as reflected by the following factors, in
considering whether some lesser sanction or cure, if any, should be imposed:
      (1)   Whether the conduct was egregious;
      (2)   Whether substantial harm resulted;
      (3)   Whether the violation was intentional;
      (4)   Whether there is a history of prior violations of the same or other
requirements; or
      (5)   Whether there is a history of overall compliance.
   (F)   Ordinance. If the corporate authorities determine that cause exists to
revoke the franchise, it may by ordinance declare the company’s franchise to be
terminated and revoked, provided that the city may grant the company an
additional period of time to remedy the substantial breach or default before
such ordinance is fully effective.
(Prior Code, § 122.089) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.090 OTHER REMEDIES.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as limiting any judicial
remedies that the city may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of this
subchapter or of any franchise agreement entered into pursuant to this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 122.090) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.091 RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUALS.
   (A)   The company shall construct, install, maintain and operate its cable
television system so as to protect the privacy rights of each subscriber and
user in accordance with the Cable Act as amended and the FCC rules and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
   (B)   No cable line, wire, amplifier, converter or other piece of equipment
owned by the company shall be installed by the company in the subscriber’s
premises, other than in appropriate easements, without first securing any
required consent. If a subscriber requests service, permission to install upon
subscriber’s property shall be presumed.
(Prior Code, § 122.091) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.092 CONSUMER PROTECTION AND CUSTOMER SERVICE PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Definitions.    For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS. Those hours during which most similar businesses
in the community are open to serve customers. In all cases, normal business
hours must include some evening hours at least one night per week and/or some
weekend hours.
      NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS. Those service conditions which are within
the control of the company. Those conditions which are not within the control
of the company include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil
disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual
weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of
the company include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view
events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and
maintenance or upgrade of the cable system.
      SERVICE INTERRUPTION. The loss of picture or sound on one or more cable
channels.
   (B)   Notification to subscribers.
      (1)   The company shall provide written information on each of the
following areas at the time of installation of service, at least annually to
all subscribers, and at any time upon request:
         (a)   Products and services offered;
         (b)   Prices and options for programming services and conditions of
subscription to programming and other services;
         (c)   Installation and service maintenance policies;
         (d)   Instructions on how to use the cable service;
         (e)   Channel positions of programming carried on the system; and
         (f)   Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and
telephone number of the local franchise authority’s cable office.
      (2)   Subscribers will be notified of any changes in rates, programming
services or channel positions as soon as possible through announcements on the
cable system and in writing. Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of
30 days in advance of such changes if the change is within the control of the
company. In addition, the company shall notify subscribers a minimum of 30 days
in advance of any significant changes in the other information required by
division (B)(1) above.
   (C)   Subscriber billing.
      (1)   Subscriber bills will be clear, concise and understandable. Bills
must be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic
and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills will also clearly
delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges,
rebates and credits.
      (2)   In case of a billing dispute, the company must respond to a written
complaint from a subscriber within 30 days.
      (3)   Credits for service will be issued no later than the subscriber’s
next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted.
      (4)   Refund checks will be issued promptly but no later than either:
         (a)   The subscriber’s next billing cycle following resolution of the
request or 30 days, whichever is earlier; or
         (b)   The return of the equipment supplied by the company if service
is terminated.
   (D)   Telephone service.
      (1)   The company shall maintain a local, toll-free or collect call
telephone customer service number which will be available to its subscribers 24
hours a day, seven days a week.
         (a)   Trained representatives will be available to respond to
subscriber telephone inquiries during normal business hours.
         (b)   After normal business hours, the access line may be answered by
a service or an automated response system, including an answering machine.
Inquiries received after normal business hours must be responded to by a
trained company representative no later than the next business day.
      (2)   Under normal operating conditions, the telephone answer time by a
customer service representative, including wait time, shall not exceed 30
seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred,
transfer time shall not exceed 30 seconds. These standards shall be met no less
than 90% of the time under normal operating conditions, measured on a quarterly
basis.
      (3)   Under normal operating conditions, the subscriber will receive a
busy signal less than 3% of the time.
   (E)   Installations, outages and service calls.
      (1)   Under normal operating conditions, each of the following four
standards will be met no less than 95% of the time measured on a quarterly
basis.
         (a)   Standard installations will be performed within seven business
days after an order has been placed. Standard installations are those that are
located up to 125 feet from the existing distribution system.
         (b)   Excluding conditions beyond its control, the company will begin
working on service interruptions promptly and in no event later than 24 hours
after the interruption becomes known. The company must begin actions to correct
other service problems the next business day after notification of the service
problem.
         (c)   The appointment window alternatives for installations, service,
calls and other installation activities will be either a specific time or, at
maximum, a four-hour time block during normal business hours. The company may
schedule service calls and other installation activities outside normal
business hours for the express convenience of the subscriber.
         (d)   The company may not cancel an appointment with a subscriber
after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled
appointment.
      (2)   If the company’s representative is running late for an appointment
with a subscriber and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled,
the subscriber will be contacted. The appointment will be rescheduled, as
necessary at a time which is convenient for the subscriber.
   (F)   Rights reserved to city. The city reserves the right to amend this
subchapter to incorporate customer service requirements or consumer protection
standards that exceed the standards set by the FCC, if such standards are
deemed to be more beneficial to the city’s residents. Every franchise awarded
pursuant to this subchapter shall be subject to such reserved power whether or
not such franchise is expressly conditioned upon such reserved power. The city
shall provide the company with 90 days written notice of any such amendment,
and an opportunity to enter comments on such amendment. Said amendments shall
be adopted by ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 122.092) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.093 RIGHTS RESERVED TO THE CITY.
   (A)   Eminent domain. Nothing herein shall be deemed or construed to impair
or affect, in any way or to any extent, the power of the city to acquire
property through the exercise of the right of eminent domain, at a fair and
just value; and nothing herein contained shall be construed to contract away or
to modify or abridge, whether for a term or in perpetuity, the city’s right of
eminent domain.
   (B)   Police powers. The company’s rights are subject to the police powers
of the city to adopt and enforce ordinances as the corporate authorities may
deem necessary for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the
public. The company shall comply with all generally applicable laws and
ordinances enacted pursuant to that power.
   (C)   Other legal rights and powers. In addition to any rights specifically
reserved to the city by this subchapter, the city reserves to itself every
right and power which is required to be reserved by a provision of this
subchapter or the franchise.
   (D)   Right to make rules and regulations. There is hereby reserved to the
city the right to adopt rules and regulations as it shall find necessary or
appropriate to implement the terms and conditions of this subchapter; provided,
however, that such rules and regulations are within the scope of the
obligations imposed by this subchapter and franchise agreements granted
pursuant to this subchapter, and do not conflict with the provisions of
applicable federal and state laws and regulations. Before any such rules and
regulations are adopted, the city shall give notice to the company and afford
the company an opportunity to be heard.
   (E)   Variance. The city reserves the right to grant variances from the
strict application of any provision of this subchapter, except those required
by federal or state law, if the city determines: that it is in the public
interest to do so, and that the strict enforcement of such provision will
impose an undue hardship on the company. To be effective, such variance shall
be evidenced by writing signed by a duly authorized representative of the city.
A variance of any provision in one instance shall not be deemed a variance of
such provision subsequent such instance, nor shall it be deemed a variance or
waiver of any other provision of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 122.093) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.094 EQUAL OPPORTUNITY EMPLOYER.
   The company shall not refuse to hire or employ, nor shall it bar or
discharge from employment, nor discriminate against any person in compensation
or in terms, conditions, or privileges of employment because of age, race,
creed, color, national origin, or sex. The company shall comply with the
provisions of the Cable Act and state law relating to employment.
(Prior Code, § 122.094) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.095 NO WAIVER BY THE CITY.
   The company shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of
the provisions of this subchapter or the franchise agreement by reason of any
failure of the city to enforce prompt compliance.
(Prior Code, § 122.095) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001)
§ 122.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   The city, pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/22-501(r)(1), does hereby
provide for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of the Cable and
Video Customer Protection Law by cable or video providers in addition to the
penalties provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a
competitively neutral basis and shall not exceed $750 for each day of the
material breach, and shall not exceed $25,000 for each occurrence of a material
breach per customer.
      (2)   MATERIAL BREACH means any substantial failure of a cable or video
provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any
provision of the law.
      (3)   The city shall give the cable or video provider written notice of
any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least 30
days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach.
      (4)   A material breach, for the purposes of assessing penalties, shall
be deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by
the cable or video service provider after the notice in division (B)(3) above.
   (C)   Any person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of §§
122.040 through
122.095 shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $750 for each offense.
A separate and distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a
violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 122.999) (Ord. 2001-377, passed 11-13-2001; Ord. 07-104, passed
10-9-2007)
CHAPTER 123: OTHER STORES AND SERVICES
Section
Barber Shops
   
123.001   License required
   
123.002   Application for license
   
123.003   License fee
   
123.004   Sanitation requirements
Department Stores
   
123.015   Definition
   
123.016   License required
   
123.017   Application for license
   
123.018   License fees
Florists
   
123.030   Definition
   
123.031   License required; fee
   
123.032   Application for license
   
123.033   Maintenance requirements
Undertakers and Cemeteries
   
123.045   License required
   
123.046   Application for license
   
123.047   License fee; expiration
   
123.048   New cemeteries prohibited
   
123.049   Additions to existing cemeteries restricted
Weights and Measures
   
123.060   Regulations adopted by reference
Filming Activities
   
123.075   Compliance with regulations required
   
123.076   Definition
   
123.077   Application for permit
   
123.078   Insurance and indemnification
   
123.079   Film permit fee
   
123.080   Approval, issuance of permit
   
123.081   Clean-up fee
   
123.082   Violation
BARBER SHOPS
§ 123.001 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall conduct or operate a barber shop in the city without having
obtained a license as required.
(Prior Code, § 123.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 123.002 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Any person desiring to conduct a barber shop in the city shall make
application in writing to the City Clerk, stating the name of the applicant,
the place where such barber shop is to be conducted, and other pertinent
information.
(Prior Code, § 123.02)
§ 123.003 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual license fee to be paid by each person to whom a license shall be
issued hereunder shall be $50 per year. All licenses shall expire on the April
30 next after the issuance.
(Prior Code, § 123.03)
§ 123.004 SANITATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The premises used for a barber shop shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition. All persons engaged in the operation of the barber shop must keep
themselves clean in person and clothing. Utensils and tools must be sterilized
before being used on a patron. It shall be unlawful to keep as a barber, or
other employee in any such shop, any person afflicted with a contagious disease
of any kind. The Health Commissioner shall make or cause to be made inspections
necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of the subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 123.04)
DEPARTMENT STORES
§ 123.015 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEPARTMENT STORE. A store in which more than two distinct lines of
merchandise are sold or offered for sale.
(Prior Code, § 123.15)
§ 123.016 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate or conduct a department store, as above defined,
without securing a license.
(Prior Code, § 123.16) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 123.017 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Any person desiring to engage in the business of conducting a department
store, as above defined, shall make application to the City Clerk for a
license. The application shall state the name of the applicant, the place of
the business, the number of persons engaged, in the conduct of the business and
other information desired by the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 123.17)
§ 123.018 LICENSE FEES.
   The annual license fee to be paid by the applicant shall be $75 per year, in
accordance with §
39.01(C) of this code, Classification III.
(Prior Code, § 123.18) (Ord. 2307, passed 3-23-1976)
FLORISTS
§ 123.030 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FLORIST. Any person engaged in business of selling, offering for sale, or
keeping with the intention of selling at retail flowers, bridal bouquets,
funeral designs or growing plants.
(Prior Code, § 123.30) (Ord. 1673, passed 4-28-1952)
§ 123.031 LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE.
   No person shall engage in the business of florist without having procured a
license. The annual license fee shall be $50. Every license shall expire on the
April 30 next after its issuance. No license shall be issued for a sum less
than the full amount of the annual license fee.
(Prior Code, § 123.31) (Ord. 2319, passed 3-23-1976) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 123.032 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Every person desiring a license as a florist shall make application in
writing to the City Clerk. The application shall set forth the name of the
person desiring the license, the name under which the business will be
conducted, the location of the business, and a statement that the applicant
will abide by the provisions of this. subchapter and all other applicable city
and state laws.
(Prior Code, § 123.32) (Ord. 1673, passed 4-28-1952)
§ 123.033 MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   Every location, place or establishment where the business of a florist is
conducted, managed or carried on shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition and free from vermin. No decayed, decaying, unwholesome, contaminated
or diseased flowers or plants shall be allowed to remain in or about the
establishment. Every location, place or establishment where cut flowers are
sold or kept for sale shall be equipped with a refrigerator or ice box of
adequate size and capacity for the keeping of cut flowers.
(Prior Code, § 123.33) (Ord. 1673, passed 4-28-1952)
UNDERTAKERS AND CEMETERIES
§ 123.045 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall conduct or carry on in the city the business of funeral
director or undertaker without obtaining a license.
(Prior Code, § 123.45) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 123.046 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Any person desiring to conduct or carry on the business of funeral director
or undertaker shall make application to the City Clerk for a license, setting
forth the name of the applicant and the place where the applicant’s business is
to be conducted or carried on. Upon the payment of a license fee, the City
Clerk shall issue to the applicant a license, attested by the proper city
authorities, authorizing the applicant to conduct or carry on the business of
funeral director or undertaker at the place specified in the license.
(Prior Code, § 123.46)
§ 123.047 LICENSE FEE; EXPIRATION.
   (A)   The annual license fee to be paid by the applicant shall be $100, plus
$10 for each person employed in the undertaking establishment except the
proprietor.
   (B)   All licenses shall expire on the April 30 following the date of
issuance. If the license is issued for less than one year, the amount of the
license fee shall be reduced pro rata.
(Prior Code, § 123.47) (Ord. 1669, passed 4-14-1952; Ord. 2311, passed 3-23-
1976)
§ 123.048 NEW CEMETERIES PROHIBITED.
   No cemetery or place for the burial of the dead shall be established within
or adjacent to the city or within one mile of the corporate limits of the city.
(Prior Code, § 123.48) (Ord. 1714, passed 5-10-1954)
§ 123.049 ADDITIONS TO EXISTING CEMETERIES RESTRICTED.
   (A)   No addition shall be made to any cemetery now existing within the city
or within one mile of the corporate limits of the city except with the express
consent of the City Council, and then only upon a showing that the addition
will not result in danger to human life or health and will not in any way tend
to be or become a nuisance.
   (B)   This prohibition shall not apply to any tract of land dedicated to
cemetery purposes.
(Prior Code, § 123.49) (Ord. 1714, passed 5-10-1954)
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
§ 123.060 REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The provisions relating to weights and measures as are adopted by the city
are adopted by reference and incorporated as a part of this code as if fully
set out herein.
(Prior Code, § 123.60)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see 225 ILCS 470
FILMING ACTIVITIES
§ 123.075 COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS REQUIRED.
   No person shall use any public or private property, facility or residence
within the city limits for the purpose of filming activities without having
paid the permit fee and complied with the regulations hereinafter set.
(Ord. 2021-25, passed 7-27-2021)
§ 123.076 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FILM ACTIVITIES.
      (1)   Staging, shooting, filming, videotaping or other similar process
conducted for the making of still photographs, motion pictures, television
programs, commercial or nontheatrical productions that requires:
         (a)   The exclusive use of city streets, sidewalks or other portions
of the public way for the staging of vehicles, equipment or crew personnel; or
         (b)   Special city services, including but not limited to:
            1.   Street closures;
            2.   Barricades, garbage cans, stages or special “no parking”
signs;
            3.   Special electrical services;
            4.   Special police protection;
            5.   Special effects, pyrotechnics, stunts, rigging or similar
activities regulated under this code or requiring permits or similar approvals
from other city departments: or
            6.   A likely impact on the public.
      (2)   FILM ACTIVITIES do not include current news reporters,
photographers or cameramen in the employ of a newspaper, news service or
similar entity engaged in on the spot coverage or broadcasting of news events
concerning those persons, scenes, or occurrences which are in the news and of
public interest. FILM ACTIVITIES do not include the filming or digital visual
recording of motion pictures or the taking of still photographs solely for
private or family use.
(Ord. 2021-25, passed 7-27-2021)
§ 123.077 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   Any person desiring to conduct or carry on with filming activities
within the city limits must apply for a film permit from the Mayor or his her
designee.
   (B)   The film permit application shall set forth the inclusive dates and
hours during which filming activities will take place; the specific location/
locations of the filming activities, a brief description of the filming
activities; the exact number of personnel involved, including the number of
crew members, talent, volunteers and any other individuals that are part of the
film production and will be present during filming activities, the exact amount
and type of vehicles and equipment that will be involved in the filming
activities, a description of any activity that may cause public alarm such as
the use of animals, gunfire, pyrotechnics or drones; and the name, address,
email address and telephone number of the person/persons in charge of the
filming activities.
(Ord. 2021-25, passed 7-27-2021)
§ 123.078 INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   (1)   The applicant for a film permit shall provide to the city proof
of insurance evidencing commercial general liability insurance, with limits of
not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury and
property damage and $500,000 per person, naming the city as an additional
insured on a primary non-contributory basis for any liability arising directly
or indirectly from the permittee’s operations. This requirement is necessary
for the issuance of a film permit.
      (2)   Each insurance policy required under this division (A) shall
include a provision stating that the policy shall not be subject to
cancellation, reduction in the amount of its liabilities or other material
changes until notice thereof has been received in writing by the City Mayor’s
office prior to such action.
      (3)   The insurance required under this division (A) shall be maintained
in full force and effect for the duration of the permit period. Any violation
of this division (A) shall result in automatic revocation of the permit.
      (4)   For purposes of this division (A), the duration of the permit
period shall include the time required for construction and removal of all
materials and equipment utilized during the filming activities. In the case of
requests for city services that involve the hiring of police and fire
personnel, proof of worker’s compensation insurance shall also be required.
   (B)   Apart from and separate from any insurance required under division (A)
above, the applicant for a film permit under this section shall agree in
writing to indemnify, defend and hold the city and it assignees and employees
harmless from all losses, damages, injuries, claims, demands and expensing
arising out of the operation of the permitted event within city limits.
   (C)   The certificates of insurance must be submitted prior to the start of
filming activities.
(Ord. 2021-25, passed 7-27-2021)
§ 123.079 FILM PERMIT FEE.
   (A)   The general fee to be paid for a film permit that allows filming
activities within city limits in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter shall be as follows:
 
Permit Type                 Security Deposit Permit Fee
Filming Level 1: 1—5 crew $600             $310 (per location, per date)
Filming Level 2: 6—12 crew$600             $500 (per location, per date)
Filming Level 3: 13—20 cre$600             $2,000 (per location, per date)
Filming Level 4: 21 and     $5,200           $3,000 (per location, per date)
greater crew
 
   (B)   The City Administrator retains the right to issue or deny a film
permit, require or not require a security deposit, and increase the permit fee,
should the circumstances require the same. Additionally, any vehicles used by
the production companies that park overnight within the city and on a city
street shall be charged the following fees: $50 per car/$100 per truck per
night. The city may also charge a rental fee for city owned parking lots for
$500/day.
(Ord. 2021-25, passed 7-27-2021; Ord. 2025-021, passed 5-27-2025)
§ 123.080 APPROVAL, ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   If the application provided for in §
123.077 of this chapter meets with approval of the Mayor or his or her designee
and the appropriate permit fee and security deposit have been provided to the
city, the Mayor or his or her designee shall issue or cause to be issued to the
person making an application, a film permit to carry on and conduct filming
activities for the timeframe specified therein.
(Ord. 2021-25, passed 7-27-2021)
§ 123.081 CLEAN-UP FEE.
   (A)   In addition to any fee to be paid for a permit hereunder, an applicant
for a film permit shall deposit a security deposit as specified in §
123.079 with the City Clerk at the time of filing an application for the
permit. This deposit shall ensure compliance with all applicable ordinances of
the city and shall further ensure that the applicants receiving a film permit
restore the grounds upon which the filming activities were held to their
original condition.
   (B)   At the close of any filming activities, the Superintendent of Public
Works shall inspect the grounds and public way upon which the filming
activities took place. In the event that the grounds and public way are free
from debris, litter and restored to their original condition, the
Superintendent shall direct the City Clerk in writing to refund the deposit
heretofore posted. If the Superintendent of Public Works deems that the grounds
or public way are not restored to their original condition, and upon refusal or
failure of the permit holder to make the required correction, the city may do
the necessary work with the costs thereof being deducted from the deposit. The
balance of the deposit, if any, shall be returned to the depositor or, if the
costs of proper restoration exceed the deposit, then the depositor shall pay to
the city the amount of the excess.
(Ord. 2021-25, passed 7-27-2021)
§ 123.082 VIOLATION.
   Any person violating §§
123.075 through
123.081 shall be fined not less than $500 or more than $1,000 for each offense.
If a person/entity engaging in filming activities does not obtain a film
permit, the city can require the immediate termination of all filming
activities. In addition to termination of filming activities, the city shall
fine the person/entity that did not obtain a permit for each day that filming
activities occurred within the city without a film permit. All violations of
this chapter, will be considered separate offenses subject to the
aforementioned fines on a daily basis.
(Ord. 2021-25, passed 7-27-2021)
CHAPTER 124: CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
124.01   Definitions
   
124.02   Business license required
   
124.03   Application
   
124.04   Inspection
   
124.05   Issuance of a cannabis business license
   
124.06   Cannabis license fee
   
124.07   Revocation or suspension of cannabis business license
   
124.08   Notice and hearing; appeal
   
124.09   General regulations
   
124.10   Hours of operation
   
124.11   Cannabis dispensaries
   
124.12   Cannabis transporters
   
124.13   Advertising and signage
§ 124.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act of Illinois and any subsequent
amendments, being 410 ILCS 705/1 et seq.
   ADVERTISE. To engage in promotional activities including, but not limited
to, newspaper, radio, internet and electronic media, and television
advertising, the distribution of flyers and circulars, billboard advertising
and the display of window and interior signs. ADVERTISE does not mean exterior
signage displaying only the name of the licensed cannabis business
establishment.
   AGENT IN CHARGE. Ss required by the Act, a full-time agent or principal
officer of the cannabis business that is responsible for opening and closing
the business, delivery acceptance, oversight of sales and agents,
recordkeeping, inventory, training and compliance with state and local law.
   APPLICANT. An individual or business seeking a cannabis business license
from the city or a renewal of said license.
   CANNABIS. Marijuana, hashish and other substances that are identified as
including any parts of the plant Cannabis sativa and including derivatives or
subspecies, such as indica of all strains of cannabis, whether growing or not,
the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant, and any
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant,
its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other
naturally produced cannabinol derivatives, whether produced directly or
indirectly by extraction; however, CANNABIS does not include the mature stalks
of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds
of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or
preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted from it), fiber,
oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of
germination. CANNABIS does not include industrial hemp as defined and
authorized under the Industrial Hemp Act, being 505 ILCS 89/1 et seq. CANNABIS
also means cannabis flower, concentrate and cannabis infused products.
   CANNABIS BUSINESS. An adult-use cannabis cultivation center, adult-use
cannabis craft grower, adult-use cannabis processing organization, adult-use
cannabis infuser organization, adult-use cannabis dispensing organization or an
adult-use cannabis transporting organization.
   CANNABIS BUSINESS LICENSE. An authorization licensing the cannabis business
to operate within the city.
   CANNABIS CONCENTRATE. A product derived from cannabis that is produced by
extracting cannabinoids, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) from the plant
through the use of propylene glycol, glycerin, butter, olive oil or other
typical cooking fats; water, ice or dry ice; or butane, propane, CO2, ethanol
or isopropanol and with the intended use of smoking or making a cannabis-
infused product. The use of any other solvent is expressly prohibited unless
and until it is approved by the Department of Agriculture.
   CANNABIS CONTAINER. A sealed, traceable, container or package used for the
purpose of containment of cannabis or cannabis-infused product during
transportation.
   CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER. A facility operated by an organization or business
that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to cultivate, dry,
cure and package cannabis and perform other necessary activities to make
cannabis available for sale at a dispensing organization or use at a processing
organization, per the Act, as it may be amended from time-to-time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER. A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, process, transport and perform necessary activities to provide
cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed cannabis business
establishments, per the Act, as it may be amended from time-to-time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION. A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Financial and
Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed cannabis business
establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing cannabis, cannabis-
infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related supplies to
purchasers or to qualified registered medical cannabis patients and caregivers,
per the Act, as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
   CANNABIS FLOWER. Marijuana, hashish and other substances that are identified
as including any parts of the plant Cannabis sativa and including derivatives
or subspecies, such as indica. of all strains of cannabis; including raw kief,
leaves, and buds, but not resin that has been extracted from any part of such
plant; nor any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation
of such plant, its seeds, or resin.
   CANNABIS-INFUSED PRODUCT. A beverage, food, oil, ointment, tincture, topical
formulation, or another product containing cannabis or cannabis concentrate
that is not intended to be smoked.
   CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION OR INFUSER. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product, per the Act as it
may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CANNABIS PARAPHERNALIA. Equipment, products and materials which are intended
to be used for planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, ingesting or otherwise
introducing cannabis into the human body.
   CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or compounds to produce
cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis product, per the Act, as it may be
amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CANNABIS TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER. An organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
transport cannabis on behalf of a cannabis business establishment or a
community college licensed under the Community College Cannabis Vocational
Training Pilot Program, per the Act, as it may be amended from time-to-time,
and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CLONE. A plant section from a female cannabis plant not vet rootbound,
growing in a water solution or other propagation matrix, that is capable of
developing into a new plant.
   LIMITED ACCESS AREA. A building, room, or other area under the control of a
cannabis dispensing organization licensed under the Act and upon the licensed
premises with access limited to purchasers, dispensing organization owners and
other dispensing organization agents or service professionals conducting
business with the dispensing organization.
   MINOR. Any individual under the age of 21 years old.
   ORDINARY PUBLIC VIEW. Within the sight line with normal visual range of a
person, unassisted by visual aids, from a public street or sidewalk adjacent to
real property, or from within an adjacent property.
   PERSON. A natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock
company, joint venture, public or private corporation, limited liability
company, or a receiver, executor, trustee, guardian or other representative
appointed by order of any court.
   TINCTURE. A cannabis infused solution, typically comprised of alcohol
glycerin, or vegetable oils, derived either directly from the cannabis plant or
from a processed cannabis extract. A TINCTURE is not an alcoholic liquor as
defined in the Liquor Control Act of 1934, being 235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq. A
TINCTURE shall include a calibrated dropper or other similar device capable of
accurately measuring servings.
(Ord. 2020-030, passed 8-25-2020)
§ 124.02 BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a cannabis business within
the city without first obtaining a business license.
(Ord. 2020-030, passed 8-25-2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 124.03 APPLICATION.
   Each cannabis business shall complete a written application, provided by the
City Clerk, which must contain the following.
   (A)   Applicant information.
      (1)   If the applicant is an individual: the name, date of birth, home
address, telephone number, email address and a copy of a valid state
identification of the person registering the business and anyone with a
financial interest in the cannabis business;
      (2)   If the applicant is a partnership/noncorporate entity: the name,
date of birth, home address, telephone number, email address and a copy of a
valid state identification for each partner, principal, member thereof, and
anyone with a financial interest in the cannabis business; and
      (3)   If the applicant is a corporation: the name, date of birth, home
address, telephone number, email address, and a copy of a valid state
identification of each principal officer, registered agent thereof, and anyone
with a financial interest in the cannabis business, a copy of the corporation
or LLC’s certificate of good standing issued by the Illinois Secretary of
State.
   (B)   Legal name. The legal name of the cannabis business and any other
names it may operate under;
   (C)   Location. The physical location, telephone number, and internet
address of the cannabis business;
   (D)   Copy of documents. A copy of all documents submitted to the Illinois
Department of Financial and Professional Regulation or the Illinois Department
of Agriculture for issuance of a state license;
   (E)   License. A copy of the cannabis business’s state issued license and a
statement as to whether the cannabis business is a qualified social equity
applicant by the State of Illinois;
   (F)   Special use license. A copy of the special use license issued by the
City Council;
   (G)   Site plan. A copy of the site plan as submitted to the Plan
Commission;
   (H)   Hours. The hours of operation for the cannabis business;
   (I)   Agent. The name, address, date of birth and copy of state issued agent
identification for the designated agent in charge and all other dispensing
agents;
   (J)   Property owner. The property owner’s name, address, telephone number
and email address and a valid copy of the lease agreement if applicable;
   (K)   Insurance. Proof of adequate insurance coverage for liability,
worker’s compensation, tenant or owner’s insurance for the premises and
equipment;
   (L)   Security plan.
      (1)   A copy of the cannabis business’s security plan that describes the
cannabis business’s plans to:
         (a)   Prevent diversion, theft, or loss of cannabis and monetary
funds;
         (b)   Monitor the activities in and around the cannabis business; and
         (c)   Restrict access to limited access areas and restricted access
areas.
      (2)   The Chief of Police shall have the right to review the security
plan.
   (M)   Application fee. Nonrefundable application fee of $2,000.
(Ord. 2020-030, passed 8-25-2020)
§ 124.04 INSPECTION.
   Once the City Clerk has determined that the business license application is
complete, he or she shall forward the application to the Building Commissioner
to conduct an inspection of the premises for compliance with all applicable
laws, including the building, electrical, plumbing, health, housing, zoning and
fire codes of the city, and any other regulations of the city relating to the
public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 2020-030, passed 8-25-2020)
§ 124.05 ISSUANCE OF A CANNABIS BUSINESS LICENSE.
   The application materials, inspectional reports, and any other relevant
information shall be forwarded to the Mayor, or his or her designee, who shall
issue a business license if the cannabis business complies with all applicable
provisions of this chapter. If the Mayor denies the cannabis business license,
he or she must notify the applicant in writing within 14 days.
(Ord. 2020-030, passed 8-25-2020)
§ 124.06 CANNABIS LICENSE FEE.
   The yearly fee for a cannabis business license shall be $1,000.
(Ord. 2020-030, passed 8-25-2020)
§ 124.07 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF CANNABIS BUSINESS LICENSE.
   The Mayor may deny, refuse to renew, suspend or revoke a cannabis business
license for any of the following reasons:
   (A)   Fraud, misrepresentation of material fact or false statement on the
application for a cannabis business license or any subsequent renewal;
   (B)   Failure to inform the city of any changes to the information contained
in the application for a cannabis business license;
   (C)   Any outstanding debt owed to the city by the cannabis business
establishment or any of its owners, partners, officers or board members,
including any taxes, fees or penalties;
   (D)   Any violation of the laws of the State of Illinois or any city
ordinance;
   (E)   Revocation or suspension of the cannabis business’s state issued
license;
   (F)   Any violation of the terms of the cannabis business’s special use
permit;
   (G)   Operating without a cannabis business license;
   (H)   A pattern of conduct that demonstrates incompetence or that the
cannabis business has engaged in conduct or actions that would constitute
grounds for discipline under the Cannabis Regulation and Taxation Act, being
410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq.;
   (I)   Refusing to allow the Mayor, his or her designee, or any member of law
enforcement or Building Department to enter and inspect the cannabis business
or refusing to cooperate in an investigation; and
   (J)   Any fact or condition that, if had existed at the time of the original
completion of the application for a cannabis business license would have
warranted the denial of the business license
(Ord. 2020-030, passed 8-25-2020)
§ 124.08 NOTICE AND HEARING; APPEAL.
   (A)   Prior to taking any adverse action against a cannabis business
license, and at least 14 days prior to hearing, the Mayor shall issue by
regular and electronic mail to the addresses listed on the application for a
cannabis business license, a written notice of hearing. The written notice
shall contain the charges made, date, time and location of the hearing.
   (B)   The Mayor has the authority to subpoena and administer oaths to
witnesses, hear the charges, agree to negotiated consent orders, and issue a
written order within 14 days.
   (C)   Any cannabis business that is denied a cannabis business license or
whose cannabis business license was declined to be renewed, suspended, or
revoked has the right to appeal to the City Council.
(Ord. 2020-030, passed 8-25-2020)
§ 124.09 GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Compliance with law. All cannabis businesses must comply with all
state and local laws, including the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410 ILCS
705/1 et seq., building, electrical, plumbing, health, housing, zoning and fire
codes.
   (B)   Report to police. Every cannabis business must promptly, within 24
hours, document and report any loss, theft, security breach or criminal
activity to city police.
   (C)   Inspections. It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business to refuse
entry or otherwise refuse inspection by the Mayor, his or her designee, any
member of law enforcement or building services.
   (D)   Employee identification. It shall be unlawful for an employee of a
cannabis business to engage in employment activities for the cannabis business
unless he or she displays a valid agent identification card, as required by
state law. A copy of all agent identification cards shall be forwarded to the
City Clerk and updated as the card is renewed, suspended, revoked or the
employee is terminated.
   (E)   Sanitary conditions. It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business to
maintain any building or equipment in an unclean or unsanitary state. All
buildings and equipment shall be free from infestation by insects, rodents or
pests.
   (F)   Deliveries. It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business to accept
cannabis deliveries through public or limited access areas. All deliveries must
be accepted into a restricted access area with adequate security.
   (G)   Odor control. Sufficient measures and means of preventing smoke,
odors, debris, dust, fluids, and other substances from exiting a cannabis
business establishment must be provided at all times.
   (H)   Lighting. No portion of the exterior of the cannabis business shall
utilize or contain any flashing lights, search lights or spotlights or any
similar lighting system.
   (I)   Minors prohibited. It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business to
allow any person under the age of 21 years old to enter or loiter about any
cannabis business. Cannabis dispensaries authorized to sell medical cannabis
may allow qualified patients pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Program Act, being 410 ILCS 130/1, over the age of 18 years old with
proper identification to enter the cannabis dispensing organization.
   (J)   On-site consumption. The on-site consumption of cannabis is prohibited
within a cannabis business and on the adjacent premises. The business shall be
responsible for enforcing the prohibition of on-site consumption of cannabis
under all circumstances inside and outside the business and adjacent premises.
(Ord. 2020-030, passed 8-25-2020)
§ 124.10 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business to open earlier than 6:00
a.m.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business to close later than 10:00
p.m. No cannabis business shall allow any person other than himself, herself or
employees to remain in the premises where cannabis is offered for sale longer
than 30 minutes after the closing hour.
   (C)   Hours of operation shall apply to all sales, delivery and dispensing
activities of the business.
(Ord. 2020-030, passed 8-25-2020)
§ 124.11 CANNABIS DISPENSARIES.
   (A)   Inoperable equipment. It shall be unlawful for a cannabis dispensing
organization to operate if its security system, point of sale system or
inventory system are inoperable.
   (B)   Sale to minors prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any cannabis
dispensing organization to give, sell or deliver to any minor, directly or
indirectly, any cannabis. Cannabis businesses authorized to sell medical
cannabis may allow qualified patients pursuant to the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Program Act, being 410 ILCS 130/1, over the age of 18 years
old to purchase medical cannabis.
   (C)   Minimum employees. It shall be unlawful for a cannabis dispensing
organization to operate if less than two licensed employees are present.
   (D)   Prohibited dispensing. It shall be unlawful for a cannabis dispensing
organization to dispense cannabis through vending machines, drive through
windows or delivery services.
   (E)   Visibility of products. It shall be unlawful for any retail cannabis,
cannabis products or cannabis paraphernalia to be displayed or kept so as to be
visible outside the cannabis dispensing organization by ordinary public view.
   (F)   Storage. During hours of operation, all cannabis shall be stored in an
enclosed locked room or cabinet accessible only to authorized business agents.
When the business is closed, all cannabis and currency shall be stored in a
reinforced vault room in the restricted access area in a manner as to prevent
diversion, theft or loss.
   (G)   Packaging. Any product containing cannabis shall be pre-packaged in a
sealed, odor-proof and child-resistant cannabis container consistent with all
regulations contained in the Act.
   (H)   Prohibited products. It shall be unlawful for any cannabis business to
sell:
      (1)   Cannabis seeds, except to those individuals showing valid
identification as a qualifying patient under the Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Program Act;
      (2)   Clones or other live plant material;
      (3)   Any products containing alcohol, with the exception of tinctures as
allowed by state law; and
      (4)   Cannabis, cannabis concentrate or cannabis infused products in
combination or bundled with each other or any other items for one price.
(Ord. 2020-030, passed 8-25-2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 124.12 CANNABIS TRANSPORTERS.
   (A)   A cannabis transporting organization agent must keep his or her
identification card visible at all times when on the property of a cannabis
business establishment and during the transportation of cannabis when acting
under his or her duties as a cannabis transporting organization agent and must
provide the identification card upon request to any law enforcement officer
engaged in his or her official duties.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person or individual who is not a
licensed cannabis transporting organization agent to be present in a commercial
vehicle or trailer engaged in the transportation of cannabis for a cannabis
transporter.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for anyone under the age of 21 years old to be
present in a commercial vehicle or trailer engaged in the transportation of
cannabis as a cannabis transporter.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis transporter or cannabis
transporting organization agent to transport cannabis anywhere other than to a
cultivation center, craft grower, infuser organization, dispensing
organization, testing facility or otherwise authorized by law.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for an adult use cannabis transporter or cannabis
transporting organization agent to use a commercial motor vehicle with a weight
rating over 10,001 pounds.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for an adult use cannabis transporter or cannabis
transporting organization agent to operate as a cannabis transporter without a
copy of the registration and manifest for the cannabis delivery in the vehicle.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for an adult use cannabis transporter or cannabis
transporting organization agent to transport cannabis, so it is visible or
recognizable from outside the vehicle.
   (H)   It shall be unlawful for a vehicle transporting cannabis to bear any
markings to indicate the vehicle contains cannabis or bear the name or logo of
the cannabis business establishment.
   (I)   It shall be unlawful for an adult use cannabis transporter or cannabis
transporting organization agent to transport cannabis unless it is stored in an
enclosed, locked, storage compartment that is secured or affixed to the
vehicle.
(Ord. 2020-030, passed 8-25-2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 124.13 ADVERTISING AND SIGNAGE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business or any other person or
entity to engage in advertising that is false or misleading, promotes
overconsumption of cannabis or cannabis products, depicts the actual
consumption of cannabis or cannabis products, depicts a person under 21 years
of age consuming cannabis, makes any health, medicinal or therapeutic claims
about cannabis or cannabis infused products, includes the image of a cannabis
leaf or bud, includes any image designed or likely to appeal to minors,
including cartoons, toys, animals or children or any other likeness to images,
characters, or phrases that is designed in any manner to be appealing to or
encourage consumption by persons under 21 years of age.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business or any other person or
entity to place or maintain an advertisement of cannabis or a cannabis infused
product in any form or through any medium:
      (1)   Within 1,000 feet of the perimeter of school grounds, a playground,
a recreation center or facility, a childcare center, a public park or public
library or a game arcade;
      (2)   On or in a public transit vehicle or public transit shelter; and
      (3)   On or in publicly owned or publicly operated property.
   (C)   Electronic message board and temporary signs are not permitted in
connection with cannabis businesses.
   (D)   All signage must comply with the Act.
(Ord. 2020-030, passed 8-25-2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS AND PROPERTY
      
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS
      
133.   OFFENSES PERTAINING TO MINORS
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
Section
General Provisions
   
130.01   Abandonment of refrigerators
   
130.02   Disorderly conduct
   
130.03   Loitering in public places; gangs
   
130.04   Firearms; discharge prohibited; replicas
   
130.05   Airguns; discharge prohibited
   
130.06   Open burning and recreational fires
Cannabis; Drug Paraphernalia
   
130.20   Possession of cannabis
   
130.21   Cannabis possession limits
   
130.22   Cannabis possession by minors
   
130.23   Unlawful possession of cannabis
   
130.24   Unlawful use of cannabis
   
130.25   Cannabis cultivation restrictions
   
130.26   Manufacture and delivery of cannabis prohibited
   
130.27   Possession of drug paraphernalia
 
   
130.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.01 ABANDONMENT OF REFRIGERATORS.
   No person shall abandon or discard, in any place accessible to children, any
refrigerator, icebox or ice chest of a capacity of one and one-half cubic feet
or more, which has an attached lid or door, which may be opened or fastened
shut by means of an attached latch or, being the owner, lessee or manager of
such place, knowingly permit such abandoned or discarded refrigerator, icebox
or ice chest to remain there in such condition.
(Prior Code, § 130.01) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   No person shall appear in public in a state of intoxication, engage in
any fight or quarrel, cause, permit or procure any dog or cock fight or engage
in any type of disorderly conduct.
   (B)   Any one of the following acts shall, when committed within the city,
be considered as disorderly conduct:
      (1)   To commit an assault or an assault and battery;
      (2)   To provoke a breach of the peace or to use any violent,
threatening, profane or indecent language to the disturbance of any person or
to use any threatening or abusive language toward any other person;
      (3)   To make, countenance or assist in making any improper noise, riot,
disturbance or breach of the peace;
      (4)   To be openly lewd or do any act of public indecency tending to
debauch the public morals or appear in public naked or indecently exposed;
      (5)   To shoot any bird or animal or hunt with any gun or dog or
discharge any firearm or other dangerous weapon in any street, highway, alley,
thoroughfare, park or public grounds;
      (6)   To interrupt or disturb any assembly of people met for the worship
of God or any school or other assembly or procession of people met for lawful
purpose;
      (7)   To overload, overwork, cruelly beat, torture, mutilate or cruelly
kill any animal or cause or knowingly allow the same to be done;
      (8)   To injure, destroy, deface or assist in injuring, destroying or
defacing any bridge, fence, building, school house, church building, depot,
house, public building, street, sign, lamp post, sidewalk or hydrant or to
write or place any indecent or bawdy words or pictures or advertisements
thereon;
      (9)   To keep or maintain a house of ill fame, assignation or place for
the practice of prostitution or lewdness or to patronize or be an inmate of the
same, or to let, own or be interested in any house, room or other premises for
any such purpose or to keep an ill-governed, disorderly house, to the
encouragement of idleness, gaming, drinking, fornication or other misbehavior;
      (10)   For any person, except law enforcement officials and persons
properly licensed to do so, to carry or wear under his or her clothes or
concealed about his or her person, any pistol, revolver, slingshot, metal
knuckles, dirk, dagger, knife or other dangerous or deadly weapon;
      (11)   For any person to exhibit, sell or offer to sell, give away or
offer to give away or otherwise disseminate or have in such person’s
possession, any obscene or indecent book, pamphlet, paper, drawing, lithograph,
engraving, picture, daguerreotype, photograph, stereoscopic picture, model,
cast instrument or article for indecent or immoral use or any other thing
tending to debauch the public morals;
      (12)   For any person to manage or use any device or play any game with
intent to cheat or defraud another;
      (13)   Loitering in or about any public park, public building, public
street, public sidewalk or other public thoroughfare or in or about any private
property which is generally open and accessible to the public, when such
loitering:
         (a)   Causes a clear and present danger of riot;
         (b)   Will clearly cause an immediate, actual, physically violent
reaction from any person thereby causing a clear and present threat to the
public peace;
         (c)   Causes actual interference, disturbance or annoyance to the
comfort or repose of any person using such public property in a lawful and
customary manner; or
         (d)   Obstructs or interferes with the free and normal passage of
pedestrians or vehicles.
      (14)   Failing to depart or disperse from any public park, public
building, public street, public sidewalk or other public thoroughfare or from
any private property which is generally open and accessible to the public, upon
the order of a duly authorized police officer or other legally authorized
conservator of the peace when such order has been given for the purpose of
preventing or suppressing any of the foregoing enumerated acts of disorderly
conduct;
      (15)   Transmits, in any manner to the fire department of any city, town,
village or fire protection district, a false alarm of fire, knowing at the time
of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such
fire exists;
      (16)   Transmits, in any manner to another, a false alarm to the effect
that a bomb or other explosive of any nature is concealed in such place that
its explosion would endanger human life, knowing at the time of such
transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such bomb or
explosive is concealed in such place;
      (17)   Transmits, in any manner to any peace officer, public officer or
public employee, a report to the effect that an offense has been committed,
knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for
believing that such an offense has been committed; and/or
      (18)   Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful
purpose or deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any
window or other opening in it.
(Prior Code, § 130.02) (Ord. 2018-049, passed 9-25-2018) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 LOITERING IN PUBLIC PLACES; GANGS.
   (A)   (1)   No vagrant or mendicant shall frequent any depot, railroad yard,
theater, street, alley, sidewalk, park, public building or any place frequented
by the public in the city.
      (2)   All persons who go about begging, all persons who are idle or
dissolute and do not lawfully provide for themselves or for their families, all
persons having no lawful means of support who habitually spend their time in
houses of ill fame or in gaming houses or who are habitually found loitering or
prowling around any depot, railroad yard, theater, street alley, sidewalk,
park, public building or place frequented by the public and all persons lodging
in or found in the nighttime in outhouses, sheds, barns or unoccupied buildings
or lodging in the open air and unable to justify their presence in such place
are declared to be vagrants or mendicants within the meaning of this section.
   (B)   (1)   Whenever a police officer observes a person whom he or she
reasonably believes to be a criminal street gang member loitering in any public
place with one or more other persons, he or she shall order all such persons to
disperse and remove themselves from the area. Any person who does not promptly
obey such an order is in violation of this division (B).
      (2)   It shall be an affirmative defense to an alleged violation of this
division (B) that no person who was observed loitering was in fact a member of
a criminal street gang.
      (3)   For the purpose of this division (B), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         CRIMINAL GANG ACTIVITY. 
            1.   Definition. The commission, attempted commission or
solicitation of the following offenses; provided that, the offenses are
committed by two or more persons or by an individual at the direction of, or in
association with, any criminal street gang with the specific intent to promote,
further or assist in any criminal conduct by gang members.
            2.   Criminal code reference. The following sections of the
Criminal Code of 2012: 720 ILCS 5/9-1 (murder), 9-3.3 (drug-induced homicide),
10-1 (kidnapping), 10-4 (forcible detention), 11-1.30 (aggravated criminal
sexual assault), 12-2 (aggravated assault-discharging firearm), 12-3.05
(aggravated battery), 12-6 (intimidation), 12-6.5 (compelling organization
membership of persons), 18-1 (robbery), 18-2 (armed robbery), 19-1 (burglary),
19-3 (residential burglary), 19-5 (criminal fortification of a residence or
building), 19-6 (home invasion), 20-1 (arson), 20-1.1 (aggravated arson), 20-2
(possession of explosives or explosive or incendiary devices), 24-1(a)(6), (a)
(7) or (a)(9) (unlawful use of weapons), 24-1.1 (unlawful use or possession of
weapons by felons or persons in the custody of the Department of Corrections
facilities), 24-1.2 (aggravated discharge of a firearm), 25.1 (mob action), 33-
1 (bribery), 33A-2 (armed violence); 720 ILCS 550/5, 5.1, 7 or 9 of the
Cannabis Control Act where the offense is a felony (manufacture or delivery of
cannabis, cannabis trafficking, calculated criminal cannabis conspiracy and
related offenses); or 720 ILCS 570/401, 401.1, 405, 406.1, 407 or 407.1 of the
State Controlled Substances Act (illegal manufacture or delivery of a
controlled substance, controlled substance trafficking, calculated criminal
drug conspiracy and related offenses); are adopted by reference.
         CRIMINAL STREET GANG. Any on- going organization, association in fact
or group of three or more persons, whether formal or informal, having as one of
its substantial activities the commission of one or more of the criminal acts
enumerated in division (B)(1) above and whose members individually or
collectively engage in or have engaged in a pattern of criminal gang activity.
         LOITER. To remain in any one place with no apparent purpose.
         PATTERN OF CRIMINAL GANG ACTIVITY. Two or more acts of criminal gang
activity of which at least two such acts were committed within five years of
each other and at least one such act occurred after the effective date of this
division (B).
         PUBLIC PLACE. The public way and any other location open to the public
whether publicly or privately owned.
      (4)   The ordinance from which the provisions of this division (B) derive
shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and
publication in pamphlet form as provided by law. A full, true and complete copy
of this division (B) shall be published in pamphlet form, by authority of the
City Council as corporate authorities.
(Prior Code, § 130.03) (Ord. 93-234, passed 10-26-1993) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.04 FIREARMS; DISCHARGE PROHIBITED; REPLICAS.
   (A)   (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         DESTRUCTIVE DEVICE. Any explosive, incendiary or poison gas:
            1.   Bomb;
            2.   Grenade;
            3.   Rocket having a propellant charge of more than four ounces;
            4.   Missile having an explosive or incendiary charge of more than
one-fourth of an ounce;
            5.   Mine; or
            6.   Device similar to any of the devices described in the
preceding clauses.
         FIREARM.
            1.   Any weapon, excluding a starter gun, which will, or is
designed to, or may readily be converted to, expel a projectile by the action
of an explosive; or
            2.   Any destructive device.
      (2)   Fire or discharge. No person shall fire or discharge any gun,
pistol or other type of firearm within the city, except upon premises used by a
lawful shooting gallery, gun club, rifle club or target range.
      (3)   Exceptions.
         (a)   The provisions of division (A)(2) above shall not apply to
sheriffs, coroners, constables, bank or other security guards when engaged in
the lawful performance of their duties, members of the police force or any
peace officers engaged in the discharge of their official duties or to any
person summoned by any such officers to assist in making arrests or preserving
the peace while the person so summoned is engaged in assisting the officer.
         (b)   The provisions of division (A)(2) above shall not apply to any
person who has obtained a permit to discharge any such gun, pistol or any other
type of firearm from the City Council.
      (4)   Permit provisions.
         (a)   Applications for the permit required under this division (A)(4)
shall be made in writing to the City Clerk. Each application shall state the
name and address of the applicant, the location where the applicant wishes to
discharge the firearm, the purpose for discharging the firearm, the type of
firearm to be discharged, the person who shall discharge the firearm, the date
and time when the discharge shall occur and such additional information needed
for the proper guidance.
         (b)   Forms and applications for the permit shall be prepared and kept
on file by the City Clerk.
         (c)   1.   All applications for the permits shall be reported to the
City Council and shall be referred to the License and Police Committees of the
City Council. The Committees shall investigate and consider the applications
within two weeks after any application has been referred to them and shall
submit the application to the City Council with their recommendations. The City
Council shall consider and approve or reject the application.
            2.   The City Council shall reject any application which discloses
that the proposed discharge of a firearm may unreasonably endanger the peace,
safety and welfare of any person or property within the city.
         (d)   If the City Council rejects any application, it shall inform the
applicant of the rejection and the specific reasons for the rejection within
ten days.
         (e)   The fee for the permit to discharge a firearm within the city is
$8. The fee is to be paid to the City Clerk at the time of application for the
permit.
   (B)   (1)   Replica firearms. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess
on his or her person, or use as if it were a real firearm, a replica firearm on
the public ways, streets, parks or other locations within the corporate limits
of the city other than as prescribed by law.
      (2)   “Replica” defined. For the purposes of this division (B), REPLICA
FIREARM means any device, object or facsimile made of plastic, wood, metal or
any other material that was purposely designed or built to look like a real
firearm.
      (3)   Permitted possession. The possession of a replica firearm is
permitted on private property with the permission of the owner or if the device
is solely for use in theatrical productions, including motion picture,
television and stage productions.
      (4)   Effective date. The ordinance from which this division (B) derives
shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and
publication in pamphlet form as provided by law. A full, true and complete copy
of this division (B) shall be published in pamphlet form, by authority of the
City Council as corporate authorities.
(Prior Code, § 130.04) (Ord. 05-569, passed 11-8-2005) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.05 AIRGUNS; DISCHARGE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, the term AIRGUN shall mean any gun,
air rifle, spring gun or other similar device that discharges or is capable of
discharging projectiles either by air, spring, compressed gas, rubber bands or
any other means, the propulsive force of which is sufficient to cause injury to
human beings or animals or to cause damage to property.
   (B)   No person shall at any time discharge or set off or permit the set off
or discharging of any airgun or other similar device, as defined in division
(A) above, at any place within the city, except in a duly established and
licensed shooting gallery or other building or roofed enclosure constructed so
as to prevent the projectiles from such gun from passing through or beyond the
walls or roof thereof.
   (C)   The parent(s) or guardian(s) of any minor child who discharges or sets
off an airgun in violation of the provisions of this section shall be held
responsible for all injuries or damage caused thereby. The parent(s) or
guardian(s) of any minor child who is guilty of a second or any subsequent
violation of this section shall be deemed to have permitted such second or
subsequent violation and shall, on conviction thereof, be fined.
(Prior Code, § 130.05) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.06 OPEN BURNING AND RECREATIONAL FIRES.
   (A)   The burning of combustible waste material, leaves, or landscape waste
is strictly prohibited within the city.
   (B)   Recreational fires are defined as the noncommercial burning of dry
wood and charcoal materials for pleasure, religious, cooking, or similar
purposes in which the fuel burned is contained in an UL approved enclosed fire
pit with all components, and the total fuel area is not exceeding three feet in
diameter and two feet in height. Recreational fires will be allowed under the
following conditions:
      (1)   The fire is in a commercially available portable fireplace, a
chimney, a permanent outdoor fireplace constructed of stone or firebrick, or in
an approved fire pit. An approved fire pit shall be bare ground with no
vegetation and no greater than three feet in diameter.
      (2)   Only dry, clean firewood may be used for recreational fires. The
burning of construction materials or yard waste is strictly prohibited. The use
of flammable or combustible liquids, other than commercially produced charcoal
lighter fluid, to start the fire is strictly prohibited.
      (3)   The fire may not exceed three feet in diameter and two feet in
height.
      (4)   No fire in an approved container (fireplace or chimney) shall be
located within eight feet of a building. No fire in a fire pit shall be located
within 25 feet of a building.
      (5)   The fire must be kept under competent and continuous supervision.
      (6)   All flammable and combustible material not used as fuel for the
fire is removed a sufficient distance from the fire so as not to constitute a
hazard.
      (7)   All fires and coals must be thoroughly extinguished after the use
thereof has been completed.
      (8)   At least one functioning, portable fire extinguisher with a 4-
A rating shall be outside and available for immediate use at all times when the
fire is burning, or a functional garden hose attached to a functional water
source.
      (9)   No recreational fires are permitted between the hours of 10:30 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m.
      (10)   No recreational fire shall be permitted when the Fire Chief or his
designee has issued an order banning the recreational fire.
      (11)   All recreational fires shall be extinguished when wind gusts are
in excess of 20 miles per hour.
   (C)   Community or social bonfires are defined as a constantly attended
outdoor fires utilized primarily for ceremonial purposes that have a fuel area
greater than three feet in diameter and greater than two feet in height. The
size of the bonfire (i.e., quantity of fuel or fuel area) may be limited at the
discretion of the Fire Chief. A bonfire is a form of open burning and requires
a Fire Prevention Code Permit (FPCP).
   (D)   Failure to adhere to this section may result in fines pursuant to §
10.99.
(Ord. 2023-007, passed 1-24-2023)
CANNABIS; DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
§ 130.20 POSSESSION OF CANNABIS.
   (A)   Definition. As used in this section, the term CANNABIS shall have the
meaning ascribed to it in the Cannabis Control Act, 720 ILCS 550/3, as amended,
as if that definition were incorporated herein.
   (B)   Offense of possession of cannabis. A person commits the offense of
possession of cannabis by possessing not more than 30 grams of any substance
containing cannabis unless permitted or authorized to do so pursuant to the
Cannabis Control Act (720 ILCS 550/1 et seq., as amended).
   (C)   Violations, penalties. Any person who violates this section with
respect to a substance containing cannabis in an amount:
      (1)   Up to ten grams shall be fined in an amount not less than $100 and
not more than $250 for each offense and such ordinance violation may be
prosecuted in accordance with Title I, Chapter 11, Administrative Adjudication
of Code Violations or in the Circuit Court of Cook County; and
      (2)   More than ten grams but not more than 30 grams shall be fined not
less than $250 and not more than $750 and such ordinance violation may be
prosecuted in the Circuit Court of Cook County but not through the City’s
Administrative Adjudication of Code Violations, Title I, Chapter 11.
   (D)   No period of imprisonment shall be sought or imposed for violating
division (B) above.
   (E)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, lawful possession of medical cannabis
by an authorized cardholder in accordance with the Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Program Act, 410 ILCS 130/a et seq., as amended or a successor
statute, shall not be a violation of division (B) above.
   (F)   Any person knowingly in possession of a substance containing cannabis
in an amount exceeding 30 grams shall be prosecuted under the Cannabis Control
Act.
   (G)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the ordinance violations set
forth in division (C) above from being prosecuted as a violation of the
Cannabis Control Act.
(Ord. 2018-009, passed 2-13-2018)
§ 130.21 CANNABIS POSSESSION LIMITS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for an Illinois resident over the age of 21 to
possess any amount greater than:
      (1)   Thirty grams of cannabis flower;
      (2)   Five grams of cannabis concentrate; and
      (3)   Five hundred milligrams of THC contained in cannabis-infused
products.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a non-resident over the age of 21 to possess
any amount greater than:
      (1)   Fifteen grams of cannabis flower;
      (2)   Two and one-half grams of cannabis concentrate; and
      (3)   Two hundred fifty milligrams of THC contained in a cannabis infused
product.
   (C)   The amounts listed in divisions (A) and (B) above shall be cumulative.
However, it shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly obtain, seek to
obtain, or possess an amount of cannabis that would cause him or her to exceed
the possession limit under this section, including cannabis that is cultivated
by a person under this Act or obtained under the Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Program Act.
(Ord. 2020-019, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 130.22 CANNABIS POSSESSION BY MINORS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person who is under 21 years of age to
possess any amount of cannabis, unless he or she is a qualified patient under
the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act, being 410 ILCS 130/1.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a person who is under 21 years of age to
possess cannabis paraphernalia, unless he or she is a qualified patient under
the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act.
(Ord. 2020-019, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 130.23 UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF CANNABIS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess cannabis in the following
places:
   (A)   A school bus, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or caregiver
pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act, being 410
ILCS 130/1;
   (B)   On the grounds of any preschool or primary or secondary school, unless
permitted for a qualifying patient or caregiver pursuant to the Compassionate
Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act;
   (C)   In any correctional facility;
   (D)   In a private residence that is used at any time to provide licensed
childcare, or other similar social service care on the premises; and
   (E)   In a motor vehicle upon a highway in this state, except in a sealed,
odor-proof, child-resistant cannabis container which is reasonably inaccessible
while the vehicle is moving.
(Ord. 2020-019, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 130.24 UNLAWFUL USE OF CANNABIS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use cannabis in the following
places:
      (1)   A school bus, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or
caregiver pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act,
being 410 ILCS 130/1;
      (2)   On the grounds of any preschool or primary or secondary school,
unless permitted for a qualifying patient or caregiver pursuant to the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act;
      (3)   In any correctional facility;
      (4)   In a private residence that is used at any time to provide licensed
childcare, or other similar social service care on the premises;
      (5)   In any public place;
      (6)   While he or she is knowingly in close physical proximity to anyone
under 21 years of age who is not a registered medical cannabis patient under
the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act;
      (7)   Within the passenger area of any motor vehicle upon a highway of
this state; and
      (8)   On any private property, including on land owned in whole or in
party or managed in whole or in part by the city or the state, and including
areas where vehicles are parked, without the express permission of the business
or lawful possessor of the property.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any law enforcement officer, corrections
officer, probation officer, firefighter, school bus permit or CDL holder to use
cannabis while on duty.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke cannabis in any place
where smoking is prohibited under the Smoke Free Illinois Act, being 410 ILCS
82/1.
(Ord. 2020-019, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 130.25 CANNABIS CULTIVATION RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for an individual to cultivate cannabis plants
unless they are licensed by the state or a registered qualifying patient over
of the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act, being 410 ILCS 130/1.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a registered qualifying patient of the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act to cultivate cannabis plants:
      (1)   Outside a closed locked space;
      (2)   That are not for personal use;
      (3)   If the individual is under the age of 21 years old;
      (4)   In excess of five plants that are more than five inches tall;
      (5)   In a location where they are subject to ordinary public view;
      (6)   On non-residential property; and
      (7)   Without the consent of the lawful owner of the property.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for a registered qualifying patient under the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act to sell, transfer or gift any
home-grown cannabis as authorized under this section and the Act.
(Ord. 2020-019, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 130.26 MANUFACTURE AND DELIVERY OF CANNABIS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person not licensed by the State of Illinois to
knowingly manufacture, deliver or possess with the intent to deliver or
manufacture, any amount of cannabis.
(Ord. 2020-019, passed 5-26-2020)
§ 130.27 POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CANNABIS. Has the meaning ascribed to it in the Cannabis Control Act, 720
ILCS 550/3, as amended, as if that definition were incorporated herein.
      CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the meaning ascribed to it in § 102 of the
Illinois Controlled Substances Act, being 720 ILCS 570/102, as amended, as if
that definition were incorporated herein.
      DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. Has the meaning ascribed to it in the Drug
Paraphernalia Control Act, 720 ILCS 600/2, as amended, as if that definition
were incorporated herein.
   (B)   Offense of possession of drug paraphernalia. A person commits the
offense of possession of drug paraphernalia by possessing drug paraphernalia
unless authorized or permitted to do so by the Drug Paraphernalia Control Act,
720 ILCS 600/1 et seq., as amended.
   (C)   Violations, penalties. Any person whose drug paraphernalia was seized
for a violation of:
      (1)   Section 130.20(C)(1) shall be fined not less than $100 and not more
than $250. This ordinance violation may be prosecuted in accordance with Title
I, Chapter 11, Administrative Adjudication of Code Violations or in the Circuit
Court of Cook County.
      (2)   Section 130.20(C)(2) shall be fined not less than $250 and not more
than $750. This ordinance violation may be prosecuted in the Circuit Court of
Cook County but not through the city’s Administrative Adjudication of Code
Violations, Title I, Chapter 11.
   (D)   Any person in possession of drug paraphernalia other than in
connection with a violation of division (C) above shall be prosecuted under the
Drug Paraphernalia Act, 720 ILCS 600/1 et seq.
   (E)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the ordinance violations set
forth in this section from being prosecuted as violation of the Drug
Paraphernalia Control Act.
(Ord. 2018-009, passed 2-13-2018)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who violates the provisions of §
130.03 of this chapter is subject to a fine of not less than $100 and not more
than $750 for each offense. Each separate violation of §
130.03 of this chapter shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (C)   Any person who violates the provisions of §
130.04 of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than
$100, nor more than $750, for each offense. Each possession or use of any such
replica firearm shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
(Prior Code, § 130.99) (Ord. 93-234, passed 10-26-1993; Ord. 05-569, passed 11-
8-2005)
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS AND PROPERTY
Section
   
131.01   Damage to city property
   
131.02   Graffiti
   
131.03   Spray paint; sale and possession
 
   
131.99   Penalty
§ 131.01 DAMAGE TO CITY PROPERTY.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CITY PROPERTY. Any property owned by, leased to or in possession of the
city including, but not limited to, any public building or structure, sewer,
water pipe, water hose, hydrant, motor vehicle, equipment, machinery, light
poles or any tree, grass or shrub located on or upon any public way or public
park or any sidewalk, crosswalk or pavement.
   (B)   No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, or park, or cause to
be parked, any motor vehicle in a negligent manner causing damage or injury to
city property.
   (C)   No person shall injure, damage, deface or interfere with any city
property without the knowledge and consent of the proper city official.
(Prior Code, § 131.01) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.02 GRAFFITI.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to inscribe, draw or otherwise place
directly upon the surface of any structure or wall that is privately or
publicly owned, any word, marking, phrase, diagram, symbol, sketch, picture or
letters where the contents thereof are visible to any member of the general
public and contain references to sexual activity, to any portion of the human
anatomy, to gang or criminal activities, to personal relationship or to
defamatory material about public or private persons. These inscriptions
drawings or representations shall be referred to herein as prohibited graffiti.
   (B)   It shall be a defense to the alleged violation of division (A) above
if such activity was undertaken with the prior written consent of the owner of
the property, with such written consent demonstrating that the owner had
knowledge of the content and the method by which the inscription was to be
placed upon the structure or wall.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the owner of the structure or wall upon which
any inscription or representation prohibited by this section, to remove such
inscription or representation and to otherwise repair or restore the structure
or wall to its prior condition within ten days from the date of the occurrence
of the offense.
   (D)   Failure by the owner of the structure or wall, upon which any
prohibited graffiti is placed, to remove the prohibited graffiti within ten
days from the date of the occurrence shall cause the summary abatement of the
public nuisance by the city. The city shall then notify the owner of its intent
to remove the prohibited graffiti. If the owner fails to remove the prohibited
graffiti within five days of the date of the notice, all costs incurred by the
city to abate the public nuisance shall be assessed to the owner.
   (E)   Failure by the owner to remove the prohibited graffiti shall also
subject the owner to being charged with failure to remove graffiti.
   (F)   The owner of the property shall be entitled to restitution and
compensation for the direct costs incurred in the repair and restoration of his
or her property from any person convicted of the prohibited activity upon the
submission of receipts evidencing payment of such costs and provided the court
entering the finding or conviction for the offense shall so order.
   (G)   The ordinance from which the provisions of this section derive shall
be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and
publication in pamphlet form as provided by law. A full, true and complete copy
of this section shall be published in pamphlet form, by authority of the City
Council as corporate authorities.
(Prior Code, § 131.02) (Ord. 94-300, passed 8-9-1994) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.03 SPRAY PAINT; SALE AND POSSESSION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, business, corporation,
partnership or entity to sell or deliver any container of spray paint to a
person of age 18 years or less within the city.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to
possess any container of spray paint within the city. It shall be an
affirmative defense that the person possessing the same is on private property
that is his or her usual place of residence.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any container of spray
paint on any public property, including, but not limited to, parks, streets,
alleys, parkways and sidewalks within the city. It shall be an affirmative
defense that the person possessing the same is either working on a project
authorized by the city or the container has been purchased, is in its original
condition and is in the trunk of an automobile.
   (D)   (1)   The ordinance from which the provisions of this section derive
shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and
publication in pamphlet form as provided by law.
      (2)   A full, true and complete copy of this section shall be published
in pamphlet form, by authority of the City Council as corporate authorities.
(Prior Code, § 131.03) (Ord. 94-294, passed 7-26-1994) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   The penalty, upon conviction for the offense of failure to
remove graffiti or after entry of an administrative finding that this offense
has occurred, made in accordance with §
32.04 of this code of ordinances shall be a fine of not less than $100 and not
more than $750 for each offense. Each day such failure shall continue shall be
considered a separate offense and fines shall be assessed accordingly.
      (2)   The penalty, upon conviction for a violation of §
131.02 of this chapter, shall be a fine of not less than $100 and not more than
$750 for each offense.
      (3)   Additionally, the City Prosecutor is authorized to seek an order
from the court entering a finding or conviction against a person for violation
of §
131.02 of this chapter that the person make full and complete restitution to
the owner of the property for expenses incurred in the removal of material and
repair of the structure or wall as a condition to any order of probation or
supervision.
   (C)   Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity violating
or failing to comply with the provisions of §
131.03 of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than
$50, nor more than $750, for each offense.
(Prior Code, § 131.99) (Ord. 94-294, passed 7-26-1994; Ord. 94-300, passed 8-9-
1994)
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS
Section
   
132.01   Prostitution
   
132.02   Gambling prohibited
§ 132.01 PROSTITUTION.
   No person shall practice prostitution in the city, and no person shall
solicit on any street, alley or public building or public place for the purpose
of including any person to engage in prostitution or any unlawful sexual
intercourse of any kind and no person shall maintain, frequent or patronize any
house of ill fame or prostitution in the city.
(Prior Code, § 132.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.02 GAMBLING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful to gamble or attend any gambling resort or to make any
bet, lottery or gambling hazard or to buy or sell any chances or tickets in any
gambling game, arrangement or device,
   (B)   It is unlawful to possess any gambling device or paraphernalia with
the use the same for an unlawful purpose, and any such device or paraphernalia
kept with any such intent may be confiscated by the Chief of Police.
   (C)   It is unlawful to maintain or patronize any establishment maintained
for a gambling house or resort.
   (D)   It is unlawful to advertise any gambling house or gambling resort in
any street, alley or public place in the city.
   (E)   Notwithstanding the above, the prohibitions provided for in this
chapter and any other chapter of the city’s code of ordinances that may
reference or govern gambling or gambling devices shall not apply to any device,
equipment, paraphernalia or activity authorized and operated in full compliance
with the Illinois Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.), including, but not
limited to, video gaming terminals and the equipment ancillary thereto.
   (F)   Notwithstanding the above, the prohibitions provided for in this
chapter and any other chapter of the city’s code of ordinances that may
reference or govern participation in raffles shall not apply to any person,
firm or corporation conducting a raffle in full compliance with Title XI,
Business Regulations,
Chapter 113, §§
113.200 through
113.208, Raffle Regulations of this code of ordinances and the Illinois Raffles
and Poker Runs Act (230 ILCS 15/0.01 et seq.).
(Ord. 2018-049, passed 9-25-2018)
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES PERTAINING TO MINORS
Section
Parental Responsibility
   
133.01   Definitions
   
133.02   Failure to exercise proper parental authority unlawful
   
133.03   Presumption; notice
   
133.04   Supervision
   
133.05   Court appearance of parents
Curfew
   
133.20   Hours of curfew
   
133.21   Person with legal care and custody; responsibility
   
133.22   Police Department authority; escorting minors
   
133.23   Defenses to prosecution
   
133.24   Definitions
   
133.25   Effective date
Truancy
   
133.40   Violation
   
133.41   Procedure; initial contact and documentation
   
133.42   Procedure; chronic truant
   
133.43   Requested disposition in juvenile or adult court
   
133.44   Effective date
 
   
133.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Alcoholic Liquor, see
Ch. 111
   Nuisances, see
Ch. 95
   Tobacco, see
Ch. 112
PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
§ 133.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LEGAL GUARDIAN. A person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor by a
court, the term does not include a person appointed guardian or given custody
of a minor under the State Juvenile Court Act of 1987, as amended, 705 ILCS
405.
   MINOR. Any person who has not yet attained the age of 19.
(Prior Code, § 133.01)
§ 133.02 FAILURE TO EXERCISE PROPER PARENTAL AUTHORITY UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful for the parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated
minor residing with the parent or legal guardian to fail to exercise proper
parental responsibility by allowing or permitting the minor to commit any
violation of a city ordinance or state statute concerning vandalism, battery,
curfew, littering, disorderly conduct, fireworks, obscene conduct, indecent
exposure, trespass, possession of alcoholic liquor, cannabis or controlled
substances or any other offense of willful or malicious acts to persons or
property.
(Prior Code, § 133.02) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.03 PRESUMPTION; NOTICE.
   A parent or legal guardian shall be presumed to have allowed or permitted
the minor to have committed a violation of a city ordinance or state statute
under all of the following conditions:
   (A)   The minor has been adjudicated to be in violation, has been charged
with the violation (except if found to be not guilty) or has incurred non-
judicial sanctions from any peace officer or conservator of the peace resulting
from an admission of guilt to an offense of an ordinance or state statute as
described in §
133.02 of this chapter;
   (B)   The parent or legal guardian has received a written notice by
certified mail, return receipt requested or by personal service in
substantially the following form:
 
LEGAL NOTICE
 
TO:  (Parents’ Names)
 
FROM:  City of Blue Island
 
You are hereby notified that (minor’s name) has been involved with a violation
of an ordinance or state statute concerning vandalism, battery, curfew,
littering, disorderly conduct, fireworks, obscene conduct, indecent exposure,
trespass, possession of alcoholic liquor or any other offense of willful or
malicious acts to persons or property.
 
If said minor is again involved with a violation of one of the above type
ordinances or state statutes, you may be found guilty of the offense of parental
irresponsibility. Conviction for said offense can result in a fine of not less
than $25, nor more than $500. You are hereby notified that you must exercise
proper parental responsibility over said minor by controlling his or her
unlawful conduct.
 
   (C)   The minor, within two years of the receipt of the notice by the parent
or legal guardian, has been either adjudicated to have committed, has been
charged with the violation (except if found to be not guilty) or has admitted
to have committed any violation of any ordinance or state statute as described
in §
133.02 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 133.03) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.04 SUPERVISION.
   It is the policy of the city to permit the Prosecutor to use the provisions
of 730 ILCS 5, the State Unified Code of Corrections, as amended, pertaining to
supervision in order to further the ends of justice, restitution and purposes
of §§
133.01 through
133.03 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 133.04)
§ 133.05 COURT APPEARANCE OF PARENTS.
   (A)   (1)   It is the policy of the city that a parent or legal guardian of
a minor shall be notified and required to appear in court whenever that minor
is charged with a violation of an ordinance or state statute which requires the
minor’s appearance in court.
      (2)   A notice in substantially the following form shall be sent to the
parents or legal guardians of the minor:
 
LEGAL NOTICE
 
TO:  (Parents’ Names)
 
FROM:  City of Blue Island
 
You are hereby notified that (minor’s name) has been involved with a violation
of an ordinance or state statute concerning vandalism, battery, curfew,
littering, disorderly conduct, fireworks, obscene conduct, indecent exposure,
trespass, possession of alcoholic liquor or any other offense of willful or
malicious acts to persons or property and which requires the appearance of said
minor in court. You are further notified that one of the parents of said minor
must appear in court before the case will be tried or be disposed. If you fail
to appear, the City Prosecutor has been directed to have issued a subpoena to
bring you into court. Failure to obey a subpoena can result in contempt of
court, with a fine or imprisonment as the penalty.
 
   (B)   The City Prosecutor is directed to have subpoenas issued whenever a
parent or legal guardian of a minor does not appear in court after the first
two times the case has been before court.
(Prior Code, § 133.05) Penalty, see §
133.99
CURFEW
§ 133.20 HOURS OF CURFEW.
   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 17 years to be upon any
public street, alley or public way or any establishment within the corporate
limits of the city between the hours of 11:30 p.m. Friday and 6:00 a.m.
Saturday; or between the hours of 11:30 p.m. Saturday and 6:00 a.m. Sunday; or
between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day of the week.
(Prior Code, § 133.20) (Ord. 11-122, passed 1-25-2011) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.21 PERSON WITH LEGAL CARE AND CUSTODY; RESPONSIBILITY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person having the legal care and custody of a
child under the age of 17 years of age to allow or permit such child to go or
be upon any public street, alley or public way or any establishment within the
corporate limits of the city during the hours set forth in §
133.20 of this chapter, except for the exceptions therein outlined.
(Prior Code, § 133.21) (Ord. 11-122, passed 1-25-2011) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.22 POLICE DEPARTMENT AUTHORITY; ESCORTING MINORS.
   Every member of the City Police Department, while on duty, is hereby
authorized to escort any minor child under the age of 17 years found upon any
public street, alley or public way or any public establishment within the
corporate limits of the city during the prohibitive hours to the Police
Department and thereupon contact the parents or legal guardians of said child
and request the parents or legal guardians to come to the Police Department and
escort the child to his or her home.
(Prior Code, § 133.22) (Ord. 11-122, passed 1-25-2011)
§ 133.23 DEFENSES TO PROSECUTION.
   It is a defense to prosecution under §§
133.20 and
133.21 of this chapter that the child was:
   (A)   Accompanied by the child’s parent or legal guardian or other person in
custody or control of the child;
   (B)   On an errand at the direction of the child’s parent or legal guardian
without any detour or stop;
   (C)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
   (D)   Engaged in an employment activity or going to or returning home from
an employment activity without any detour or stop;
   (E)   Involved in an emergency;
   (F)   On the sidewalk abutting the child’s residence or abutting the
residence of a next door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
Police Department about the minor’s presence;
   (G)   Attending an official school, religious or other recreational activity
supervised by adults and sponsored by a government or government agency, a
civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for
minor or going to returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official
school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and
sponsored by a government or governmental agency, a civic organization or
another similar entity that takes responsibility for the child;
   (H)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the
right of assembly; and/or
   (I)   Married or had been married or is an emancipated minor under the
Emancipation of Minors Act (750 ILCS 30/1 et seq.).
(Prior Code, § 133.23) (Ord. 11-122, passed 1-25-2011)
§ 133.24 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EMERGENCY.
      (1)   An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state
that calls for immediate action.
      (2)   The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural
disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring immediate action to
prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit
to which the public is invited including, but not limited to, any place of
amusement or entertainment.
   GUARDIAN. A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of
the child or a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a
court.
   PARENT. A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or step-parent of
the child of at least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to
have the care and custody of the child.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities and shops.
   REMAIN. To linger or stay or fail to leave premises when requested to do so
by a police officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the
premises.
   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
(Prior Code, § 133.24) (Ord. 11-122, passed 1-25-2011)
§ 133.25 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The ordinance from which the provisions of this subchapter derive shall be
in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication
in pamphlet form as provided by law. A full, true and complete copy of this
subchapter shall be published in pamphlet form, by authority of the City
Council as corporate authorities.
(Prior Code, § 133.25) (Ord. 11-122, passed 1-25-2011)
TRUANCY
§ 133.40 VIOLATION.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be a violation of this subchapter for any person under
the age of 18 who is enrolled in a public, private or parochial school to
absent himself or herself from attendance at such school without the permission
of his or her legal guardian(s) or parent(s).
      (2)   Any person who shall so absent himself or herself shall be guilty
of the offense of truancy and be subject to the penalties set out in §
133.43 of this chapter.
   (B)   Emergency or unforeseen absences due to illness or other reasonable
cause beyond the control of the person so absenting himself or herself from
school without the permission of his or her parent(s) or legal guardian(s)
shall not constitute truancy if such permission is obtained from said parent(s)
or legal guardian(s) and submitted in writing to the proper school authorities
within 24 hours of such absence.
(Prior Code, § 133.40) (Ord. 99-251, passed 4-27-1999) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.41 PROCEDURE; INITIAL CONTACT AND DOCUMENTATION.
   (A)   Upon encountering a school-aged individual outside of school during
school hours, a police officer or truant officer shall:
      (1)   Question such individual in order to determine whether the
individual has violated the provisions of this subchapter and verify truancy
with the school via radio, telephone or personal visit;
      (2)   Upon reasonably ascertaining that such individual has violated this
subchapter, seize the individual and return him or her to the proper authority
at the school;
      (3)   Complete a truancy report containing the following information:
full name; date of birth; address; telephone number; parent or guardian’s name;
work place telephone number; and school attended; and
      (4)   Forward a copy of the report to the juvenile investigations unit of
the City Police Department and the truant office of the county or other duly
authorized governmental agency empowered to investigate or act with regard to
truants.
   (B)   A juvenile officer shall review the report and complete or update an
applicable juvenile contact card. Further, a school representative, county
truant officer or other duly authorized government official empowered to
investigate or act with regard to truants may file a report of truancy directly
with a juvenile officer in cases of frequent truancy that are not documented by
police reports.
(Prior Code, § 133.41) (Ord. 99-251, passed 4-27-1999)
§ 133.42 PROCEDURE; CHRONIC TRUANT.
   (A)   A CHRONIC TRUANT is defined as an individual who has violated this
subchapter three times in one year or has otherwise been shown to have absented
himself or herself from school three times in one year without permission of
his or her parents or without an acceptable explanation of the absence
establishing reasonable cause beyond the control of the individual.
   (B)   A chronic truant shall submit to a student and parent conference with
either a City Police Department juvenile officer, county truant officer, school
representative or other duly authorized government official empowered to
investigate or act with regard to truants at the request of same. The following
disposition or staffing may result:
      (1)   Station adjustment;
      (2)   Station adjustment with supervision by a juvenile officer, if
applicable;
      (3)   Referral of chronic truant to counseling and/or appropriate agency
to deal with the specialized problem; and/or
      (4)   Referral to the court of competent jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 133.42) (Ord. 99-251, passed 4-27-1999)
§ 133.43 REQUESTED DISPOSITION IN JUVENILE OR ADULT COURT.
   If the case of a chronic truant is referred to court, the court shall be
requested to consider the following as possible dispositions of the chronic
truancy case:
   (A)   Adult supervision for one year or for the balance of the school year
in which the offense was committed;
   (B)   Suspension of the chronic truant’s driver’s license, where applicable;
   (C)   Community service work;
   (D)   Fines of not less than $100 and not more than $750, which may be
waived upon the successful completion of the school year without unexplained or
unpermitted absence; and
   (E)   Referral to specific agencies available to address specific problems.
(Prior Code, § 133.43) (Ord. 99-251, passed 4-27-1999)
§ 133.44 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The ordinance from which the provisions of this subchapter derive shall be
in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and publication
in pamphlet form as provided by law. A full, true and complete copy of this
subchapter shall be published in pamphlet form, by authority of the City
Council as corporate authorities.
(Prior Code, § 133.44) (Ord. 99-251, passed 4-27-1999)
§ 133.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating or failing to comply with the provisions of §§
133.20 through
133.25 of this chapter shall upon conviction thereof be fined not less than
$50, nor more than $750, for each offense.
(Prior Code, § 133.99) (Ord. 11-122, passed 1-25-2011)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
      
151.   PLUMBING CODE
      
152.   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
      
153.   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
      
154.   ENTERPRISE ZONES
      
155.   EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
      
156.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
      
157.   HISTORIC PRESERVATION
      
158.   NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION
      
159.   MOBILE HOME PARKS
      
160.   MULTI-FAMILY RENTAL STRUCTURES
      
161.   REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREAS
      
162.   LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING
      
163.   FACILITIES IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY
      
164.   VACANT PROPERTIES; PRIORITY LIEN PROCEDURES
      
165.   ZONING CODE
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
General Provisions
   
150.001   Fire limits
   
150.002   Fees and deposits
   
150.003   Department of Buildings; Building Commissioner
Building Codes
   
150.015   Findings
   
150.016   Title
   
150.017   Authority
   
150.018   Purpose
   
150.019   Jurisdiction
   
150.020   Interpretation
   
150.021   2021 International Building Code adopted; supplemental regulations
   
150.022   2021 International Existing Building Code adopted
   
150.023   2021 International Energy Conservation Code adopted
   
150.024   2021 International Mechanical Code adopted
   
150.025   2021 International Property Maintenance Code adopted; supplemental
regulations
   
150.026   State statutes adopted
   
150.027   2008 Illinois Food Service Sanitation Code adopted
   
150.028   2021 International Residential Code adopted
   
150.029   NFPA 101 Uniform Fire Code adopted; supplemental regulations
   
150.030   2018 City of Chicago Electrical Code
   
150.031   Plan review; permit process and procedures; components
   
150.032   Conflicts
   
150.033   Effective date
Building Permits
   
150.045   Required
   
150.046   Application
   
150.047   Issuance
   
150.048   Separate permit for each building; expurgation of permit
   
150.049   Fees
   
150.050   Compliance deposit
   
150.051   Inspections
   
150.052   Plumbing permit application
   
150.053   Fee waiver for conversions of multi- family residences to single-
family, coach houses to garages
   
150.054   Responsibility of Building and Zoning Department with conversion
records
Construction and Remodeling
   
150.065   Definitions
   
150.066   Requirements generally
   
150.067   Garages
   
150.068   Residential remodeling or conversion
   
150.069   City of Chicago Building Code; when applicable
Occupancy
   
150.080   Certificate of occupancy required
   
150.081   High hazard occupancies
   
150.082   Institutional occupancies
   
150.083   Places of assembly
   
150.084   Commercial and industrial occupancies
   
150.085   Buildings over two stories for residential or mixed-residential
occupancy
Off-Street Parking
   
150.100   Location, size and access
   
150.101   Construction specifications
   
150.102   Lighting
   
150.103   Number of spaces
   
150.104   Open parking lots in second residential districts
Fences
   
150.115   Permit required; fee
   
150.116   Construction requirements
   
150.117   Variations
Signs, Awnings and the Like
   
150.130   Permit required; fee
   
150.131   Construction requirements
Moving or Wrecking
   
150.145   House moving
   
150.146   Building wrecking
Dangerous or Abandoned Buildings
   
150.160   Definitions
   
150.161   Declared to be nuisance
   
150.162   Boarding-up of building prohibited; exception
Registration of Foreclosing Mortgaged Property
   
150.170   Purpose and intent
   
150.171   Definitions
   
150.172   Applicability and jurisdiction
   
150.173   Establishment of a registry
   
150.174   Inspection and registration of real property under foreclosure
   
150.175   Maintenance requirements
   
150.176   Security requirements
   
150.177   Provisions supplemental
   
150.178   Public nuisance
   
150.179   Additional authority
   
150.180   Opposing, obstructing enforcement officer; penalty
   
150.181   Immunity of enforcement officer
   
150.182   Penalties
   
150.183   Amendments
 
   
150.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   Permit Fee Waiver Application
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.001 FIRE LIMITS.
   (A)   Limits. The fire limits of the city are defined as follows: that
portion of Blue Island bounded on the north by the city limits, on the west by
the centerline of Greenwood Avenue and Greenwood Avenue if extended to the
south as far as the centerline of 135th Street, and south on the centerline of
135th Street by a line 400 feet west of and parallel to the centerline of
Western Avenue; on the south by the city limits, on the east by a line of 400
feet east of and parallel to the centerline of Western Avenue as far north as
the centerline of 135th Street and north of the centerline of 135th Street by
the centerline of Rexford Street and of Rexford Street if extended to the
centerline of Vermont Street and by the centerline of Gregory Street north of
the centerline of Vermont Street and the centerline of Gregory Street if
extended, also that portion of Blue Island bounded on the west by the
centerline of Greenwood Avenue, on the east by the city limits and on the north
and south by lines drawn on each side of, running parallel to and 130 feet
distant from the centerline of Vermont Street and that part of the city which
is bounded on the east by California Avenue, on the north by 139th Street, on
the northwest by Coopers Grove Road, on the west by Kedzie Avenue and on the
south by the city limits.
   (B)   New construction.
      (1)   All materials used for exterior wall construction of any building
or structure hereinafter erected within the fire limits shall be of masonry.
However, frame construction shall be allowed in all residence districts for
garages or other accessory buildings which are designed and intended as an
accessory use, but not for residential occupancy.
      (2)   All materials used for interior wall, ceiling and floor
construction of all buildings or structures hereinafter erected within the fire
limits, including garages and accessory buildings, shall be of fire-resistive
materials with a fire rating of not less than two-hours in accordance with the
current standards established by the American Insurance Association or its
successors.
      (3)   All buildings or structures hereinafter erected within the fire
limits, including garages and accessory buildings, shall comply with all other
applicable city zoning, building or other ordinances or applicable state law.
   (C)   Existing buildings or structures.
      (1)   In a district zoned residential within the fire limits, an existing
wood frame building may be enlarged by a frame addition not to exceed 200
square feet in area. However, the building may not be increased in height. A
frame building in a district zoned commercial or industrial may not be enlarged
unless the addition is built in accordance with the requirements of this
section. The exterior walls of any addition to a brick or similar building in
all zoning districts shall be constructed with the same material as the
existing building or structure. However, any building used exclusively for
residential purposes, the habitable portions of which are enclosed by exterior
walls of brick or masonry, may have added an enclosed porch or an enclosure of
an existing porch with the material or materials constituting the exterior
walls of the enclosed porch of a fire-resistive material with a fire rating of
not less than three-fourths of an hour in accordance with the current standards
established by the American Insurance Association or its successors. A frame
building in all zoning districts may be altered by the construction of exterior
walls or the covering of the frame exterior walls with fire-resistive materials
having a fire rating of not less than two hours in accordance with the current
standards established by the American Insurance Association or its successors.
      (2)   All materials used for interior wall, ceiling and floor
construction in altering, enlarging or repairing an existing building or
structure within the fire limits, including garages and accessory buildings,
shall be of fire-resistive materials with a fire rating of not less than two
hours in accordance with the current standards.
      (3)   A frame building within the fire limits which is damaged by fire to
an extent greater than 50% of its value shall not be repaired or rebuilt.
   (D)   Wooden frames. No building or structure of wood frame or other
combustible construction shall be moved from without to within the fire limits,
or from one lot to another lot therein.
(Prior Code, § 150.001) (Ord. 1837, passed 7-13-1959; Ord. 2120, passed 2-23-
1970; Ord. 2134, passed 9-28-1970; Ord. 2293, passed 11-25-1975) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.002 FEES AND DEPOSITS.
   (A)   General contractor registration fees. The annual registration fee for
all contractors who shall register with the city shall be as set forth in the
city fee and fine schedule. Such registration shall be valid for a period of
one year from the date of purchase. Plumbing contractors shall be exempt from
registration requirements.
   (B)   Plumbing, electrical permit fees. The fees and deposits associated
with the following activities shall be as set forth in the city’s fee and fine
schedule and which shall be paid at the time application for a plumbing or
sewer permit is filed with the Building Department, which fees and deposits
shall be forthwith transmitted to the City Collector:
      (1)   Permit fee for tapping water main;
      (2)   Deposit fee for use of fire hydrant meter. Fee to be returned after
subtraction of the amount to be paid for water usage and/or damage to meter;
      (3)   Permit fee for connection to sewer. All work to be tested by the
city before back filling;
      (4)   Inspection fees per additional fixture and sprinkler systems (per
head): Five fixtures or less: $50;
      (5)   New and replacement water service; and
      (6)   Deposits and inspection fees for opening streets and parkways. The
amount which shall be returned 45 days after completion for street and parkway
openings shall be established by the fee and fine schedule.
   (C)   Electrical contractor permit fees. The fees and deposits associated
with the following activities shall be as set forth in the city’s fee and fine
schedule and which shall be paid by an electrical contractor at the time
application for an electrical permit is filed with the Building Department,
which fees and deposits shall be forthwith transmitted to the City Collector:
      (1)   Service inspection fees per amperes service, ampere circuits,
motors or equivalent;
      (2)   Outdoor signs. Neon and internal illuminated signs per square foot
and electrical connection fee; and
      (3)   Single-family residences. Single-family residences will have
minimum 100 amperes service for central air conditioning system prior to
approval.
   (D)   Bonding. With every application for a permit there shall be filed by
the applicant with the City Clerk an indemnification bond, payable to the city,
for the use by any person, corporation or other entity with whom such applicant
shall thereafter contract to do work, indemnifying any such person, corporation
or entity for damages caused by or sustained because of the failure of such
applicant to perform the work so contracted for in accordance with provisions
and requirements of the city. The minimum amount of said indemnification bond
is a follows:
      (1)   For electrical work: $1,000;
      (2)   For sewer work: $20,000; and
      (4)   For wrecking or demolition work: $20,000.
   (E)   Licenses, permits. With every application for an electrical permit
there shall be filed, with the Building Commissioner, a copy of the applicant’s
City of Chicago electrician’s license. With every application for a plumbing
permit, there shall be filed with the Building Commissioner a copy of the
applicant’s state plumber’s license.
   (F)   Miscellaneous fees and charges. The following fees and charges shall
apply and shall be established by the city’s fee and fine schedule.
      (1)   Re-inspection fee will be charged for each re-inspection required
to be made to re-inspect the work performed by each trade whose work must be
inspected. This fee must be paid prior to the re-inspection.
      (2)   An additional fee will be charged for each permit required to be
issued when work on a job has been started prior to issuance of all required
permits.
      (3)   A fee will be charged when a dumpster is brought to a work site.
   (G)   Effective date. This section shall be in full force and effect from
and after its passage, approval and publication in pamphlet form as provided by
law. A full, true and complete copy of this section shall be published in
pamphlet form, by authority of the City Council as corporate authorities.
(Prior Code, § 150.002) (Ord. 99-247, passed 4-6-1999; Ord. 2015-040, passed
12-8-2015) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.003 DEPARTMENT OF BUILDINGS; BUILDING COMMISSIONER.
   (A)   (1)   There is hereby established a department of the city which shall
be known as the Department of Buildings and which shall consist of a Building
Commissioner and such assistants as may be provided for from time to time by
the City Council.
      (2)   There is hereby created the office of Building Commissioner. This
officer shall be appointed by the Mayor, by and with the consent of the City
Council. His or her compensation shall be fixed by the City Council. He or she
shall, before entering upon the duties of his or her office, enter into a bond
in the sum of $2,000 conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of
his or her office, with sureties to be approved by the City Council. The
Building Commissioner shall be the head of the Department of Buildings and
shall have the management and control of all matters and things pertaining to
the Department. It shall be his or her duty to enforce all of the provisions of
this chapter and all other ordinances relating to the erection, alteration,
repair, removal or safety of buildings. He or she shall perform all duties
required of him or her by the provisions of this chapter and other applicable
ordinances and other duties required of him or her by the Mayor and City
Council.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be the duty of the Building Commissioner to enforce the
provisions of this chapter and, for that purpose, he or she shall have the
power of a police officer.
      (2)   The Building Commissioner shall check all applications, and all
plans and specifications, for a building permit before the permit is issued.
      (3)   The Building Commissioner shall have the right of entry to any
building or structure within the city, whether or not under construction, to
perform any duty imposed upon him or her under this code.
      (4)   If construction in progress is found not to be in compliance with
this chapter or any other ordinance of the city, the Building Commissioner is
empowered to order the immediate stop of the work, and the work shall forthwith
be stopped until adequate provisions for compliance are made. If, at
completion, the construction is found to have been done not in compliance with
these provisions, the Building Commissioner may refuse to issue a certificate
of occupancy for any use of the building until compliance is reached.
      (5)   The Building Commissioner shall have the power to reject alternate
materials or methods if they do not meet the standards established by this
chapter, to inspect all of the buildings and structures within the city, shall
have the power of judgment as to unsafe and hazardous buildings and structures,
and shall have the authority to secure compliance with the provisions and
purposes of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 150.003) (Ord. 1837, passed 7-13-1959)
BUILDING CODES
§ 150.015 FINDINGS.
   It is in the best interest of the Mayor and City Council to adopt such
building codes to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of
the city and protect property by the regulation of construction, alteration,
addition, repair, removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and maintenance
of buildings and structures within the city.
(Prior Code, § 150.015) (Ord. 12-168, passed 3-13-2012)
§ 150.016 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “Building Code of the City of Blue
Island”.
(Prior Code, § 150.016) (Ord. 12-168, passed 3-13-2012)
§ 150.017 AUTHORITY.
   The Building Code of the city is authorized pursuant to authority granted
under the Illinois Municipal Code, including, but not limited to, Div. 30 of
the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/11-30-1 et seq.)
(Prior Code, § 150.017) (Ord. 12-168, passed 3-13-2012)
§ 150.018 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter is enacted to provide for the minimum requirements to
safeguard life or limb, health and the public safety and welfare and the
protection of property by regulating and controlling the construction,
alteration, removal, demolition, maintenance, materials and use and occupancy
of all buildings and structures, providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefore within the city.
(Prior Code, § 150.018) (Ord. 12-168, passed 3-13-2012)
§ 150.019 JURISDICTION.
   The territorial jurisdiction of this subchapter shall include all of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 150.019) (Ord. 12-168, passed 3-13-2012)
§ 150.020 INTERPRETATION.
   For purposes of interpretation and application, the provisions of this
subchapter shall be held to be minimum requirements. Any provision of this
subchapter that imposes more stringent regulations, requirements or limitations
than are imposed by any other applicable statute or regulation of the state,
then the provisions of this subchapter shall govern except all plumbing
regulations shall be governed by the Illinois Plumbing Code.
(Prior Code, § 150.020) (Ord. 12-168, passed 3-13-2012; Ord. 2015-040, passed
12-8-2015)
§ 150.021 2021 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTED; SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Adoption. The city shall hereby adopt the 2021 International Building
Code® by reference as if fully set forth herein.
   (B)   Supplemental regulations.
SECTION 1.1: FENCE
All fence permit applications shall be accompanied by a staked plat of survey
performed by a license surveyor dated no less than six (6) months from the date
of application.
SECTION 1.2: FENCE POST INSTALLATION
REQUIREMENTS
All fence posts regardless of composite material shall extend a minimum of
thirty-six (36) inches below grade.
Chain link fences shall use only metal posts and all fence posts shall be
anchored in concrete thirty-six (36) inches in depth.
The diameter of the fence post anchor hole shall be four times the size of the
width of the post.
SECTION 1.31: FACING OF FENCE
Any fence erected on a property line or within one foot of any property line
shall be so constructed that the fence posts or other supports for such fence
shall be placed or located on that side of the fence which faces the property
of the person erecting or causing such fence to be erected, provided, however,
that in the case of a fence erected under a mutual agreement between two
adjoining properties, the fence posts or other supports may be placed on
whichever side such property owners by mutual agreement may elect.
SECTION 1.3.2: ALLOWABLE FENCE HEIGHT
No fence on any lot or parcel of ground located in any area zoned residential
shall exceed six (6) feet in height above the side/walk grade or above the
surface of the ground where no grade is established, except that a fence
designed and used to enclose a swimming pool may be more than six (6) feet but
not more than eight (8) feet in height above the grade as aforesaid.
SECTION 1.3.3: ALLOWABLE FENCE LOCATION
No fence on any lot or parcel of ground located in a residential zone may be
erected on any portion of such lot or parcel within the front yard of a
residential structure.
SECTION 1.4: USE OF SECURITY WIRE IN FENCE
APPLICATIONS
All fences with the exception of those located in areas zoned industrial shall
be strictly prohibited from using security wire on a fence. Security wire is
commonly referred to as, but not limited to: barbed wire or razor wire.
SECTION 1.5: RELOCATION OF WATER
METERING DETECTION DEVICE.
When a water metering detection device is located within the boundary area of a
proposed fence to be erected it shall be the responsibility of the occupant
and/or contractor to notify the City of Blue Island Water Department prior to
the construction of said fence. After the aforementioned device has been
relocated by City of Blue Island water department personnel and all applicable
permits have been secured such work may be allowed to commence.
   SECTION 1014: HANDRAILS.
   Historic properties or properties within the Historic District of the City
of Blue Island, need not comply with the requirements of Section 1014 of the
2021 IBC.
(Prior Code, § 150.021) (Ord. 12-168, passed 3-13-2012; Ord. 2025-032, passed
6-24-2025; Ord. 2025-043, passed 8-12-2025)
§ 150.022 2021 INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.
   The city shall hereby adopt the 2021 International Existing Building Code®
by reference as if fully set forth herein.
(Prior Code, § 150.022) (Ord. 12-168, passed 3-13-2012; Ord. 2025-032, passed
6-24-2025)
§ 150.023 2021 INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE ADOPTED.
CHAPTER 1 [CE]
SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION
SECTION C101
SCOPE AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
C101.1 Title. This code shall be known as the Illinois Energy Conservation Code
or “this Code” and shall mean:
   With respect to the State facilities covered by 71 Ill. Adm. Code 600,
Subpart B:
      This Part, all additional requirements incorporated within Subpart B
(including ASHRAE 90.1 Standards, including all published errata but excluding
published supplements that encompass ASHRAE 90.1-2013), and any statutorily
authorized adaptations to the incorporated standards adopted by CDB are
effective January 1, 2016.
   With respect to the privately funded commercial facilities covered by 71
Ill. Adm. Code 600, Subpart C:
      This Part, all additional requirements incorporated within Subpart C
(including the 2015 International Energy Conservation Code, including all
published errata and excluding published supplements that encompass ASHRAE
90.1-2013), and any statutorily authorized adaptations to the incorporated
standards adopted by CDB, are effective January 1,2016.
C101.1.2 Adoption. The Board shall adopt amendments to this Code within 12
months after its publication. Any such update in this Code shall take effect
within 6 months after it is adopted by the Board and shall apply to any new
building or structure in this State for which a building permit application is
received by a municipality or county, except as otherwise provided by the EEB
Act.
C101.1.3 Adaptation. The Board may appropriately adapt the International Energy
Conservation Code to apply to the particular economy, population or
distribution. No unit of local government, including any home rule unit, may
apply energy efficient building standards to privately funded commercial
facilities in a manner that is less stringent than the Code as described in 71
Ill. Adm. Code 600, Subpart C. However, geography and climate of the State and
construction within the State, consistent with the public policy objectives of
the EEB Act.
C101.5 Compliance. Commercial buildings shall meet the provisions of the
Illinois Energy Conservation Code covered by 71 Ill. Adm. Code 600, Subpart C.
The local authority having jurisdiction (AHJ) shall establish its own
procedures for enforcement of the Illinois Energy Conservation Code. Minimum
compliance shall be demonstrated by submission of:
   1.   Compliance forms published in the ASHRAE 90.1 User’s Manual; or
   2.   Compliance Certificates generated by the U.S. Department of Energy’s
COMcheck™ Code compliance tool; or
   3    Other comparable compliance materials that meet or exceed, as
determined by the AHJ, the compliance forms published in the ASHRAE 90.1 User’s
Manual or the U.S. Department of Energy’s COMcheck™ Code compliance tool; or
   4.   The seal of the architect/engineer as required by Section 14 of the
Illinois Architectural Practice Act [225 ILCS 305], Section 12 of the
Structural Engineering Licensing Act [225 ILCS 340] and Section 14 of the
Illinois Professional Engineering Practice Act [225 ILCS 325].
C102.1.1 Above code program. Nothing in the EEB Act or Subpart C prevents a
unit of local government from adopting an energy efficiency code or standards
that are more stringent than this Code. The requirements identified as
“mandatory” in Chapter 4 shall be met.
SECTION C109 BOARD OF APPEALS
C109.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or
determinations made by the code official relative to the application and
interpretation of this Code, there may be created a board of appeals. The code
official shall be an ex officio member of the board of appeals but shall not
have a vote on any matter before the board. The board of appeals shall be
appointed by the governing body and shall hold office at its pleasure. The
board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business, and shall
render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate
copy to the code official.
C109.3 Qualifications. The board of appeals shall consist of members who are
qualified by experience and training.
CHAPTER 2 [CE] DEFINITIONS
SECTION C202 GENERAL DEFINITIONS
ADD THE FOLLOWING Definitions:
AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION or AHJ. Means the organization, officer or
individual responsible for approving equipment, materials, an installation or
procedure.
BOARD. Means the Illinois Capital Development Board.
COUNCIL. Means the Illinois Energy Conservation Advisory Council whose purpose
is to recommend modifications to the Illinois Energy Conservation Code.
EEB ACT. Means the Energy Efficient Building Act [20 ILCS 3125].
CHAPTER 4 [CE] COMMERCIAL
ENERGY EFFICIENCY
SECTION C402
BUILDING ENVELOPE REQUIREMENTS
C402.2.2 Roof assembly. The minimum thermal resistance (R-value) of the
insulating material installed either between the roof framing or continuously
on the roof assembly shall be as specified in Table C402.1.3, based on
construction materials used in the roof assembly. Skylight curbs shall be
insulated to the level of roofs with insulation entirely above deck or R-5,
whichever is less.
Exceptions:
   1.   Continuously insulated roof assemblies where the thickness of
insulation varies 1 inch (25 mm) or less and where the area-weighted U-factor
is equivalent to the same assembly with the R-value specified in Table
C402.1.3.
   2.   Where tapered insulation is used with insulation entirely above deck,
the R-value where the insulation thickness varies 1 inch (25 mm) or less from
the minimum thickness of tapered insulation shall comply with the R-value
specified in Table C402.1.3.
   3.   Unit skylight curbs included as a component of a skylight listed and
labeled in accordance with NFRC 100 shall not be required to be insulated.
   4.   For roofs on existing buildings with slope less than 2.5 units vertical
in 12 unites horizontal (2.5:12), refer to Section C503.1, exceptions.
   5.   For roofs on existing buildings, refer to Section C503.1 or C504.2.
Insulation installed on a suspended ceiling with removable ceiling tiles shall
not be considered part of the minimum thermal resistance of the roof
insulation.
C402.5.1 Air barriers. A continuous air barrier shall be provided throughout
the building thermal envelope. The air barriers shall be permitted to be
located on the inside or outside of the building envelope, located within the
assemblies composing the envelope, or any combination thereof. The air barrier
shall comply with Sections C402.5.1.1 and C402.5.1.2. For roof air barriers on
existing buildings, refer to Section C503.1 or C504.2.
Exception: Air barriers are not required in buildings located in Climate Zone
2B.
C402.5.1.1 Air barrier construction. The continuous air barrier shall be
constructed to comply with the following:
   1.   The air barrier shall be continuous for all assemblies that are the
thermal envelope of the building and across the joints and assemblies.
   2.   Air barrier joints and seams shall be sealed, including sealing
transitions at joints between dissimilar materials. The joints and seals shall
be securely installed in or on the joint for its entire length so as not to
dislodge, loosen or otherwise impair its ability to resist positive and
negative pressure from wind, stack effect and mechanical ventilation.
   3.   Penetrations of the air barrier shall be caulked, gasketed or otherwise
sealed in a manner compatible with the construction materials and location.
Paths for air leakage from the building to the space between the roof deck and
roof covering used as an air barrier, shall be caulked, gasketed or otherwise
covered with a moisture vapor-permeable material. Joints and seals associated
with penetrations shall be sealed in the same manner or taped or covered with
moisture vapor-permeable wrapping material. Sealing materials shall be
appropriate to the construction materials being sealed and shall be securely
installed around the penetration so as not to dislodge, loosen or otherwise
impair the penetrations’ ability to resist positive and negative pressure from
wind, stack effect and mechanical ventilation. Sealing of concealed fire
sprinklers, where required, shall be in a manner that is recommended by the
manufacturer. Caulking or other adhesive sealants shall not be used to fill
voids between fire sprinkler cover plates and walls or ceilings.
   4.   Recessed lighting fixtures shall comply with Section C402.5.8. Where
similar objects are installed that penetrate the air barrier, provisions shall
be made to maintain the integrity of the air barrier.
CHAPTER 5 [CE] EXISTING BUILDINGS
SECTION C503
ALTERATIONS
C503.1 General. Alterations to any building or structure shall comply with the
requirements of the code for new construction. Alterations shall be such that
the existing building or structure is no less conforming to the provisions of
this code than the existing building or structure was prior to the alteration.
Alterations to an existing building, building system or portion thereof shall
conform to the provisions of this code as those provisions relate to new
construction without requiring the unaltered portions of the existing building
or building system to comply with this code. Alterations shall not create an
unsafe or hazardous condition or overload existing building systems.
Alterations complying with ANSI/ASHRAE/IESNA 90.1. need not comply with
Sections C402, C403, C404 andC405.
   Exceptions: The following alterations need not comply with the requirements
for new construction, provided the energy use of the building is not increased:
   1.   Storm windows installed over existing fenestration.
   2.   Surface-applied window film installed on existing single-pane
fenestration assemblies reducing solar heat gain, provided the code does not
require the glazing or fenestration to be replaced.
   3.   Existing ceiling, wall or floor cavities exposed during construction,
provided that these cavities are filled with insulation.
   4.   Construction where the existing roof, wall or floor cavity is not
exposed.
   5.   Roof recover.
   6.   Air barriers shall not be required for roof recover and roof
replacement where the alterations or renovations to the building do not include
alterations, renovations or repairs to the remainder of the building envelope.
CHAPTER 1 [RE] SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION
SECTION R101
SCOPE AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
R101.1 Title. This code shall be known as the Illinois Energy Conservation Code
or “this Code”, and shall mean:
   With respect to the residential buildings covered by 71 Ill. Adm. Code 600,
Subpart D:
   This Part, all additional requirements incorporated within Subpart D
(including the 2015 International Energy Conservation Code, including all
published errata but excluding published supplements) and any statutorily
authorized adaptations to the incorporated standards adopted by CDB is
effective January 1, 2016.
R101.1.2 Adoption. The Board shall adopt amendments to this Code within 12
months after its publication. Any such update in this Code shall take effect
within 6 months after it is adopted by the Board and shall apply to any new
building or structure in this State for which a building permit application is
received by a municipality or county, except as otherwise provided by the EEB
Act
R101.1.3 Adaptation. The Board may appropriately adapt the International Energy
Conservation Code to apply to the particular economy, population distribution,
geography, and climate of the State and construction within the State,
consistent with the public policy objectives of the EEB Act.
R101.5 Compliance. Residential buildings shall meet the provisions of the
Illinois Energy Conservation Code covered by 71 Ill. Adm. Code 600, Subpart D.
The local authority having jurisdiction (AHJ) shall establish its own
procedures for enforcement of the Illinois Energy Conservation Code. Minimum
compliance shall be demonstrated by submission of:
   1.   Compliance certificates generated by the U.S. Department of Energy’s
REScheck™ code compliance tool; or
   2.   Other comparable compliance materials that meet or excel, as determined
by the AHJ, the U.S. Department of Energy’s REScheck™ code compliance tool; or
   3.   The seal of the architect/engineer as required by Section 14 of the
Illinois Architectural Practice Act [225 ILCS 305], Section 12 of the
Structural Engineering Licensing Act [225 ILCS 340] and Section 14 of the
Illinois Professional Engineering Practice Act [225 ILCS 325]
SECTION R102
ALTERNATIVE MATERIALS, DESIGN AND METHODS OF CONSTRUCTION AND EQUIPMENT
R102.1.1 Above code programs. No unit of local government, including any home
rule unit, may regulate energy efficient building standards for residential
building in a manner that is either less or more stringent than the standards
established pursuant to this Code. The requirements identified as “mandatory”
in Chapter 4 shall be met.
However, the following entities may regulate energy efficient building
standards for residential buildings in a manner that is more stringent than the
provisions contained in this Code:
   i)   A unit of local government, including a home rule unit, that has, on or
before May 15, 2009, adopted or incorporated by reference energy efficient
building standards for residential buildings that are equivalent to or more
stringent than the 2006 International Energy Conservation Code;
   ii)   A unit of local government, including a home rule unit, that has, on
or before May 15, 2009, provided to the Capital Development Board, as required
by Section 55 of the Illinois Building Commission Act, an identification of an
energy efficient building code or amendment that is equivalent to or more
stringent than the 2006 International Energy Conservation Code; and
   iii)   A municipality with a population of 1,000,000 or more.
SECTION R109
BOARD OF APPEALS
R109.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or
determinations made by the code official relative to the application and
interpretation of this code, there may be created a board of appeals. The code
official shall be an ex officio member of the board of appeals but shall not
have a vote on any matter before the board. The board of appeals shall be
appointed by the governing body and shall hold office at its pleasure. The
board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business, and shall
render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate
copy to the code official.
R109.3 Qualifications. The board of appeals shall consist of members who are
qualified by experience and training.
CHAPTER 2 [RE] DEFINITIONS
SECTION R202
GENERAL DEFINITIONS
ADD THE FOLLOWING Definitions:
AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION or AHJ. Means the organization, officer or
individual responsible for approving equipment, materials, an installation or
procedure.
BOARD. Means the Illinois Capital Development Board.
COUNCIL. Means the Illinois Energy Conservation Advisory Council whose purpose
is to recommend modifications to the Illinois Energy Conservation Code.
EEB ACT. Means the Energy Efficient Building Act [20 ILCS 3125].
LOCAL EXHAUST. An exhaust system that uses one or more fans to exhaust air from
a specific room or rooms within a dwelling.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING. Means a detached one-family or two-family dwelling or any
building that is three stories or less in height above grade that contains
multiple dwelling units, in which the occupants reside on a primarily permanent
basis, such as a townhouse, a row house, an apartment house, a convent, a
monastery, a rectory, a fraternity or sorority house, a dormitory, and a
rooming house; provided, however, that when applied to a building located
within the boundaries of a municipality having a population of 1,000,000 or
more, the term “RESIDENTIAL BUILDING” means a building containing one or more
dwelling units, not exceeding four (4) stories above grade, where occupants are
primarily permanent.
WHOLE HOUSE MECHANICAL VENTILATION SYSTEM. An exhaust system, supply system, or
combination thereof that is designed in accordance with Section R403.6 to
mechanically exchange indoor air for outdoor air when operating continuously or
through a programmed intermittent schedule to satisfy the whole house
ventilation rate. Outdoor air intakes and exhausts shall have automatic or
gravity dampers that close when the ventilation system is not operating.
CHAPTER 4 [RE] RESIDENTIAL
ENERGY EFFICIENCY
SECTION R401
GENERAL
R401.2 Compliance. Projects shall comply with one of the following:
   1)   Sections R401 through R404.
   2)   Section R405 and the provisions of Sections R401 through R404 labeled
“Mandatory.”
   3)   With the concurrence of the code official, an alternative method, an
energy rating index (ERI) approach in Section R406 and the provisions of
Sections R401 through R404 labeled “Mandatory”.
Section R402 Building Thermal Envelope
Table R402.1.2
Insulation and Fenestration Requirements by Componenta
                                                    Wood  Mass                   Slabd Crawl
Climate Fenestration Skylightb Glazed       Ceiling Frame Wall   Floor Basementc R-    Spacec
Zone    U-factorb    U-factor  Fenestration R-Value Wall  R-     R-    Wall R-   Value Wall
                               SHGCb,e              R-    value1 value value     and   R-
                                                    Value                        Depth
Section R402 Building Thermal Envelope
Table R402.1.2
Insulation and Fenestration Requirements by Componenta
                                                    Wood   Mass                   Slabd Crawl
Climate Fenestration Skylightb Glazed       Ceiling Frame  Wall   Floor Basementc R-    Spacec
Zone    U-factorb    U-factor  Fenestration R-Value Wall   R-     R-    Wall R-   Value Wall
                               SHGCb,e              R-     value1 value value     and   R-
                                                    Value                         Depth
4                                                   20 or                         10, 2
except  0.35         0.55      NR           49      13+5h  8/13   19    10/13     ft.   10/13
Marine
5 and                                               20 or                         10, 2
Marine  0.32         0.55      NR           49      13+5h  13/17  30g   10/13     ft.   15/19
4
                                                    20+5                          10, 4
7 and 8 0.32         0.55      NR           49      or     19/21  38g   15/19     ft.   15/19
                                                    13+10h
For SI: 1 foot - 304.8 mm
a   R-values are minimums. U-factors and SHGC are maximums. When insulation is installed in a
cavity which is less than the label or design thickness of the insulation, the installed R-
value of the insulation shall not be less than the R-value specified in the table.
b   The fenestration U-factor column excludes skylights. The SHGC column applies to all glazed
fenestration. Exception: Skylights may be excluded from glazed fenestration SHGC requirements
in Climate Zones 1 through 3 where the SHGC for skylights does not exceed 0.30.
c   “15/19” means R-15 continuous insulation on the interior or exterior of the home or R-19
cavity insulation at the interior of the basement wall. “15/19” shall be permitted to be met
with R-13 cavity insulation on the interior of the basement wall plus R-5 continuous
insulation on the interior or exterior of the home. “10/13” means R-10 continuous insulation
on the interior or exterior of the home or R-13 cavity insulation at the interior of the
basement wall.
d   R-5 shall be added to the required slab edge R-values for heated slabs. Insulation depth
shall be the depth of the footing or 2 feet, whichever is less in Climate Zones 1 through 3
for heated slabs.
e   There are no SHGC requirements in the Marine Zone.
f   Basement wall insulation is not required in warm-humid locations as defined by Figure
R301.1 and Table R301.1.
g   Or insulation sufficient to fill the framing cavity, R-19 minimum.
h   The first value is cavity insulation, the second value is continuous insulation, so “13+5”
means R-13 cavity insulation plus R-5 continuous insulation.
i   The second R-value applies when more than half the insulation is on the interior of the
mass wall.
Table R402.1.4
Equivalent U-Factorsa
                              Ceiling Frame   Mass             Basement Crawl
Climate Fenestration Skylight U-      Wall U- Wall U- Floor U- Wall U-  Space
Zone    U-Factor     U-Factor Factor  Factor  Factorb Factor   Factor   Wall U-
                                                                        Factor
Table R402.1.4
Equivalent U-Factorsa
                              Ceiling Frame   Mass             Basement Crawl
Climate Fenestration Skylight U-      Wall U- Wall U- Floor U- Wall U-  Space
Zone    U-Factor     U-Factor Factor  Factor  Factorb Factor   Factor   Wall U-
                                                                        Factor
4
except  0.35         0.55     0.026   0.060   0.098   0.047    0.059    0.065
Marine
5 and
Marine  0.32         0.55     0.026   0.060   0.082   0.033    0.059    0.055
4
7 and 8 0.32         0.55     0.026   0.045   0.057   0.028    0.050    0.055
a   Nonfenestration U-factors shall be obtained from measurement, calculation
or an approved source.
b   When more than half the insulation is on the interior, the mass wall U-
factors shall be a maximum of 0.17 in Climate Zone 1, 0.14 in Climate Zone 2,
0.12 in Climate Zone 3, 0.87 in Climate Zone 4 except Marine, 0.065 in Climate
Zone 5 and Marine 4, and 0.057 in Climate Zones 6 through 8.
c   Basement wall U-factor of 0.360 in warm-humid locations as defined by
Figure R301.1 and Table R301.1
 
R402.2.2 Ceilings without attic spaces. Where Section R402.1.2 would require
insulation levels above R-30 and the design of the roof/ceiling assembly does
not allow sufficient space for the required insulation, the minimum required
insulation for such roof/ceiling assemblies shall be R-30. This reduction of
insulation from the requirements of Section R402.1.2 shall be limited to 500
square feet (46 m2) or 20 percent of the total insulated ceiling area,
whichever is less. This reduction shall not apply to the U-factor alternative
approach in Section R402.1.4 and the total UA alternative in Section R402.1.5.
   Exception:
   For roofs on existing buildings with slope less than 2.5 units vertical in
12 units horizontal (2.5:12), refer to Section R503.1.1.
R402.2.9 Basement walls. Walls associated with conditioned basements shall be
insulated from the top of the basement wall down to 10 feet (3048 mm) below
grade or to within six-inches (152 mm) of the basement floor, whichever is
less. Walls associated with unconditioned basements shall meet this requirement
unless the floor overhead is insulated in accordance with Sections R402.1.2 and
R402.2.8.
Exception: Walls associated with conditioned basements may be insulated from
the top of the basement wall down to 4 feet (1219 mm) below grade when the
Basement Wall R-value is at least 15/19, (Basement Wall U-Factor of 0. 050).
R402.4.1.2 Testing. The building or dwelling unit shall be tested and verified
as having an air leakage rate of not exceeding five air changes per hour (ACH)
in Climate Zones 4 and 5. The building or dwelling unit shall be provided with
a whole - house mechanical ventilation system as designed in accordance with
Section R403.6. Testing shall be conducted in accordance with ASTM E779 or ASTM
E1827 and reported at a pressure of 0.2 inches w.g. (50 Pascals). Where
required by the code official, testing shall be conducted by an approved third
party. A written report of the results of the test, indicating the ACH, shall
be signed by the party conducting the test and provided to the code official.
Testing shall be performed at any time after all penetrations of the building
thermal envelope have been sealed.
Exceptions:
   1.   For additions, alterations, renovations or repairs to existing
buildings, building envelope tightness and insulation installation shall be
considered acceptable when the items in Table R402.4.1.1, applicable to the
method of construction, are field verified. Where required by the code
official, an approved third party independent from the installer, shall inspect
both air barrier and insulation installation criteria.
   2.   For heated attached private garages and heated detached private garages
accessory to one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses not more than three
stories above grade plane in height, building envelope tightness and insulation
installation shall be considered acceptable when the items in Table R402.4.1.1,
applicable to the method of construction, are field verified. Where required by
the code official, an approved third parry independent from the installer,
shall inspect both air barrier and insulation installation criteria. Heated
attached private garage space and heated detached private garage space shall be
thermally isolated from all other habitable, conditioned spaces.
During testing:
   1.   Exterior windows and doors, fireplace and stove doors shall be closed,
but not sealed, beyond the intended weatherstripping or other infiltration
control measures.
   2.   Dampers including exhaust, intake, makeup air, backdraft and flue
dampers shall be closed, but not sealed beyond intended infiltration control
measures.
   3.   Interior doors, if installed at the time of the test, shall be open.
   4.   Exterior doors for continuous ventilation systems and heat recovery
ventilators shall be closed and sealed.
   5.   Heating and cooling systems, if installed at the time of the test,
shall be turned off.
   6.   Supply and return registers, if installed at the time of the test,
shall be fully open.
SECTION 403
SYSTEMS
R403.6 Mechanical ventilation (Mandatory). Where the air infiltration rate of a
building or dwelling unit is five air changes per hour or less when tested in
accordance with Section R402.4.1.2, the building or dwelling unit shall be
provided with ventilation that meets the requirements of this section or the
International Mechanical Code, as applicable, or with other approved means of
ventilation. Outdoor air intakes and exhausts shall have automatic or gravity
dampers that close when the ventilation system is not operating.
R403.6.2 Recirculation of air. Exhaust air from bathrooms and toilet rooms
shall not be recirculated within a residence or to another dwelling unit and
shall be exhausted directly to the outdoors. Exhaust air from bathrooms and
toilet rooms shall not discharge into an attic, crawl space or other areas
inside the building. (M1507.2, 2015 IRC)
R403.6.3 Whole-house mechanical ventilation system. Whole-house mechanical
ventilation systems shall be designed in accordance with Sections R403.6.4
through R403.6.6. (M1507.3, 2015 IRC)
R403.6.4 System design. The whole-house ventilation system shall consist of one
or more supply or exhaust fans, or a combination of such, and associated ducts
and controls. Local exhaust or supply fans are permitted to serve as such a
system. Outdoor air ducts connected to the return side of an air handler shall
be considered to provide supply ventilation. (M1507.3.1, 2015 IRC)
R403.6.5 System controls. The whole-house mechanical ventilation system shall
be provided with controls that enable manual override. (M1507.3.2, 2015 IRC)
R403.6.6 Mechanical ventilation rate. The whole house mechanical ventilation
system shall provide outdoor air at a continuous rate of not less than that
determined in accordance with Table R403.6.6(1).(M1507.3.3, 2015 IRC)
   Exceptions:
   1.   The whole-house mechanical ventilation system is permitted to operate
intermittently where the system has controls that enable operation for not less
than 25-percent of each 4-hour segment and the ventilation rate prescribed in
Table R403.6.6(l) is multiplied by the factor determined in accordance with
Table R403.6.6(2).
   2.   The total required outdoor air ventilation rate (Qtot) shall be as
specified in Table 403.6.6(1) or calculated in accordance with Equation 4-1.
CFMtotal = 0.01CFA + 7.5(Nbr + 1) (Equation 4-1)
Where:
CFMtotal = total required ventilation rate, (cfm)
CFA = conditioned floor area of residence, (ft2)
Nbr = number of bedrooms (not to be less than 1)
R403.6.6.1 Different Occupant Density. Table R403.6.6(1) assumes two persons in
a dwelling unit and an additional person for each additional bedroom. Where
higher occupant densities are known, the airflow rate shall be increased by 7.5
cfm (3.5 L/s) for each additional person. Where approved by the authority
having jurisdiction, lower occupant densities may be used.
R403.6.6.2 Airflow Measurement. The airflow rate required is the quantity of
outdoor ventilation air supplied and/or indoor air exhausted by the whole-house
mechanical ventilation system installed, and shall be measured using a flow
hood, flow grid, or other airflow measuring device. Ventilation airflow of
systems with multiple operating modes shall be tested in all modes designed to
meet Section R403.6.6. Where required by the code official, testing shall
conducted by an approved third party. A written report of the results of the
test, indicating the verified airflow rate, shall be signed by the party
conducting the test and provided to the code official.
R403.6.7 Local exhaust rates. Local exhaust systems shall be designed to have
the capacity to exhaust the minimum air flow rate determined in accordance with
Table R403.6.7. (M1507.4, 2015 IRC)
Table R403.6.6(1) (M1507.3.3(1), 2015 IRC)
Continuous Whole-House Mechanical Ventilation System Airflow Rate
                                       Number of Bedrooms
Dwelling Unit Floor Area (Square Feet) 0—2—4—6—> 7
                                       Airflow in CFM
Table R403.6.6(1) (M1507.3.3(1), 2015 IRC)
Continuous Whole-House Mechanical Ventilation System Airflow Rate
                                       Number of Bedrooms
Dwelling Unit Floor Area (Square Feet) 0—12—4—6—> 7
                                       Airflow in CFM
1,501—3,000                          45   60  75  90  105
3,001—4,500                          60   75  90  105 120
4,501—6,000                          . 75 90  105 120 135
6,001—7,500                          90   105 120 135 150
> 7,500                                105  120 135 150 165
For SI: 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2, 1 cubic foot per minute =0.0004719 m3/
 
Table R403.6.6(2) (M1507.3.3(2), 2015 IRC)
Intermittent Whole-House Mechanical Ventilation Rate Factorsa,b
Run-time Percentage in Each 4-hour Segment 25% 33% 50% 66% 75% 100%
Factora                                    4   3   2   1.5 1.3 1.0
a   For ventilation system run time values between those given, the
factors are permitted to be determined by interpolation.
b   Extrapolation beyond the table is prohibited.
 
Table R403.6.7 (M1507.4, 2015 IRC)
Minimum Required Local Exhaust Rates for One- and Two-Family Dwellings
Area to Be Exhausted   Exhaust Rates
Kitchens               100 cf in intermittent or 25 cfm continuous
Bathrooms-toilet rooms Mechanical exhaust capacity of 50 cf in intermittent or
                       20 cf in continuous
For SI: 1 cubic foot per minute = 0.0004719m3/s
 
SECTION R405
SIMULATED PERFORMANCE ALTERNATIVE (PERFORMANCE)
 
Table R405.5.2(1)
Specifications for the Standard Reference and Proposed Designs
Building Component Standard Reference Design     Proposed Design
                   Air leakage rate of 5 air
                   changes per hour in climate
                   zones 4 and 5. Testing shall
                   be conducted in accordance    For residences that are not
                   with ASTM E779 or ASTM El827  tested, the same air leakage
                   and reported at a pressure of rate as the standard reference
                   0.2 inches w.g. (50 Pascal).  design.
                   The mechanical ventilation     
                   rate shall be in addition to  For tested residences, the
Air exchange rate  the air leakage rate and the  measured air exchange ratea.
                   same as in the proposed        
                   design, but no greater than   The mechanical ventilation
                   0.01 x CFA + 7.5 x (Nbr+ 1)   rateb shall be in addition to
                   where:                        the air leakage rate and shall
                   CFA = conditioned floor area  be as proposed.
                   Nbr = number of bedrooms
                   Energy recovery shall not be
                   assumed for mechanical
                   ventilation.
 
SECTION 406
ENERGY RATING INDEX
COMPLIANCE ALTERNATIVE
R406.1 Scope. This section establishes an alternative compliance criteria using
an Energy Rating Index (ERI) analysis.
For purposes of clarification, the Illinois Department of Commerce and Economic
Opportunity (“Department”) declares that Section R406 of the 2015 International
Energy Conservation Code affords an alternative form of compliance and is not a
mandate on the Department to provide training to Section R406.
CHAPTER 5 [RE] EXISTING BUILDINGS
SECTION R502
ADDITIONS
R502.1.1.2 Heating and cooling systems. New heating, cooling and duct systems
that are part of the addition shall comply with Sections R403.1, R403.2,
R403.3, R403.5 and R403.6.
   Exception: Where ducts from an existing heating and cooling system are
extended to an addition, the new and existing duct systems shall not be
required to be tested in accordance with Section R403.3.3. New duct systems
shall be sealed in accordance with Section R403.3.2.
SECTION R503
ALTERATIONS
R503.1.1 Building envelope. Building envelope assemblies that are part of the
alteration shall comply with Section R402.1.2 or R402.1.4, Sections R402.2.1
through R402.2.12, R402.3.1, R402.3.2, R402.4.3 and R402.4.4.
   Exceptions: The following alterations need not comply with the requirements
for new construction provided the energy use of the building is not increased:
   1.   Storm windows installed over existing fenestration.
   2.   Existing ceiling, wall or floor cavities exposed during construction
provided that these cavities are filled with insulation.
   3.   Construction where the existing roof, wall or floor cavity is not
exposed.
   4.   Roof recover.
   5.   Roofs without insulation in the cavity and where the sheathing or
insulation is exposed during reroofing shall be insulated either above or below
the sheathing.
   6.   For roof replacement on existing buildings with a roof slope of less
than 2 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (2:12), and where the roof
covering is removed and insulation remains, and where the required R-value
cannot be provided due to thickness limitations presented by existing rooftop
conditions, (including heating, ventilating and air-conditioning equipment, low
door or glazing heights, parapet heights, weep holes, and roof flashing heights
not meeting the manufacturer’s specifications), the maximum thickness of
insulation compatible with the available space and existing uses shall be
installed. Insulation used shall be minimum R-3.5 per inch. In areas where
flashing may be terminated a minimum of 8 inches above the roof covering
(including required insulation) insulation shall be a minimum of R-20.
   7.   R-value for roof assemblies with tapered insulation above deck with
slope greater than 1/8 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (1/8:12) shall
average R-20.
   8.   Surface-applied window film installed on existing single pane
fenestration assemblies to reduce solar heat gain provided the code does not
require the glazing or fenestration assembly to be replaced.
R503.1-2 Heating and cooling systems. New heating, cooling and duct systems
that are part of the alteration shall comply with Sections R403.1, R403.2,
R403.3 and R403.6.
   Exception: Where ducts from an existing heating and cooling system are
extended, the new and existing duct systems shall not be required to be tested
in accordance with Section R403.3.3. Altered duct systems shall be sealed in
accordance with Section R403.3.2.
SECTION R504
REPAIRS
R504.2 Application. For the purposes of this code, the following shall be
considered repairs:
   1.   Glass-only replacements in an existing sash and frame.
   2.   Roof repairs.
   3.   Insulation with new roof covering for roof slopes less than 2 units
vertical in 12 units horizontal (2:12) inches only in areas where the tapered
insulation is used above an existing roof covering to create slope between
drains or upslope from obstructions to water flow. 4. Repairs where only the
bulb and/or ballast within the existing luminaires in a space are replaced
provided that the replacement does not increase the installed interior lighting
power.
Sections M1507.2 (R403.6.2), M1507.3 (R403.6.3), M1507.3.1 (R403.6.4),
M1507.3.2 (R403.6.5), M1507.3.3 (R403.6.6), M1507.4 (R403.6.7)
Tables M1507.3.3(l) (R403.6.6(l)), M1507.3.3(2) (R403.6.6(2)), M1507.4
(R403.6.7)
(Prior Code, § 150.023) (Ord. 2016-017, passed 5-24-2016; Ord. 2025-032, passed
6-24-2025)
§ 150.024 2021 INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED.
   The city shall hereby adopt the 2012 International Mechanical Code® by
reference as if fully set forth herein.
(Prior Code, § 150.024) (Ord. 12-168, passed 3-13-2012; Ord. 2025-032, passed
6-24-2025)
§ 150.025 2021 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED; SUPPLEMENTAL
REGULATIONS.
   (A) Adoption. The city shall hereby adopt the 2021 International Property
Maintenance Code® as if fully set forth herein.
   (B)   Supplemental regulations.
101.1: TITLE.
Insert “the City of Blue Island”.
102.3: APPLICATION OF OTHER CODES.
Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy,
shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the City’s
most currently adopted building, fire, electrical, mechanical and plumbing
codes. Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside
any provision of the City of Blue Island Zoning Code.
103.5: FEES.
Insert “The appropriate City of Blue Island fee schedule.”
108.4: PLACARDING.
Delete the word “Condemned” and insert“City Code violation.”
108.4.1: PLACARD REMOVAL.
Delete the word “condemnation” and insert “City Code violation.”
108.5: PROHIBITED OCCUPANCY.
Delete in entirety and insert:
Any person who shall occupy a placarded premises or structure or any part
thereof, or shall use placarded equipment, and any owner or any person
responsible for the premises who shall let anyone occupy a placarded premises,
shall be liable for the penalties provided by this code. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, access to a placarded structure may be permitted to a person or
owner, for the limited purpose of removing personal property of said person or
owner from said structure, provided they i) obtain permission of the City of
Blue Island Building Department prior to said access, and ii) are accompanied
by a City of Blue Island Building Department employee during the time of said
access. The time and manner of access to a placarded structure shall be
determined by the City of Blue Island Building Department during normal
operating hours of the Building Department. Access to a structure pursuant to
this Subsection is within the sound discretion of the Building Department and
may be denied on the basis of safety, health, or hazard.
109.1: IMMINENT DANGER.
Delete “This Structure Is Unsafe and Its Occupancy has been Prohibited by the
Code Officials and insert “NOT APPROVED FOR OCCUPANCY.”
112.4: FAILURE TO COMPLY.
Delete “of not less than $50.00 dollars or more than $750.00 dollars.”
112.5: FAILURE TO OBTAIN BUILDING PERMIT.
Whenever the code official finds any work regulated by this code being
performed without the appropriate City Building Permit being displayed, the
code official is authorized to post a “STOP WORK” warning on the jobsite until
such time as the proper permits are obtained.
201.3: TERMS DEFINED IN OTHER CODES.
Delete in its entirety.
SECTION 202: GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
Shall be amended to include the following definitions:
Accessory Structure. A structure, whether temporary or permanent, the use of
which is incidental and secondary to that of the principal building and is
located on the same premises.
Basement. A portion of a building located partly underground, but having less
than half its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the
adjoining ground.
Building. Any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind, and which is
permanently affixed to the land.
Building Code. The building code officially adopted by the legislative body of
this jurisdiction, or such other code as may be officially designated by the
legislative body of the jurisdiction for the regulation of construction,
alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and
maintenance of buildings and structures.
Building Official. The official designated by the jurisdiction to enforce
building, zoning or similar laws, or his duly authorized representative.
Cellar. A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground and having
half or more than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average
grade of the adjoining ground.
Dilapidated. A building, structure, or part thereof which is in a state of ruin
or shabbiness resulting from neglect. The term implies a hazard to life or
property.
Dwellings.
One-family dwelling: A building containing one dwelling unit.
Two-family dwelling: A building containing two (2) dwelling units.
Multi-family apartment house: A building or portion thereof containing more
than two (2) dwelling units.
Boarding house, tourist house: A building arranged or used for the lodging with
or without meals, for compensation, by more than five (5) and not more than
twenty (20) individuals.
Rooming house: A building or part thereof, in which sleeping quarters (but not
meals or cooking facilities) are provided by prearrangement for compensation on
a weekly or longer basis for 3 or more persons.
Hotel: Any building containing six (6) or more guest rooms intended or designed
to be used, or which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied, or which are
occupied for sleeping purposes by guests.
Dwelling Unit. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities
for one (1) or more persons including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
Exterior Property Areas. The open space on the premises and on adjoining
property under the control of owners or operators of such premises.
Extermination. The control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests
by eliminating their harboring places; by removing or making inaccessible
materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigation,
trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination approved by the
health officer.
Garbage. Wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food including wastes from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.
Grade. The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the
exterior
Hotel. See “Dwellings.”
Infestation. The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or premises, of
insects, rodents, vermin or other pests.
Junk Vehicle. Any vehicle which is without a currently valid license plate or
plates and is in either a rusted, wrecked, discharged, dismantled, partly
dismantled, inoperative, or abandoned condition. A junked vehicle shall be
classified as to its condition in one (1) of the two (2) following categories:
Restorable: A junked vehicle that is in a condition whereby repairs to same
could be made to place it in operating condition without exceeding the
estimated value when repaired.
Wreck: A junked vehicle in such condition that it is economically unsound to
restore same to operating condition considering the repairs to be made, age of
the vehicle, market value of the vehicle if it were restored or in such
condition that the public officer, in his opinion determines that it warrants
such classification.
The code official shall make the final determination as to the classification
to be assigned to any one (1) particular vehicle.
Maintenance. Conformance of a building and its facilities to the code under
which the building was constructed.
Multifamily Dwellings. See “Dwellings.”
Occupant. Any person, living, sleeping, cooking, or eating in, or having actual
possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
Refuse. See “Rubbish.”
Rehabilitation. Repairs to, or replacement of, present elements of any existing
building, such as windows, stairs, flooring, wiring, etc.; or rearrangement of
rooms, by the relocation of partitions or walls; or by the installation of new
bathrooms or kitchens; or the general replacement of the interior or portions
of the interior of a building; which may or may not include changes to
structural elements such as floor systems, roof systems, columns, or load
bearing interior or exterior walls.
Renovation. A building and its facilities made to conform to present day
minimum standards of sanitation, fire and life safety.
Service Facilities. Those facilities and fixtures necessary for the supply of
such required basic services as heat, electricity, hot and cold water, and
sewage disposal.
Unsanitary Condition. A condition constituting a danger or hazard to the health
of a person or persons occupying or frequenting a building or premises, or to
the general public.
SECTION 301.2.1: RESPONSIBILITY OF LESSOR.
Any dwelling unit, offered for rental, is required to be inspected by Building
Department inspectors prior to occupancy. All rental units must be clean,
sanitary, pest free and in good repair. All required or supplied equipment,
fixtures and structural elements shall function as intended by the manufacturer
or builder of said item. All walls and ceilings to be either freshly painted or
grease free, cleaned and sanitized.
SECTION 302.3: SIDEWALKS AND DRIVEWAYS.
Delete in entirety and insert:
All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar paved
areas for public use shall be kept in a proper state of repair and free of all
snow, ice, mud and other debris. If any sidewalk or driveway or portion thereof
by virtue of its state of repair shall constitute a danger to public health and
safety, the sidewalk or driveway or portion thereof shall be replaced.
Property owners shall maintain all parkway areas, curb lines, easements and
alleyways to the midpoint adjacent to their property. Tree maintenance and
planting in the parkways shall be done in accordance with any applicable
ordinances.
SECTION 302.4: WEEDS.
Insert “six (6) inches.”
Add new:
Section 302.4.1: Yards.
All residential yard areas not covered by buildings, gardens or common
landscaping will be maintained with grass.
SECTION 302.8: MOTOR VEHICLES.
Delete in entirety and insert:
Except as provided in other regulations, not more than one (1) currently
unregistered and/or uninspected motor vehicle shall be parked on any property
in a residential district. No vehicle shall be allowed to be in a state of
major disassembly, disrepair or in any condition as defined as a junk vehicles,
nor shall it be in the process of being stripped or dismantled. A vehicle of
any type shall not at any time undergo major overhaul, including bodywork, in a
residential district. No automotive repair business of any type shall be
allowed on residential properties.
SECTION 302.8.1: MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING.
All parking areas for motor vehicles shall be paved with bituminous, concrete
or an equivalent surface and shall be kept free from litter and debris and in
good repair. Boats, watercraft, recreational watercraft, recreational vehicles,
trailers and campers or any vehicle pulled by another vehicle or upon a trailer
may only be parked in barrier areas in the rear yard. The surface in these
areas shall be bituminous, concrete, gravel or an equivalent surface and shall
be kept free from litter, debris and in good repair. The barriers shall be
constructed of concrete, landscape timbers or other equivalent material
approved by the building department.
SECTION 302.8.3: MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING, NON-RESIDENTIAL.
Except as provided in other regulations and approved by the code official, not
more than two (2) currently unregistered and/or uninspected motor vehicles
shall be permitted on any property in a non-residential district, and any
vehicle shall not at any time be in the process of being stripped or
dismantled.
SECTION 302.9.1: DUMPING UPON A WATERWAY.
Depositing or throwing refuse or garbage of any kind in a channel, river,
stream or any waterway is prohibited.
SECTION 302.9.2: LITTERING.
Throwing or depositing garbage or refuse of any kind, including but not limited
to cans, bottles, paper and plastic, in any street, alley, park or public way
within the City is unlawful.
SECTION 302.10: REMOVAL OF UNUSED FUEL OIL DRUMS.
Fuel oil drums or tanks, which are no longer in use to store fuel oil for
heating, shall be removed prior to the transfer of ownership of any real
property in which they are located. Removal shall be accomplished as a
condition of approval of the premises for sale by the building department. The
Building Department may order immediate removal of any fuel oil drums or tanks
that it determines endangers or may endanger the public’s health, safety or
welfare if not removed. The owner or occupant of the real property shall remove
the fuel oil drum or tank immediately if ordered to do so in this situation.
SECTION 302.11: CARETAKER.
In every multiple dwelling two (2) units or more there shall be a person or
entity designated by the owner, whose duties include maintaining the commonly
used parts of the premises. It shall be the responsibility of the property
owner to provide the name and emergency contact information for the designated
individual or entity to the Building Department and update it as needed. It
shall be the responsibility of the Building Commissioner to maintain these
records.
SECTION 302.12: PROVISION OF SERVICE FACILITY, EQUIPMENT OR UTILITY.
No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service facility, equipment or
utility which is required under this housing code, to be removed from, shut off
and/or discontinued from any occupied dwelling unit, except such temporary
interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in
process, when discontinuance of service is approved by the Building
Commissioner, and except during temporary emergencies.
SECTION 302.13: OUTDOOR STORAGE AREAS.
Business Zoning Districts: All storage, with the exception of “limited’ display
of merchandise, shall be in completely enclosed buildings or obscured from
public view by a solid fence or wall not less than eight (8) feet in height or
by densely planted vegetation so designed and planted as to be 75 percent
opaque when viewed horizontally between two (2) feet and eight (8) feet above
ground level.
Residential Zoning Districts: All outdoor storage for a continuous period
exceeding 15 days in length shall be enclosed or obscured from view as required
for storage in business districts. However, the storage of such functional
items as children’s play structures, firewood, and operable automobiles and
bicycles shall be exempt from this provision.
SECTION 304.3: PREMISES IDENTIFICATION.
Delete in entirety and insert:
All buildings shall have an appropriate address marking affixed to the
structure in a location and size that is visible and legible to any public
safety or emergency vehicle from the street. All buildings that are accessible
from a public alley vehicle shall also have an appropriate address marking
affixed in a location and size that is visible and legible to any public safety
or emergency vehicle from the public alley. These numbers shall contrast with
their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters.
Numbers shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke
width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm).
SECTION 304.5.1: BASEMENTS FREE FROM DAMPNESS.
Cellars, basements and crawl spaces shall be maintained reasonably free from
dampness to prevent conditions conducive to decay or deterioration of the
structure.
SECTION 304.7: ROOFS AND DRAINAGE.
Insert at end:
“and the discharge hose must be at least five (5) feet away from all property
lines. Sump pump discharges must be directed to the rear of the property and
must end at least ten (10) feet from property lines. All residential gutters
and downspouts shall be disconnected from entry into the sewer system except in
those instances when the Building Commissioner or his designee determines that
a discharge of water cannot be made into a yard area without causing a problem
to the property owner or to an adjacent property.”
SECTION 304.14: INSECT SCREENS.
Delete “During the period from (DATE) to (DATE)
SECTION 305.3.1: BATHROOM AND KITCHEN FLOORS.
Every toilet, bathroom and kitchen floor surface shall be constructed and
maintained so as to be substantially impervious to water and so as to permit
such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition and uniform in
appearance.
SECTION 307.1: GENERAL.
Delete in entirety and insert:
Every interior and exterior flight of stairs shall conform to the applicable
codes and requirements of the currently adopted version of the International
Residential Code.
SECTION 308.3.1: GARBAGE FACILITIES.
Delete in entirety and insert:
The owner of every multi-family dwelling containing four (4) units or more, and
all commercial businesses, shall contract with a private scavenger service for
disposal of all garbage, rubbish, trash or other disposables. All such items
are required to be placed in leakproof containers equipped with close-fitting
covers, provided by the scavenger service for the storage of such materials.
All garbage, rubbish, trash or other disposable items are to be placed in the
container, no higher than the top of the container, with the lids closed at all
times, until removed from the premises by the scavenger company. In the event
that the garbage, rubbish, trash or other disposable items exceeds the top of
the container and the lids cannot be tightly closed it is the responsibility of
the owner or operator of the dwelling or business to contact the scavenger
service for more frequent pick-ups or additional containers. No garbage,
rubbish, trash or other disposables are to be placed or left on the ground.
SECTION 308.3.2: CONTAINERS.
Delete in entirety and insert:
All single family, two or three unit dwellings, are required to have a
sufficient number of garbage totters. There should be a minimum of one totter
per unit. All garbage, rubbish, trash or other disposable items are to be
placed inside the totter and the lid kept tightly closed at all times. If there
is more garbage, rubbish, trash or other disposable items than can be properly
kept in a single totter with the lid tightly closed it is the responsibility of
the owner to obtain an additional totter or totters. If more than one totter
per unit is needed, they are available at an additional charge, The waste
hauler having the current service contract with the City supplies garbage
totters to be used. No garbage, rubbish, trash or other disposables are to be
placed or left on the ground.
SECTION 308.3.3: USE OF GARBAGE BAGS.
Plastic bags outside the garbage container may only be used for leaves, grass
clippings, newspapers or magazines. Papers and magazines not in containers must
be bundled and tied. No wet garbage is to be placed in any plastic bag.
SECTION 308.3.4: SANITATION.
The owner of every dwelling is responsible to keep the area where garbage is
stored in a clean and sanitary condition.
SECTION 309.4: MULTIPLE OCCUPANCY.
Delete “the public or shared areas of the structure and exterior property. If
infestation is caused by failure of an occupant to prevent such infestation in
the area occupied, the occupant shall be responsible for extermination.”
And add “all areas of the structure and exterior property. All extermination
that is done in any residential building having two or more residential units
shall be performed by an exterminator having a current state certification. “
SECTION 309.4.1: PROOF OF EXTERMINATION.
The owner of any rental unit shall provide proof that the unit has been
exterminated prior to tenant occupying the unit.
SECTION 308.5: OCCUPANT.
Delete in entirety.
SECTION 404.1: PRIVACY.
Delete in entirety and add:
“Every dwelling unit shall be arranged in such a manner that each room is
accessible from every other room without the use of hallways, rooms or other
areas not exclusively a part of such dwelling unit. No dwelling unit shall be
accessible from any hallway, room or other area not exclusively a part of such
dwelling unit except through a doorway equipped with a door and a lock.”
SECTION 404.4.6: BASEMENT ROOMS.
Basement rooms partially below grade shall not be used for living purposes
unless:
1. more than half its clear floor to ceiling height is above the average grade
of the adjoining ground;
2. required minimum window area of every habitable room is entirely above the
grade of the ground adjoining such window area;
3. the dwelling unit meets the other requirements of this Property Maintenance
Code.
SECTION 404.6: EFFICIENCY UNIT.
Change “three” to “two.”
SECTION 502.5: PUBLIC TOILET FACILITIES.
Delete “International Plumbing Code” and add the “Illinois plumbing code.”
SECTION 505.4: WATER HEATING FACILITIES.
Delete “of not less than 110 degrees F (43 degrees C).”
And add “in accordance with the most currently adopted Illinois plumbing code.”
SECTION 602.2: RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCIES.
Delete in entirety and add:
Every dwelling unit, or rooming unit shall have heating facilities which are
properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition, and are
capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and
water closet compartments contained therein to a temperature of 72 degrees
Fahrenheit at a distance of 18 inches above floor level when the outside
temperature is a minimum 10 degrees Fahrenheit; provided that gas or electric
appliances designed exclusively for cooking or water heating purposes shall not
be considered as heating facilities within the meaning of this provision.
A minimum temperature of 72 degrees Fahrenheit from 6:30 A.M. to 11:00 P.M. and
65 degrees Fahrenheit from 11:00 P.M. to 6:30 A.M. averaged throughout any
dwelling unit or rooming unit shall be maintained without such undue
restriction of ventilation, as to interfere with proper healthful conditions.
SECTION 602.3: HEAT SUPPLY.
Delete in entirety.
SECTION 602.4: OCCUPIABLE WORK SPACES.
Delete “during the period from (DATE) to (DATE)”
SECTION 602.5: ROOM TEMPERATURE MEASUREMENT.
Delete in entirety.
SECTION 604.2: SERVICE.
Delete “60 amperes” and add “100 amperes”
SECTION 702.2: AISLES.
Delete “International Fire Code” and add “most currently adopted Fire Code.”
SECTION 702.4: EMERGENCY ESCAPE OPENINGS.
Delete “Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are permitted to be placed
over emergency escape and rescue openings provided the minimum net clear
opening size complies with the code that was in effect at the time of
construction and such devices shall be releasable or removable from the inside
without the use of a key, tool or force greater than that which is required for
normal operation of the escape and rescue opening. “
SECTION 702.4.1: SECURITY COVERINGS.
Burglar bars, grilles, grates, gates or any other security type devices shall
be prohibited from use in any and all applications.
SECTION 704.1: GENERAL.
Delete “International Fire Code” and add “most currently adopted Fire Code.”
SECTION 704.2: SMOKE ALARMS.
Delete “International Fire Code” and add “most currently adopted Fire Code.”
SECTION 704.3: POWER SOURCE.
Change “Exception: Smoke alarms” to “Exception: Existing smoke alarms”
APPENDIX A - BOARDING STANDARD.
Delete in entirety.
(Prior Code, § 150.025) (Ord. 12-168, passed 3-13-2012; Ord. 2015-040, passed
12-8-2015; Ord. 2023-011, passed 2-28-2023; Ord. 2025-032, passed 6-24-2025)
§ 150.026 STATE STATUTES ADOPTED.
   The city shall hereby adopt the following state statutes by reference as if
fully set forth herein:
   (A)   210 ILCS 115, Mobile Home Park Act;
   (B)   210 ILCS 120, Mobile Home Tiedown Act;
   (C)   210 ILCS 117, Abandoned Mobile Home Act;
   (D)   430 ILCS 115/1, Illinois Modular Dwelling and Mobile Structure Safety
Act; and
   (E)    The provisions of 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-1 et seq., as it may be amended
from time to time, are adopted as permitted by statute.
   (F)   410 ILCS 25/5 - Illinois Accessibility Code - For Commercial and
Residential Buildings.
(Prior Code, § 150.026) (Ord. 12-168, passed 3-13-2012; Ord. 2022-031, passed
4-26-2022; Ord. 2025-032, passed 6-24-2025)
§ 150.027 2008 ILLINOIS FOOD SERVICE SANITATION CODE ADOPTED.
   The city shall hereby adopt the 2008 Illinois Food Service Sanitation Code®
as if fully set forth herein.
(Prior Code, § 150.027) (Ord. 12-168, passed 3-13-2012)
§ 150.028 2021 INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED.
   The city shall hereby adopt the 2021 International Residential Code® as if
fully set forth herein.
(Prior Code, § 150.028) (Ord. 12-168, passed 3-13-2012; Ord. 2025-032, passed
6-24-2025)
§ 150.029 NFPA 101 UNIFORM FIRE CODE ADOPTED; SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Adoption. The city shall hereby adopt the NFPA 101 Uniform Fire Code®
as if fully set forth herein.
   (B)   Supplemental regulations.
SECTION 10.1-MONITORING OF FIRE ALARM AND
AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS.
Newly installed Automatic sprinkler systems, and Fire detection systems shall
be supervised directly by the Blue Island Dispatch Center and transmit signals
via wireless radio transmitter. Existing Automatic sprinkler systems and Fire
detection systems shall be converted to transmit directly to the Blue Island
Dispatch Center via wireless radio transmitter by January 1, 2014.
SECTION 10.2-PLACEMENT OF COMBINATION
STYLE SMOKE/CO ALARMS IN EXISTING
APARTMENT BUILDINGS.
Existing apartment buildings shall be required to have combination style smoke/
co alarms in all corridors, and in all sleeping areas. Such devices shall be
hard wired directly to the buildings electrical system and shall have battery
back-up.
SECTION 10.3- NEW CONSTRUCTION OF NON-
SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.
The first responding fire department apparatus shall be able to reach all
interior points of a newly constructed non-single family residential structure
with a 150 foot initial attack hose or a distance approved by the code official
and/or Fire Chief. Where this requirement cannot be met, an interior standpipe
system equipped with fire department hose connections will be required. The
standpipe system shall be installed in accordance with the currently adopted
version of NFPA 14 (Standard for installation of standpipe and hose systems).
The standpipe system shall be connected to a public water system, and shall
have a fire department connection.
(Prior Code, § 150.029) (Ord. 12-168, passed 3-13-2012; Ord. 2025-032, passed
6-24-2025)
§ 150.030 2018 CITY OF CHICAGO ELECTRICAL CODE.
   (A)   General. The city shall hereby adopt the 2018 City of Chicago
Electrical Code as if set forth herein.
   (B)   Supplemental regulations.
SECTION 12.1: USE OF ALUMINUM WIRE.
The use of aluminum wire shall be strictly prohibited in all applications.
SECTION 12.2: USE OF METALLIC FLEXIBLE TUBING.
The use of Metallic flexible tubing (commonly referred to as: Whip/BX/
Greenfield) in exposed areas shall not extend more than 6 feet from termination
points.
SECTION 12.3: USE OF NON-METALLIC CABLE.
The use of non-metallic cable (commonly referred to as “Romex”) or any other
soft sleeve type cable containing electrical conductors within shall be
strictly prohibited from use in all applications.
SECTION 12.4: USE OF PLASTIC/PVC OR NON-METALLIC CONDUIT PIPE.
The use of plastic/pvc or any other non-metallic piping above grade shall be
strictly prohibited from use in all applications. Any plastic/pvc or any other
non-metallic pipe used in below grade applications shall be UL listed and
approved for such usage.
SECTION 12.5: MINIMUM REQUIREMENT FOR
DOUBLE METER SERVICES AND ABOVE.
In such applications when there is more than one meter as part of the
electrical service that supplies any structure regardless of intent, a minimum
of a 200-ampere riser and corresponding components as required by the
aforementioned code shall be required.
SECTION 12.6: MINIMUM ELECTRICAL SERVICE REQUIREMENT.
The minimum electrical service allowable shall be 100 amperes.
In the event of rehabilitation or retrofitting of 50 percent or more of an
existing electrical system that is less than 100 ampere shall require that
system to be upgraded to the 100-ampere minimum.
When existing electrical systems are deemed unsafe by the Building Commissioner
or his designee they shall be required to be placed out of service and replaced
with the 100-ampere minimum required and/or 200-ampere riser requirement where
double meters are present.
SECTION 12.7: EXPOSURE OF WALLS AND CEILINGS.
When walls or ceilings are opened or exposed for any purpose the electrical
system contained within shall be required to meet the provisions of the
aforementioned adopted code.
(Prior Code, § 150.031) (Ord. 12-168, passed 3-13-2012; Ord. 2025-032, passed
6-24-2025)
§ 150.031 PLAN REVIEW; PERMIT PROCESS AND PROCEDURES; COMPONENTS.
   (A)   General. Plan reviews are necessary for projects including, but not
limited to, structural alteration, new construction, extensive rehabilitation
of over 1,200 square feet or $10,000 in estimated cost. Construction prints,
drawings and related documents shall be stamped by a licensed architect,
structural engineer or other pertinently qualified professional engineer when
submitted for plan review. Plan review and permit fees shall apply, and shall
be paid at the time permit is granted and issued.
   (B)   Components of the plan review process. The Planning Department
representative will review to ensure that the proposed project is in accordance
with the city’s Zoning Code and Development Plan. Building Department staff
will meet collectively and review to ensure that the proposed project meets the
requirements of the applicable codes and provisions adopted by the city.
(Prior Code, § 150.032) (Ord. 12-168, passed 3-13-2012)
§ 150.032 CONFLICTS.
   (A)   The housing stock and commercial properties located within the city
are diverse and present many different scenarios, circumstances and situations
to the Building Code officials due to the various ages and previously accepted
construction methods. In the event of rehabilitation, addition or new
construction, the Building Commissioner shall have the authority to grant
variance in appropriate situations due to existing conditions as explained in
the aforementioned.
   (B)   In the event where there is a conflict between the aforementioned
adopted codes and provisions, the Building Commissioner or his or her designee
shall render the final decision on which provision shall supersede, except in
the event of a conflict with the Illinois Plumbing Code, being 77 Ill. Adm.
Code Part 890, the Illinois Plumbing Code shall govern.
(Prior Code, § 150.033) (Ord. 12-168, passed 3-13-2012; Ord. 2015-040, passed
12-8-2015)
§ 150.033 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage, approval and publication in pamphlet form as provided by law. A full,
true and complete copy of this subchapter shall be published in pamphlet form,
by authority of the City Council as corporate authorities.
(Prior Code, § 150.034) (Ord. 12-168, passed 3-13-2012)
BUILDING PERMITS
§ 150.045 REQUIRED.
   No building shall be erected, altered or repaired within the city, nor shall
any excavation preliminary thereto commence, unless a building permit has been
obtained from the Building Commissioner. No person shall begin any work for
which a building permit is required or begin any work or excavation in
preparation for the work until a building permit has been obtained. It shall be
the responsibility of all workers and persons furnishing materials to ascertain
that a building permit, where one is required, has been properly issued before
commencing work or delivery of materials.
(Prior Code, § 150.045) (Ord. 1837, passed 7-13-1959; Ord. 2089, passed 12-23-
1968; Ord. 2330, passed 4-27-1976; Ord. 2332, passed 4-27-1976) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.046 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application for permit. The application for a building permit shall be
made to the Building Commissioner in writing upon a form for that purpose. The
application shall contain the name of the owner or owners and, if title is held
by means of a land trust, the beneficiary or beneficiaries; the exact location
of the proposed work; the character of the work; the proposed use or occupancy
of all parts of the building; the estimated cost of the proposed work; and
other required information. Plans and specifications shall be submitted with
the application to the Building Commissioner for his or her approval. The
application must be signed by the owner or all owners, the beneficiary or all
beneficiaries of a land trust, the architect if one is engaged, and the
contractor having primary responsibility for the progress of the work, all of
whom shall be jointly and severally responsible for compliance with the
provisions of city and state laws.
   (B)   Plans and specifications. The application for a building permit shall
be accompanied by two sets of plans and specifications drawn to scale upon
proper cloth or paper. It shall include a plot plan of the lot showing the
relation of the lot to adjoining streets and alleys, the relation of the
building to all boundary lines of the lot and the relation of the proposed new
construction to existing buildings upon the lot, if any. Plans shall also show
the proposed or existing arrangement of sewage, drain and water lines, and
plumbing fixtures. The plans must bear the signature and seal of a architect
licensed in the state pursuant to 225 ILCS 305, the State Architecture Practice
Act of 1989. If the Building Commissioner deems the work as shown by plans to
be in conformity with this code, with the Zoning Code and with other applicable
ordinances, he or she shall stamp and approve both sets of plans. One set will
be retained by him or her and one set will be kept on the building job as long
as the work is in progress. Plans and specifications need not be submitted, at
the discretion of the Building Commissioner, for small, simple and unimportant
work.
(Prior Code, § 150.046) (Ord. 1837, passed 7-13-1959; Ord. 2089, passed 12-23-
1968; Ord. 2330, passed 4-27-1976; Ord. 2332, passed 4-27-1976)
§ 150.047 ISSUANCE.
   Upon approval of the application by the Building Commissioner, and upon
payment of the permit fee, the City Clerk will issue a building permit to the
applicant, with a card of suitable size and form for posting. The card shall
bear the permit number, the date issued, the name and address of the applicant
and the scope of the work granted under the permit. The card shall be posted
conspicuously on the site of the work during the time the work is in progress.
(Prior Code, § 150.047) (Ord. 1837, passed 7-13-1959; Ord. 2089, passed 12-23-
1968; Ord. 2330, passed 4-27-1976; Ord. 2332, passed 4-27-1976)
§ 150.048 SEPARATE PERMIT FOR EACH BUILDING; EXPURGATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   A separate permit shall be obtained for each separate building.
   (B)   A building permit shall be void unless the work for which the permit
is issued is begun within six months from the date of issuance of the permit.
   (C)   All permits shall expire at the end of 18 months following the date of
issuance; however, the Building Commissioner, for good cause shown, may grant
an extension for an additional period not exceeding 12 months.
(Prior Code, § 150.048) (Ord. 1837, passed 7-13-1959; Ord. 2089, passed 12-23-
1968; Ord. 2330, passed 4-27-1976; Ord. 2332, passed 4-27-1976)
§ 150.049 FEES.
   A building permit fee shall be paid by the applicant to the City Clerk in
accordance with the following.
   (A)   For each permit, $5 per $1,000 of the work valuation shall be paid;
provided, no such permit fee shall be less than $15; and, further provided
that, no fee shall be charged when such valuation of work does not exceed $100.
Such valuation of the work for which the permit is granted is to be factual, of
which the Building Commissioner may require proof, and may later recover the
difference in fee between the valuation stated in the application and the
actual valuation. Such fees shall be recorded by the City Clerk and placed to
the General Fund of the city.
   (B)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation who begins or initiates any work
for which a permit is required prior to obtaining a permit shall be required to
pay, in addition to the applicable building permit fee, the sum of $25.
      (2)   (a)   This additional payment shall be made prior to the issuance
of any permit to said person, firm or corporation.
         (b)   This additional payment shall be paid to the City Clerk and
placed in the General Fund of the city. This additional payment shall be
required to be made regardless of and in addition to any fines imposed by any
court of competent jurisdiction for violation of the provisions of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 150.049) (Ord. 1837, passed 7-13-1959; Ord. 2089, passed 12-23-
1968; Ord. 2330, passed 4-27-1976; Ord. 2332, passed 4-27-1976)
§ 150.050 COMPLIANCE DEPOSIT.
   (A)   At the time of issuance of a building permit, the applicant or
applicants shall deposit with the City Clerk, a sum of money, in cash, based on
the cost of construction or estimated cost of construction as follows:
 
Cost of Construction or Estimated Cost of Construction Deposit
$100 or more, but less than $2,000                     $100
$2,000 or more, but less than $10,000                  $200
$10,000 or more                                        $300
 
   (B)   The deposit shall be held by the City Clerk in a special account to
ensure that the applicant or applicants will perform the following:
      (1)   Proper notice of the required inspection is given to the Building
Commissioner;
      (2)   No work is done until the required inspections are made;
      (3)   No building or part of a building is occupied until a final
inspection has been made and a certificate of occupancy has been issued;
      (4)   The construction site has been cleared of all construction debris;
      (5)   Stopcocks, where required, have been properly installed and are in
operating condition;
      (6)   All construction debris has been removed from the public streets,
alleys, parkways and sidewalks; and
      (7)   All sidewalks damaged during construction have been replaced or
compensation for damages has been made to the city.
   (C)   (1)   If the applicant or applicants fail to perform divisions (B)(1),
(B)(2) or (B)(3) above, the entire sum deposited shall be forfeited to the city
and deposited in the General Fund of the city.
      (2)   If the applicant or applicants fail to perform divisions (B)(4),
(B)(5), (B)(6) or (B)(7) above, the Superintendent of Public Works and the
Superintendent of Streets shall perform the obligation, and the cost shall be
charged against the deposit.
      (3)   If any part of the deposit shall then remain, the sum shall be
refunded.
      (4)   Upon certification of the Building Commissioner, the Superintendent
of Public Works, and the Superintendent of Streets that the applicant or
applicants have complied with the obligations above, the City Clerk shall
return the entire deposit. No interest shall be paid on the deposit.
(Prior Code, § 150.050) (Ord. 1837, passed 7-13-1959; Ord. 2089, passed 12-23-
1968; Ord. 2330, passed 4-27-1976; Ord. 2332, passed 4-27-1976)
§ 150.051 INSPECTIONS.
   All building or construction work for which a permit is issued shall be
subject to inspection at any time by the Building Commissioner and, at certain
stages of the work, he or she shall be notified by the permit holder or builder
to inspect, as follows:
   (A)   Foundations. After trenches are excavated, forms erected and
foundation materials are on hand, but before the materials are poured or
placed;
   (B)   Structural framework. Before same is covered so as to hinder
inspection;
   (C)   Lath. After all lathing, interior and exterior, is in place and all
plastering materials are on the job, but before plaster is applied; and
   (D)   Final inspection. To be made the after building is completed and ready
for occupancy.
(Prior Code, § 150.051) (Ord. 1837, passed 7-13-1959)
§ 150.052 PLUMBING PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   Pursuant to the Illinois plumbing license law, the city is authorized
to require permits for the installation and repair of plumbing and collect a
permit fee.
   (B)   The permit application to begin proposed plumbing work shall be made
to the City Building Department by such plumber as agent of the property owner.
The applicant shall supply such information as required by the Building
Department.
   (C)   Permits for installation and repair of plumbing shall not be issued
without verification by the City Plumbing Inspector that the applicant has a
valid plumbing license or that the applicant is the owner-occupant of a single-
family residence that is the subject of the permit. For the purpose of this
section, the term OCCUPANT shall have the meaning as provided by the Illinois
plumbing license law.
   (D)   Upon payment of the applicable permit fee and verification required as
set forth in this section, the Building Department will issue a permit, which
will be presented to the Department of Water and Sewer as notice of the
plumber’s authority to begin work. No such work whatsoever shall begin until
such issuance and presentation of the authorizing permit.
   (E)   Upon completion of any plumbing work, and before covering the plumbing
work in any manner as to hinder inspection, the Plumbing Inspector shall be
notified by the plumbing contractor. The Plumbing Inspector shall inspect the
installation to determine if it is in compliance with the plumbing code, with
this subchapter and with the details of the permit.
   (F)   If the plumbing work is found to be in compliance, the Water and Sewer
Department or the plumbing contractor, depending on the size of the service
pipe, shall make a final tap to the city main and begin the supply of water, if
the plumbing work is not in compliance, such tap to main shall not be made, or
if made for testing shall be disconnected until compliance is reached.
(Ord. 06-007, passed 1-24-2006; Ord. 2014-007, passed 2-11-2014; Ord. 2015-040,
passed 12-8-2015)
§ 150.053 FEE WAIVER FOR CONVERSIONS OF MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENCES TO SINGLE-
FAMILY, COACH HOUSES TO GARAGES.
   All building permit fees assessed pursuant to
Chapter 150 of this code of ordinances will be waived for qualified applicants
who fully comply with the provisions set forth in divisions (A) through (K),
inclusive, below.
   (A)   To qualify for the permit fee waiver, the building to be converted
from a multi-family residence or coach house into a single-family residence or
garage must be located in an R-l Residential zoning district or a U-TOD Zoning
District.
   (B)   The property owner must apply for a permit at the Building and Zoning
Department. The application form is attached hereto as Appendix A of this
chapter.
   (C)   At the time of application, the property owner must provide plans,
specifications and drawings prepared in accordance with §
150.046 of this code describing and depicting the proposed conversion.
   (D)   A pre-permit inspection will be scheduled and conducted by the
Building Department to determine whether the proposed conversion can be
completed in accordance with applicable building regulations.
   (E)   The plans for the conversion must only allow for one kitchen and must
provide that all interior spaces be joined so that access to the exterior to
gain entry to any portion of the residence is not required.
   (F)   Converted coach houses must have kitchens and plumbing removed and
disconnected from the source of the water supply. A coach house that originally
was a garage prior to being converted into a residence may only be converted to
use as a garage.
   (G)   All utilities serving the building that is being converted must be
changed and limited to use for a single-family residence or garage.
   (H)   After the “rough inspection” is performed by the Building Department,
the property owner will be required to record in the Office of the Cook County
Recorder of Deeds a revised deed which includes a covenant, acceptable to the
city, stating the residence on the premises is a single-family residence and
will not be converted into or occupied as a multi-family residence at any time
after the date of recording of the revised deed.
   (I)   A copy of the recorded deed must be delivered by the property owner to
the Building and Zoning Department.
   (J)   After the revised deed is recorded and delivered to the Building and
Zoning Department, the owner shall apply for a final inspection to be performed
by the Building Department. When all work is completed and is in compliance
with the building regulations, a certificate of completion will be issued to
the owner by the Building Department.
   (K)   All work performed for the conversion must be completed and in
compliance with the building regulations within 12 months of the date of the
application or all building permit fees normally charged by the city will be
reinstated.
(Ord. 2019-042, passed 8-27-2019)
§ 150.054 RESPONSIBILITY OF BUILDING AND ZONING DEPARTMENT WITH CONVERSION
RECORDS.
   (A)   The Building and Zoning Department will keep a copy of the recorded
deed, which includes the covenant of the owner stating the residence will not
be converted or used as a multi-family residence, in the file the Department
maintains for the property.
   (B)   The Building and Zoning Department will also prepare a current list of
all buildings converted and will deliver an updated copy of this list to the
Community Development Committee of the City Council on a quarterly basis. The
first quarter will begin with the first conversion pursuant to this program and
will continue every three months thereafter.
(Ord. 2019-042, passed 8-27-2019)
CONSTRUCTION AND REMODELING
§ 150.065 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APARTMENT. Two or more rooms arranged for one or more persons living
together as a single housekeeping unit, with cooking, living, sanitation and
sleeping facilities in a multi-family dwelling.
   DWELLING. A building or part thereof designed or used exclusively for
residential occupancy.
      (1)   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A residential building or portion
thereof containing two or more dwelling units and for the purpose of this
subchapter includes apartments, duplexes, rowhouses and condominiums.
      (2)   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A residential building containing only one
dwelling unit.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms which are arranged, designed or used as
living quarters for one family only.
(Prior Code, § 150.065) (Ord. 2062, passed 1-22-1968)
§ 150.066 REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY.
   No new dwelling shall be constructed or erected within the city, except as
hereinafter provided and except as provided in applicable provisions of §
150.001(B) and (C) of this chapter.
   (A)   Lot area requirements.
      (1)   The minimum lot area in square feet upon which a dwelling can be
constructed is as follows:
 
Type of Dwelling Unit Minimum Lot Area in Square Feet
1-family              3,124
2-family              3,750
3-family              5,000
4-family              6,250
5- or more family     7,500
 
      (2)   If the lot area in square feet is within 90% of the minimum set
forth above, however, construction may be permitted thereon.
   (B)   Additional minimum lot area. The following additional minimum lot area
in square feet per dwelling unit is required in the construction of a multiple-
family dwelling of 7,500 square feet or more:
 
Type of Dwelling Unit Minimum Lot Area in Square Feet per Dwelling Unit
Efficiency            1,000
1-bedroom             1,100
2-bedroom             1,200
3-bedroom             1,600
4-bedroom             2,000
 
   (C)   Multiple-family dwellings.
      (1)   Minimum unit square footage for multi-family dwellings shall be as
follows:
 
Dwelling   Square Feet
Efficiency 500
1-bedroom  650
2-bedroom  850
3-bedroom  1,050
4-bedroom  1,200
 
      (2)   No floor area between fire walls shall exceed 3,500 square feet.
   (D)   Single-family dwellings. The minimum unit square footage in a single-
family dwelling shall be 1,100 square feet of livable space.
   (E)   Floor; lot area ratio. GROSS FLOOR AREA RATIO shall mean the square
footage of a dwelling measured from exterior walls. The floor-lot area ratio
maximums by stories shall be as follows (basements not used for or as a
dwelling unit shall not be counted in floor area ratio):
 
1-story         60%
2-story         70%
3-story or more 80%
 
   (F)   Minimum distances between lot lines and exterior dwelling walls.
      (1)   Dwellings not more than 50 feet in width may not be erected closer
than three feet from side lot lines on interior lots, except for roof eaves
which may extend to not more than 18 inches from the lot line. For dwellings
more than 50 feet, but less than 100 feet, in width, side yard requirements
shall be five feet from interior lot lines.
      (2)   A dwelling on a corner lot may not extend closer than ten feet from
the side lot line abutting a side street.
      (3)   A dwelling may not be constructed closer to the front lot line than
15 feet, except where another distance is permitted under the provisions of the
Zoning Code relating to front yards.
      (4)   A dwelling may not be constructed nearer to the rear lot line than
permitted under the Zoning Code.
   (G)   Height maximum requirement. No dwelling shall be constructed exceeding
35 feet, nor more than three stories, in height.
   (H)   Efficiency unit. A dwelling unit consisting of one principal room,
exclusive of bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closets or dining alcove, directly off
the principal room.
   (I)   Floor area ratio. The floor area of the building on a residential lot
divided by the area of the lot.
   (J)   Lot. A parcel of land, vacant or with a building, with its usual
accessory buildings or use, including open space as required by this chapter.
Lot lines are the lines bounding the lot. A corner lot shall be deemed to be a
lot fronting on two or more streets and having a width of not more than 50
feet. An interior lot is a lot other than a corner lot.
   (K)   Occupancy. The use of any building or structure for any one or
combination of the following purposes: residential, commercial or industrial.
   (L)   Fire-resistive materials. Materials used in floor construction for
dwellings not to exceed three dwellings shall have a minimum one-hour fire
rating in accordance with current standards established by the National Board
of Fire Underwriters or its successors.
   (M)   Materials used in floor construction. For four or more dwellings
extending more than one story in height shall have a minimum fire rating of two
hours in accordance with current standards established by the National Board of
Fire Underwriters or its successors. Wood floor joists shall not be used.
   (N)   Liveload capacity of floors. Liveload capacity of floors shall not be
less than 40 pounds per square foot.
   (O)   Exterior wall construction. Multi-family exterior wall construction of
multi-family dwellings shall be of masonry, and brick veneer construction shall
not be used.
   (P)   Bearing wall thickness. Minimum bearing wall thickness (in inches)
shall be as follows:
 
Foundation (walls 32 ft. or higher) 1st 2nd 3rd
1-story                             10  8   8
2-story                             10  8   8
3-story                             10  10  8
 
   (Q)   Foundations. Foundations of buildings over one story in height shall
be of concrete only.
   (R)   Means of egress. All dwellings, except single-family dwellings, shall
be provided with sufficient and proper types of exits to ensure safety to the
occupants, but not less than two means of egress from each dwelling unit,
located as remotely from each other as the plan of the building will permit.
The means of egress shall lead directly to a street, setback, yard or court
opening to a street by means of an open passage that does not pass through
another dwelling unit. Fire escapes shall not be considered means of egress.
   (S)   Stairways. Every stairway above the first floor shall be within the
enclosing walls of the dwelling. One or two sides may be exposed to open air.
      (1)   Windows in stairways. Only solid glass block windows without
openings are permitted in multi-family dwellings.
      (2)   Stairway requirements. The minimum requirements for stairs in
dwellings are as follows.
         (a)   Headroom. Continuous clear headroom measured vertically from
front edge of tread to a line parallel with stair run shall be not less than
six feet, six inches.
         (b)   Width. Front stairs: 42 inches; rear stairs: 36 inches - all
being clear of handrail.
         (c)   Tread. Nine and one-half inches, with nosing ten and one-fourth
inches.
         (d)   Riser. Seven and three-fourths inches maximum and shall be of
uniform height in any one story.
         (e)   Winders. No winders permitted in multi-family dwellings. For
single-family dwellings, tread width measured at a point 18 inches from
converging end shall equal the tread width on straight stair run, unless tread
width at converging end is six inches or more.
         (f)   Maximum stair run. No stair run shall exceed five feet in height
vertically without a stair landing.
         (g)   Stair landing. Minimum dimensions shall equal width of stairs.
         (h)   Handrail. A continuous handrail shall be installed on at least
one side of each stair run and landing.
   (T)   Roof covering. Wood shingles as a roof covering on any dwelling are
prohibited.
   (U)   Damaged buildings. No dwelling which has been more than 50% demolished
by fire or other causes shall be repaired or remodeled, except to conform with
the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 150.066) (Ord. 2062, passed 1-22-1968)
§ 150.067 GARAGES.
   The rules, regulations and specifications for the construction of garages
shall be as follows.
   (A)   Detached frame garage.
      (1)   Concrete floor, with a minimum of four-inch concrete flooring;
      (2)   An eight-inch by eight-inch perimeter wall;
      (3)   Sand or stone fill is required; use of cinder fill is prohibited;
      (4)   A two-inch by four-inch single bottom plate with an anchor bolt six
feet O/C;
      (5)   Double two-inch by four-inch top plate;
      (6)   Use of two-inch by four-inch studs 24 inch O/C;
      (7)   Double two-inch by four-inch corner studs and double studs next to
all windows and doors;
      (8)   Double two-inch by 12-inch headers across overhead door openings;
      (9)   Use of two-inch by six-inch double headers over all window
openings;
      (10)   Double two-inch by four-inch over service door openings;
      (11)   Minimum of two-inch by six-inch cross ties;
      (12)   Use of two-inch by six-inch rafters, 24 feet;
      (13)   Hips and ridges, two-inch by six-inch;
      (14)   Use of one-half inch plywood minimum roof sheeting;
      (15)   Use of 235 pound weight shingles; and
      (16)   Double walled construction required with one-half inch minimum
gypson sheathing.
   (B)   Masonry garage. A foundation of trench footing is permitted, at a
minimum of eight inches wide, 36 inches below grade with a 16-inch bell
footing.
   (C)   Electrical requirements for all garages.
      (1)   Each garage must have a switch, light and grounded outlet.
      (2)   Service to the garage must be on a separate circuit.
   (D)   Maximum height of garages. No portion of any garage shall exceed 15
feet in height.
(Prior Code, § 150.067) (Ord. 2340, passed 11-25-1976)
§ 150.068 RESIDENTIAL REMODELING OR CONVERSION.
   (A)   RESIDENTIAL CONVERSION, for the purposes of this section, is defined
as the remodeling or rearranging of existing residential space to greater than
its designed, present and usual residential occupancy in number of apartments,
or in number of rental sleeping rooms, or in combination thereof; also such
remodeling or rearranging of space heretofore unused for residential purposes
to such purposes in any number of apartments or rooms.
   (B)   To protect the general welfare, the following provisions as to such
conversions shall apply.
      (1)   The conversion of space above the second story in an existing
building of over two stories in height to residential use, or to greater
residential use, is prohibited.
      (2)   The conversion to residential use of an existing building or any
part thereof which building was originally designed and built for commercial
occupancy, or for mixed occupancy, shall comply as for new residential
construction.
      (3)   Additions, either to side or height, to buildings in connection
with conversions for residential purposes, shall comply as for new residential
construction.
      (4)   The floor space, light and ventilation, and ceiling height
requirements for each apartment and each rental sleeping room in space
converted to that purpose shall be not less than as in §§ 200, 201 and 205 of
the City of Chicago Building Code adopted by reference in §
150.069 of this chapter.
      (5)   Partitions and ceilings separating adjoining converted apartments
or rental rooms, or one from the other, shall be not less than one-hour fire-
resistive construction approved by the Building Commissioner. The interior side
of any exterior wall in the case of wood frame buildings when such exterior
wall is within ten feet proximity of another building, or any lot line, except
a street or alley line, shall also be not less than one-hour fire-resistive
construction approved by the Building Commissioner.
      (6)   When converted apartments or rental rooms are located on a second
floor of any building, the floor joists of such second floor and the building
framing and foundation shall be capable, in the opinion of the Building
Commissioner, of properly supporting the increased load to be exerted
thereupon.
      (7)   Each converted apartment shall be provided with its own private
sanitation facilities, and where there are two or more converted rental rooms
there shall be one set of sanitation facilities for every six persons or part
thereof occupying such rooms, the facilities to be readily accessible to such
occupants.
      (8)   Each converted apartment and/or two or more rental sleeping rooms
located above the first floor shall have not less than two means of entrance
and exit to and from the building without passing through the living quarters
of others, either directly to the living quarters or to a common corridor, one
means of which must be exterior to the building.
      (9)   The conversion of basement space to residential purposes shall
comply as for new construction in accordance with Ch. 13-64 of the City of
Chicago Building Code adopted by reference in §
150.069 of this chapter.
      (10)    The conversion of attic space over a first story to residential
purposes shall comply with the applicable provisions of this section. The
conversion of attic space above a second floor to a residential purpose is
prohibited.
      (11)   The conversion of the first story/first floor of any commercial
property to any residential purpose is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 150.068) (Ord. 1837, passed 7-13-1959; Ord. 2025-020, passed 4-
22-2025) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.069 CITY OF CHICAGO BUILDING CODE; WHEN APPLICABLE.
   (A)   Whenever this subchapter does not specifically cover the construction
of any dwelling or any part thereof, the applicable provisions of the City of
Chicago Building Code as may be from time to time amended, relating to the
construction of residential dwelling units shall apply and are hereby adopted
and incorporated in this subchapter as it set out at length herein. Three
copies of such building code are now on file at the office of the City Clerk.
   (B)   In the event of a conflict between this subchapter and the Chicago
Building Code, this subchapter shall control.
(Prior Code, § 150.069) (Ord. 2062, passed 1-22-1968)
OCCUPANCY
§ 150.080 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED.
   No building or structure or any part thereof shall be occupied until a
certificate of occupancy has been issued by the Building Commissioner. The
Building Commissioner shall issue the certificate only if, after inspection, he
or she finds that the building or structure complies with city and state law
and that the building or structure has been completed in accordance with the
plans and specifications filed in support of the application for the building
permit relating to the building or structure. The certificate shall show the
permitted use for the building or structure. A temporary certificate may be
issued for the temporary use of a portion of a building or structure prior to
the completion of the entire structure or building.
(Prior Code, § 150.080) (Ord. 2331, passed 4-27-1976) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.081 HIGH HAZARD OCCUPANCIES.
   (A)   High hazard uses and occupancies, such as dry-cleaning plants, paint
or lacquer spraying or any other use in which during the process or in the
conduct of the business highly flammable, explosive or toxic substances are
used or stored, shall be conducted in a building and location with fire-proof
or resistive construction, fire protective systems and devices, in conformance
with regulations on the quantity and manner of storage of the hazardous
substances, and ventilation approved by the Building Commissioner and in
accordance with nationally recognized good practice for that particular use.
The reference for good practice shall be as set forth in the National Board of
Fire Underwriters or an equal authority.
   (B)   Every automobile service station dispensing highly volatile fuels, and
every warehouse or other building in which a highly hazardous substance is
stored or handled, shall be of fire-proof construction approved by the Building
Commissioner.
(Prior Code, § 150.081) (Ord. 1837, passed 7-13-1959) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.082 INSTITUTIONAL OCCUPANCIES.
   (A)   Buildings used for institutional occupancies such as convalescent
homes, homes for the aged or children or the handicapped, nurseries, nursing
homes or sanitariums or sanatoriums shall not exceed one story in height, nor
more than 2,500 square feet in area, when constructed of non-fire-resistive
materials. Existing wood frame buildings converted to those occupancies may be
exempt from those restrictions if equipped with a sprinkling system, with fire-
resistant walls and ceilings, and with other fire and safety measures
applicable to the case, and all approved by the Building Commissioner. In no
case shall the building for such purpose exceed two stories in height.
   (B)   In any institutional building which is two stories in height, the
interior access or accesses between the first and second floors shall be
enclosed fire-resistant stair wells, provided with a swinging/ self-closing,
close-fitting, fire-resistant door to prevent passage of flame, heat, gas and
smoke. Each story shall also be provided with two or more separate means of
entrance and exit, one of which is exterior to the building, and with doors
opening outward.
   (C)   Basement or attic work or store rooms under or over an institutional
occupancy shall be separated from such occupancy by not less than one-hour
fire-resistant construction and be tight to prevent passage of flame, heat, gas
and smoke. Boiler and furnace rooms in such an occupancy shall be as set forth
in §
150.066 of this chapter.
   (D)   Any new institutional occupancy building shall be of fire-resistant
construction throughout, designed by a licensed architect and approved by the
National Board of Fire Underwriters and by the Building Commissioner.
(Prior Code, § 150.082) (Ord. 1837, passed 7-13-1959)
§ 150.083 PLACES OF ASSEMBLY.
   The construction or alteration of or conversion to places of assembly such
as theaters, auditoriums, churches, lodge and club rooms, places of sports and
games, night clubs, taverns, restaurants, dance or lecture halls or other
places of mass assembly, shall be only after the submittal of plans and
specifications signed and sealed by an architect licensed by the state, and
approved by the Building Commissioner and shall be in accordance with
nationally recognized good practice for such structure and its particular use.
(Prior Code, § 150.083) (Ord. 1837, passed 7-13-1959)
§ 150.084 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL OCCUPANCIES.
   The erection, alteration of or conversion to a building for commercial and/
or industrial use shall be only after the submittal of plans and specifications
signed and sealed by an architect licensed by the state, and approved by the
Building Commissioner, and shall be in accordance with nationally recognized
good practice for the structure and its particular use.
(Prior Code, § 150.084) (Ord. 1837, passed 7-13-1959)
§ 150.085 BUILDINGS OVER TWO STORIES FOR RESIDENTIAL OR MIXED-RESIDENTIAL
OCCUPANCY.
   The erection or alteration of a building over two stories in height for
residential or residential mixed with some other type of occupancy shall be
only after the submittal of plans and specifications signed and sealed by an
architect licensed by the state, and approved by the Building Commissioner, and
shall be subject to all other provisions of this subchapter as to residential
construction and conversion to residential occupancy.
(Prior Code, § 150.085) (Ord. 1837, passed 7-13-1959)
OFF-STREET PARKING
§ 150.100 LOCATION, SIZE AND ACCESS.
   (A)   Location. All parking spaces required to serve buildings or uses
erected or established after the effective date of this section shall be
located on the same zoning lot as the building or use served. Buildings or uses
existing on the effective date of this section which are subsequently altered
or enlarged so as to require the provision of parking spaces under this section
may be served by parking facilities located on land other than the zoning lot
on which the building or use served is located; provided, the facilities are
within 400 feet walking distance of a main entrance to the use served.
      (1)   Except as hereinafter provided, all parking spaces for single-
family or multiple-family dwelling units and apartment buildings shall be
located in the rear half of the lot.
      (2)   Where parking spaces are enclosed within the main structure or a
garage, the enclosure shall not be located nearer to the street line than the
building setback line as provided for in the zoning code.
   (B)   Size. A required off-street parking space shall be at least nine feet
in width and at least 20 feet in length, exclusive of access drives, aisles,
ramps and columns. The space shall have a vertical clearance of at least seven
feet.
   (C)   Access. Each required off-street parking space shall open directly
upon an aisle or driveway of such width and design as to provide safe and
efficient means of vehicular access to the parking space. The aisle or driveway
shall be accessible to a street or alley and located to least interfere with
traffic movements.
(Prior Code, § 150.100) (Ord. 1837, passed 7-13-1959; Ord. 2026, passed 2-27-
1967; Ord. 2249, passed 10-14-1974)
§ 150.101 CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS.
   All off-street parking areas, loading facilities and driveways required by
the city shall be constructed with concrete or asphalt surfaces and shall
conform to the following standards.
   (A)   (1)   Plans and specifications for parking areas, loading facilities
and driveways shall be submitted to the City Clerk at the time application is
made for a building permit for the construction, enlargement or alteration of a
building or buildings to be served by the parking area, loading facilities and
driveways. If no building construction, enlargement or alteration is to take
place, application for a building permit to construct those areas shall be made
to the City Clerk prior to commencement of construction of the areas.
      (2)   The plans and specifications shall show the location of the areas;
the location of adjoining proposed or existing buildings, sidewalks and other
structures; the proposed grade of the parking area; a cross-section of the
area; the location of expansion joints; and the proposed means of storm water
drainage.
   (B)   (1)   The subgrade shall be prepared in accordance with the Illinois
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, adopted 7-2-1973.
      (2)   After the subgrade has been prepared, the contractor, prior to
placing the proposed pavement, shall notify the Building Commissioner for an
inspection of the subgrade.
   (C)   (1)   Portland cement concrete parking areas, loading facilities and
driveways shall be constructed at a minimal thickness of ten inches in
accordance with the line and grade as indicated on the plans and
specifications.
      (2)   This work shall be performed in accordance with the applicable
articles under § 408 of the Illinois Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction.
      (3)   Prior to pouring the proposed pavement, the contractor shall notify
the Building Commissioner for an inspection of the forms and placement of
proposed expansion joints where the proposed improvement may abut the existing
back of curbs, walks or steps as well as at intermediate locations as the forms
may provide.
   (D)   (1)   Asphalt pavement parking areas, loading facilities and driveways
shall be constructed on an eight-inch aggregate base course, type B, in
accordance with the applicable articles under the Illinois Standard
Specifications.
      (2)   After placing the base course, the asphalt paving surface shall be
constructed with one and one-half inches of bituminous concrete binder course
and a final surface of one-inch bituminous concrete surface course, Class I
(modified).
      (3)   This work shall be performed in accordance with the Illinois
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.
   (E)   Penalty provisions for any violation of this section can be found in §
10.99 of this Code.
(Prior Code, § 150.101) (Ord. 1837, passed 7-13-1959; Ord. 2026, passed 2-27-
1967; Ord. 2249, passed 10-14-1974; Ord. 2022-065, passed 12-13-2022) Penalty,
see §
10.99
§ 150.102 LIGHTING.
   (A)   Except for single-family dwellings, all off-street parking areas shall
be illuminated.
   (B)   The illumination shall be arranged so as not to reflect light into
adjacent residential areas.
(Prior Code, § 150.102) (Ord. 1837, passed 7-13-1959; Ord. 2026, passed 2-27-
1967; Ord. 2249, passed 10-14-1974)
§ 150.103 NUMBER OF SPACES.
   (A)   Computation of parking spaces. When determination of the number of
off-street parking spaces required by this subchapter results in a requirement
of a fractional space, any fraction of one- half or less may be disregarded,
while a fraction in excess of one-half shall be counted as one parking space.
   (B)   Required spaces. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in the
following amounts:
      (1)   Single-family dwellings: one parking space, plus one additional
parking space for each two roomers or lodgers accommodated;
      (2)   Multiple-family dwellings and apartment buildings: one and one-half
space for each dwelling unit contained in the building;
      (3)   Hotels: at least one space for each three separate rooms and for
each three suites of more than one room, one parking space;
      (4)   Motels and mobile home parks: one parking space for each room in a
motel and one space for each mobile home in a mobile home park;
      (5)   Hospitals: one parking space for each three hospital beds;
      (6)   Nursing, convalescent and similar homes: one space for each six
patient beds;
      (7)   Funeral homes: five parking spaces for each room used as a chapel
or parlor;
      (8)   Medical and dental clinics: three parking spaces for each doctor or
dentist to be accommodated in such building;
      (9)   Places of mass assembly, including theaters, but excluding
churches: one parking space per ten seats of seating capacity. For this use,
space provided for other parking uses which are located within 500 feet of the
place of the assembly, which are not normally in use during the hours of the
assembly, and which by consent are made available for the use of the assembly
may be used to meet these requirements in proportion of the space to the
requirements;
      (10)   Private clubs, bowling alleys, restaurants and similar assemblies:
one parking space for each 300 square feet of floor area;
      (11)   Churches: one parking space per ten seats of seating capacity;
      (12)   Retail business establishments: except for any lot which does not
have access to a public alley, one parking space per 500 square feet of floor
area, exclusive of storage rooms;
      (13)   Industrial establishments: one parking space per five employees
per maximum eight-hour shift; and
      (14)   Other uses: parking spaces on the same basis as required for the
most similar use as determined by the Planning Commission of the city.
(Prior Code, § 150.103) (Ord. 1837, passed 7-13-1959; Ord. 2026, passed 2-27-
1967; Ord. 2249, passed 10-14-1974)
§ 150.104 OPEN PARKING LOTS IN SECOND RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a special permit to allow an open
parking lot in a second residential district, subject to the following.
   (A)   Public notice and hearing must be as for any other zoning ordinance;
and
   (B)   After the hearing and before granting the permit, the Zoning Board of
Appeals shall find that the proposed parking lot will not substantially injure
or interfere with the use and value of the adjacent residential property, that
it would be impractical to require its location elsewhere, that the lot will be
paved dust-free, that if illuminated the light will not be a nuisance to
adjacent residents, that the lot will not encroach upon the property lines of
the city or of adjoining properties, and that all requirements of the Zoning
and Building Codes will be met.
(Prior Code, § 150.104) (Ord. 1837, passed 7-13-1959; Ord. 2026, passed 2-27-
1967; Ord. 2249, passed 10-14-1974)
FENCES
§ 150.115 PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.
   (A)   Fence permit required. No fence shall be constructed or erected on
real property within the city limits until a permit to construct or erect the
fence has been obtained from the Building Commissioner. A fence permit must be
purchased by the owner of real property if construction is being done by said
owner. A fence permit must be purchased by the contractor if the construction
is being done by said contractor.
   (B)   Application for permit. An application for a fence permit shall be
made to the Building Commissioner in writing upon a form furnished by the
Building Commissioner for that purpose. The application shall contain the name
of the owner, the location of the proposed fence to be erected, the material to
be used in the construction thereof, and such other information as may be
hereinafter required. Plans and/or drawings for such fence shall be submitted
with the application.
   (C)   Issuance of fence permit. Upon approval of the application by the
Building Commissioner, the Building Commissioner will issue a fence permit to
the applicant along with a card of suitable size and form for posting bearing
the permit number, the date issued and the name and address of the applicant.
Such card shall be posted conspicuously on the site of the work during all of
the time such work is in progress.
   (D)   Fence permit fee. A fence permit fee shall be paid by the applicant to
the City Clerk at the time of filing the application in the amount of $15. Such
fee shall be recorded by the City Clerk and placed in the General Corporate
Fund of the city.
   (E)   Inspection. All fence construction shall be subject to inspection at
any time by the Building Commissioner and in the event that such construction
does not comply with the information contained in the application or the plans
or drawings or any other provision of this subchapter, work shall be stopped by
the Building Commissioner until such compliance is made.
(Prior Code, § 150.115) (Ord. 2371, passed 7-12-1977; Ord. 2526, passed 9-23-
1980; Ord. 86-08, passed 2-11-1986)
§ 150.116 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   No fence shall be constructed unless it meets the following requirements.
   (A)   Any fence erected on a property line or within one foot of any
property line shall be so constructed that the fence posts or other supports
for such fence shall be placed or located on that side of the fence which faces
the property of the person erecting or causing such fence to be erected.
However, in the case of a fence erected under a mutual agreement between two
adjoining properties, the fence posts or other supports may be placed on
whichever side such property owners by mutual agreement may elect.
   (B)   No fence on any lot or parcel of ground located in any R-1 Single-
Family Residential District, C-1 Central Area, C-2 Highway Commercial District,
or Uptown-Transit Oriented Development (UTOD) District, as defined and
established by
Ch. 165, Zoning Code, of this code of ordinances or any amendment thereto,
shall exceed six feet in height above the sidewalk grade, or above the surface
of the ground where no grade is established. Additionally, no fence on any lot
or parcel of ground located in any I-1 Limited Industrial or I-2 General
Industrial District, as defined and established by
Ch. 165, Zoning Code, of this code of ordinances or any amendments thereto,
shall exceed eight feet in height above the sidewalk grade, or above the
surface of the grounds where no grade is established. Notwithstanding the
foregoing,a fence designed and used to enclose a swimming pool may be more than
six feet, but not more than eight feet in height above the grade as aforesaid.
   (C)   No fence on any lot or parcel of ground located in any R-1 Single-
Family Residential, C-1 Central Area, C-2 Highway Commercial District, or
Uptown-Transit Oriented Development (UTOD) District, as defined and established
by
Ch. 165, Zoning Code, of this code of ordinances or any amendment thereto, may
be erected on any portion of such lot or parcel of ground lying within the
front yard as defined in said zoning code and as the same is applicable to such
lot or parcel of ground.
   (D)   No fence on any real estate located in the R-1 Single-Family
Residential as defined and established by
Ch. 165, Zoning Code, of this code of ordinances shall be erected in whole or
in part of what is commonly known as barbed wire. No fence located on real
estate in the C-1 Central Area Commercial, C-2 Highway Commercial, I-1 Limited
Industrial and I-2 General Industrial Districts as defined and established by
Ch. 165, Zoning Code, of this code of ordinances may be constructed in whole or
in part of what is commonly known as barbed wire, except as otherwise permitted
by §
150.117 of this chapter.
   (E)   No fence on any lot or parcel of ground located in any R-1 Single-
Family Residential, as defined and established by
Chapter 165, Zoning Code, of this code of ordinances or any amendment thereto,
may be erected on any portion of a corner side yard, defined as a side yard
which adjoins a street, unless the fence is set back at least a foot from the
lot line and is not constructed in whole or in part of what is commonly known
as white vinyl.
(Prior Code, § 150.116) (Ord. 2371, passed 7-12-1977; Ord. 86-08, passed 2-11-
1986; Ord. 2024-032, passed 6-25-2024; Ord. 2025-009, passed 1-28-2025)
§ 150.117 VARIATIONS.
   (A)   The requirements of §
150.116 may not be varied, except upon application to the Planning and Zoning
Board of Appeals, which may recommend to the Mayor and Aldermen of the city a
variation in fence regulations in harmony with the general purpose and intent
of this chapter, only in accordance with the standards and procedures
hereinafter set forth. Variations can only be granted regarding the criteria
contained in §
150.116(B) and (E), or regarding the repair, reconstruction, or reinstallation
of a nonconforming fence, provided that no such variation shall increase the
nonconformity.
   (B)   Procedure and notice of hearing. An application for a variation shall
be filed in writing with the Building Official on forms recommended by the
Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals. Such application shall be forwarded from
the Building Official to the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals with a
request to hold a public hearing and thereafter set forth its findings and
recommendations. The findings and recommendations of the Planning and Zoning
Board of Appeals shall be made in writing and shall be forwarded to the Mayor
and Aldermen of the city. Notice of the time and place of such public hearing
shall be published at least once, not more than 30 days or less than 15 days
before the hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation published within the
city.
   (C)   Standards for variations.
      (1)   No variation shall be recommended by the Planning and Zoning Board
of Appeals, or granted by the Mayor and Aldermen of the city, unless findings
have been made based upon the evidence presented in each specific case that the
following conditions have been met:
         (a)   The proposed variation will not merely serve as a convenience to
the applicant, but will alleviate some demonstrable and unusual hardship which
would result if the strict letter of the regulations were carried out and which
is not generally applicable to other property within the same district;
         (b)   The alleged hardship has not been created by any person
presently having a proprietary interest in the property;
         (c)   The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if a
fence may only be built under the regulations;
         (d)   The proposed variation will not be materially detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the
neighborhood;
         (e)   The proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of
light and air to adjacent property, substantially increase congestion in the
public streets, increase the danger of fire, or endanger the public safety;
         (f)   The proposed variation will not alter the essential character of
the neighborhood; and
         (g)   The proposed variation is in harmony with the spirit and intent
of this chapter.
      (2)   No variance shall be granted if the proposed fence would detract
from the total appearance of the surrounding area. However, creative fencing
and landscaping designs will be evaluated.
   (D)   Standards for variations of barbed wire fences.
      (1)   A fence located on real estate in the C-1 Central Area Commercial,
C-2 Highway Commercial, I-1 Limited Industrial and I-2 General Industrial
Districts as defined and established by Ch. 165, Zoning Code, of this code of
ordinances may be constructed in part of what is commonly known as barbed wire.
However, such barbed wire shall be located at the top only of a fence being
eight feet high above the sidewalk grade or eight feet high above the surface
of the ground where no sidewalk grade is established, no more than three
strands of said barbed wire may be so located, and such barbed wire shall be a
continuation of said fence in a vertical plane or slanted to overhang the real
estate which said fence is designed to enclose.
      (2)   No fence shall be erected in whole or in part of what is commonly
known as barbed wire on real property in a C-1 Central Area Commercial District
or C-2 Highway Commercial District if the real property located within a one
square block area of the real property upon which the fence with barbed
wire is to be erected is improved with more than 50% residential dwellings or
if barbed wire would detract from the historical theme of the area as set forth
in Ch. 158 of this code of ordinances.
   (E)   Fee. A sum of $25 will be charged by the city for a variance
application.
(Prior Code, § 150.117) (Ord. 86-08, passed 2-11-1986; Ord. 2021-043, passed 9-
14-2021; Ord. 2024-032, passed 6-25-2024; Ord. 2024-046, passed 10-22-2024;
Ord. 2025-009, passed 1-28-2025)
SIGNS, AWNINGS AND THE LIKE
§ 150.130 PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall erect or maintain any rigid or
non-rigid awning, canopy, marquee or sign over any street, sidewalk, alley or
other public way in the city without having obtained a permit. Permits for
awnings, canopies, marquees or signs shall be issued by the City Clerk, subject
to the approval of the Building Commissioner, upon payment of the fee provided.
The permit shall designate the location of the proposed structure. The annual
fee for permits shall be $0.25 per square foot for each overhanging awning,
canopy, marquee or sign.
   (B)   Each person, firm or corporation maintaining such a sign shall file
with the City Clerk a bond or indemnity policy in the sum of $50,000,
conditioned to indemnify the city for any loss, damage or liability that may
result from the construction or maintenance of the awning, canopy, marquee or
sign. The bond or indemnity policy shall have sureties approved by the Mayor
and City Council. If a blanket indemnity insurance policy against any loss or
liability due to such signs or canopies is secured by the city, no bond shall
be required.
   (C)   Temporary permits may be issued for maintenance of a temporary rigid
or non-rigid awning, canopy, marquee or sign for a short time, not to exceed
three weeks, upon payment of a fee of $2 for each week or fraction thereof that
the sign is to be maintained.
   (D)   The period for which permits required by this section shall run shall
be the same as the general license year.
   (E)   It shall be the duty of the Building Commissioner to inspect or cause
to be inspected every awning, canopy, marquee or sign extending over any
sidewalk, street, alley or other public way not less than once yearly. In the
event his or her inspection discloses a violation of the terms of this
subchapter, he or she shall make a report in writing to the owner of the sign
and the owner or occupant of the premises to which it is attached. The owner of
the sign or the owner or occupant of the premises shall have ten days from the
date of receipt of the notice of violation to comply with the provisions of
this subchapter. If the violation is not corrected within ten days, the
Building Commissioner is authorized to institute suit for removal of the sign
or to file charges for the violation of the terms of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 150.130) (Ord. 2176, passed 5-8-1972) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.131 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All rigid or non-rigid awnings, canopies, marquees or signs extending
over any public sidewalk, street, alley or public place must be securely
fastened and constructed so that there will be no danger of the same being
dislodged by ordinary winds or falling from other cause and shall be
constructed without ground support on the public right-of-way. All awnings,
canopies or marquees constructed of combustible materials shall be fire-proof
in accordance with city laws and shall be maintained in a safe and good
condition.
   (B)   The lowest part of any rigid or non-rigid awning, canopy, marquee or
sign shall be at least eight feet above the level of the walk or public way
over which it extends. However, any support or framework shall be not less than
seven and one-half feet above the walk or public way over which it extends. In
no event shall a rigid or non-rigid awning, canopy, marquee or sign be erected
or constructed over any public way used by vehicles if any part of its support
or framework or any part of the sign is less than 15 feet above the level of
the public way.
   (C)   The projection of signs from the property lines shall be as provided
in the zoning code. No rigid or non-rigid awning, canopy or marquee shall be
projected from the property line more than five feet. In no event shall the
projection be closer than two feet from the curb line.
(Prior Code, § 150.131) (Ord. 2176, passed 5-8-1972)
MOVING OR WRECKING
§ 150.145 HOUSE MOVING.
   Regulations concerning house movers and the process of house moving within
the city shall be as in other city ordinances for the specific purpose of
governing same.
(Prior Code, § 150.145) (Ord. 1837, passed 7-13-1959)
§ 150.146 BUILDING WRECKING.
   (A)   General. Regulations concerning building wreckers and the process of
building wrecking within the city shall be as set forth in this section.
   (B)   Permit required. Before proceeding with the wrecking or tearing down
of any building or other structure which is more than one story in height; has
a ground floor area of more than 400 square feet; is situated immediately
adjacent to or is located so closely to the line of any public street or alley
that wrecking or tearing down will necessitate the use of some portion of the
public way; or may endanger persons or property using or being upon the public
way; a permit for the wrecking or tearing down shall be obtained by the owner
or his or her agent from the City Clerk. It shall be unlawful to proceed with
the wrecking or tearing down of any building or structure or any structural
part unless the permit is obtained.
      (1)   Application for a permit shall be made in writing by the owner or
his or her agent to the City Clerk who shall refer the same to the Building
Commissioner, who shall inspect the premises affected and make report to the
City Clerk before any permit is issued. Every application shall state the
location and describe the building or other structure which it is proposed to
wreck or tear down, the extent of the public ways to be occupied or obstructed,
the dates when the work is to begin and the name and address of the person,
firm or corporation proposing to do the wrecking or tearing down.
      (2)   If the Building Commissioner determines that the applicant has
complied with the terms of this section and other applicable ordinances, he or
she shall approve the issuance of the permit and the City Clerk shall issue the
permit upon the payment of a permit fee of $50. However, in the case of the
wrecking or tearing down of a building or other structure which is not more
than one story in height and has a ground floor area of not more than 400
square feet which can be torn down and removed without the obstruction of any
public way and without the risk of injury to persons or property using or being
upon any public way, no permit fee shall be required.
   (C)   Safety requirements. Upon the issuance of a permit, the building or
other structure may be wrecked or torn down provided that all the work done
shall be subject to the supervision of the Building Commissioner and to
reasonable restrictions that he or she imposes to safeguard the public and to
protect any public way. The work shall be protected by barricades, scaffolding
and other similar devices as may be necessary to protect the public and to
ensure safety to human life and to comply with the provisions of the Act of the
General Assembly passed 6-3-1907, in force 7-1-1907, provisions of this chapter
and applicable state law providing for the safety of workers in and about the
construction and removal of buildings.
   (D)   Surety bond or insurance.
      (1)   Before any permit is issued granting authority to wreck a building
or structure for which a permit is required, the person engaged in the work of
wrecking the building shall file with the City Clerk a surety bond with
sureties to be approved by the City Clerk in the amount of $20,000 to
indemnify, keep, and save harmless the city against any loss, cost, damage,
expense, judgment or liability of any kind whatsoever which the city may suffer
or which may accrue against, be charged to or be recovered from the city or any
of its officials from anything done under any permit granted for the wrecking
operations.
      (2)   However, the person engaged in the work of wrecking may, in lieu of
the surety bond, file with the City Clerk a policy of insurance or a
certificate evidencing the existence of a policy of insurance written by a
reputable insurance company qualified to do business in the state. The policy
shall be acceptable to the City Clerk and name the city as one of the insured.
The policy of insurance shall be written to afford protection to the city
against all claims by any person or persons who may sustain or suffer injury or
damage to property as a result of anything done in and about the wrecking of
the building. The limits of protection afforded by the insurance policy shall
be not less than $100,000 for injury to one person and not less than $200,000
for injury to two or more persons and $20,000 for damage to property. The
insurance policy shall be kept in force at all times during the wrecking of the
building or other structure and until the wrecking is fully completed.
   (E)   Disposition of wreckage and debris.
      (1)   All debris shall be removed from the site as the wrecking
progresses.
      (2)   However, salvage materials may be temporarily stored on the
premises upon condition that they be stored in a safe and neat manner and that
they be removed upon the completion of the wrecking.
      (3)   In no case shall wreck materials or debris be permitted to fall
upon any public way or any adjoining private property, or to occupy or obstruct
a public way.
      (4)   Upon the completion of the demolition, and if a succeeding building
is not to be immediately erected upon the site, the site shall be filled where
necessary with soil, cinders or other firm material to a level equal to that of
adjoining sidewalks, alleys or other properties.
   (F)   Discontinuance of operation.
      (1)   No wrecking operation shall be discontinued or abandoned once it
has been undertaken.
      (2)   It shall be carried forward promptly and without unnecessary
interruption.
   (G)   Obstruction or opening of street. In any case where the wrecking of
any building or structure will require the obstruction of any public street or
the opening of any public street or alley, the applicant, at the time of making
application for the permit required by the terms of this section, shall also
make application for and obtain any other permit which may be required in
connection with the street obstruction or street opening pursuant to the terms
of any other city law. The issuance of the permit required by this section
shall be subject to the provisions of this section.
   (H)   Protection of sidewalks.
      (1)   In every case where the wrecking of any building or structure will
or may cause or result in damage to any public sidewalk bordering the premises
upon which the building or structure is situated, the applicant shall, as a
condition precedent to the issuance of the permit required by the terms of this
section, make a deposit of cash with the City Clerk in an amount not less than
the amount estimated to be required to replace any sidewalk which may be
damaged in connection with the wrecking operation.
      (2)   The cash deposit shall be held by the City Clerk until the wrecking
operations are completed and any sidewalk damaged is repaired or replaced to
the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Streets of the city, following which
the cash deposit shall be returned to the person making the same.
      (3)   In the event any damaged sidewalk is not repaired or replaced
within 30 days following the date of the completion of the wrecking operations
or within a reasonable additional time allowed by the City Clerk because of
weather conditions or other similar cause, the cash deposit or so much thereof
as shall be necessary shall be used to pay the cost of repairing or replacing
the damaged sidewalk.
      (4)   The remainder, if any, shall be returned to the person making the
deposit.
(Prior Code, § 150.146) (Ord. 1864, passed 12-20-1960; Ord. 2304, passed 3-23-
1976) Penalty, see §
150.999
DANGEROUS OR ABANDONED BUILDINGS
§ 150.160 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED BUILDING.
      (1)   Any vacant building which is frequented by persons who are not
lawful occupants of such structure;
      (2)   Any vacant building which, by reason of lack of maintenance or by
reason of the boarding-
up of its doors and windows or other reasons, has a substantial adverse effect
on the value of property in the immediate neighborhood;
      (3)   A building, the principal use of which has been abandoned and that
no longer has any function or use; or
      (4)   Any vacant building which has had its doors or windows boarded up
for emergency reasons for a period in excess of eight weeks.
   BUILDING. Includes, but is not limited to, any residential, business or
commercial structure, shed, garage or other structure.
   DANGEROUS BUILDING.
      (1)   Any building which is dangerous to the public health because of its
construction or condition or which may cause or aid in the spread of disease or
cause injury to the health of the occupants of it or of neighboring structures;
      (2)   Any building which, because of faulty construction, age, lack of
proper repair or any other cause, is especially susceptible to fire and
constitutes or creates a fire hazard; or
      (3)   Any building which, by reason of faulty construction, age or lack
of repair, is likely to collapse or fall.
(Prior Code, § 150.160) (Ord. 2677, passed 1-8-1985)
§ 150.161 DECLARED TO BE NUISANCE.
   (A)   Any dangerous or abandoned building in the city, as defined in §
150.160 of this chapter, is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of any
dangerous or abandoned building in the city.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or person in custody
of any dangerous building to permit the same to remain in a dangerous
condition, to occupy such building, or to permit it to be occupied while it is
or remains in a dangerous condition.
(Prior Code, § 150.161) (Ord. 2677, passed 1-8-1985) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.162 BOARDING-UP OF BUILDING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   Every owner or occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall maintain
all doors and windows therein with glass or such other glazing materials as are
permitted by this subchapter.
   (B)   No owner or occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall enclose, nor
permit the enclosure, of any door or window by enclosing or covering any door
or window with plywood, masonite, particle board or other lumber product (so-
called boarding-up).
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the boarding up of dwellings
and dwelling units damaged by fire, tornado or other catastrophe for a period
not to exceed eight weeks; however, the period of such permitted board-up may
be extended by the Building Commissioner.
      (1)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the builder of a new
dwelling or dwelling unit from boarding-up doors and windows therein until such
time as construction is complete and the unit is ready for occupancy.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the Chief of
Police or the Chief of the Fire Department from causing a dwelling or dwelling
unit to be boarded up when it is otherwise authorized by law for such official
to do so, or when the public health, safety and welfare are endangered by the
condition of any such dwelling or dwelling unit.
(Prior Code, § 150.162) (Ord. 2677, passed 1-8-1985) Penalty, see §
150.999
REGULATION OF FORECLOSING MORTGAGED PROPERTY
§ 150.170 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is the purpose and intent of the city to establish a process to address
the deterioration, crime, and decline in value of city neighborhoods caused by
real property with foreclosing or foreclosed mortgages located within the city,
and to identify, regulate, limit and reduce the number of these properties
located within the city. Structures owned by individuals who are economically
strained and unable to meet their mortgage obligations are often not properly
or diligently maintained, which contributes to blight, declined real property
values, and have a negative impact on social perception of the areas where they
are located. It is the city's intent to establish a registration program as a
mechanism to help protect neighborhoods from becoming blighted through the lack
of adequate maintenance of real property that is in foreclosure or foreclosed,
and to provide a mechanism to avert foreclosure actions through timely
intervention, education, or counseling of real property owners.
(Ord. 2025-040, passed 9-23-2025)
§ 150.171 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   DEFAULT. Means that the mortgagor has not complied with the terms of the
mortgage on the real property, or the promissory note, or other evidence of the
debt, referred to in the mortgage or deed of trust, after having been provided
written notice of the default from the mortgagee to the mortgagor and
mortgagor's failure to fully cure or remedy the default as specified in the
written notice.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any law enforcement officer, building official, zoning
inspector, code enforcement officer, fire inspector, building inspector, or
other person authorized by the city to enforce the applicable code(s).
   EVIDENCE OF VACANCY. Any condition that on its own, or combined with other
conditions present, would lead a reasonable person to believe that the real
property is vacant. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to:
overgrown and/or dead vegetation; past due utility notices and/or disconnected
utilities; accumulation of trash junk or debris; abandoned vehicles, auto parts
and/or materials; the absence of furnishings and/or personal items consistent
with habitation or occupancy; the presence of an unsanitary, stagnant swimming
pool; the accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers and/or mail; statements
by neighbors, passers-by, delivery agents or government agents; and/or the
presence of boards over doors, windows or other openings in violation of
applicable code.
   FORECLOSURE or FORECLOSURE ACTION. The process by which a real property,
placed as security for a real estate loan, is sold at public sale to satisfy
the debt if the borrower defaults. A foreclosure or foreclosure action is
deemed commenced upon a mortgagee's filing of a Notice of Lis Pendens or
similar evidence of default.
   MORTGAGEE. The creditor, including but not limited to, trustees; mortgage
servicing companies; lenders in a mortgage agreement; any agent (including but
not limited to any person responsible for fulfilling the obligation to
register, commonly known as a "registrant"), servant, or employee of the
creditor; any successor in interest; or any assignee of the creditor's rights,
interests or obligations under the mortgage agreement; or any other person or
entity with the legal right to foreclose on the real property, excluding
governmental entities as the assignee or owner.
   OWNER. Every person, entity, or mortgagee, who alone or severally with
others, has legal or equitable title to any real property as defined by this
chapter; has legal care, charge, or control of any such real property; is in
possession or control of any such real property; and/or is vested with
possession or control of any such real property. The property manager shall not
be considered the owner.
   PROPERTY MANAGER. Any party designated by the owner or mortgagee as
responsible for inspecting, maintaining and securing the real property as
required in this chapter.
   REAL PROPERTY. Any residential or commercial land and/or buildings,
leasehold improvements and anything affixed to the land, or portion thereof
identified by a property parcel identification number, located in the city
limits.
   REGISTRABLE PROPERTY. Shall mean any real property located in the city,
whether vacant or occupied, that is: (i) subject of a foreclosure action; (ii)
has been the subject of a foreclosure action and a judgment has been entered
but the real property has not yet been sold; (iii) has been the subject of a
foreclosure sale and title was transferred to the mortgagee or an affiliate
entity of the mortgagee; or (iv) transferred to the mortgagee or an affiliated
entity of the mortgagee under a deed in lieu of foreclosure or foreclosure
sale. The designation of a real property as a registrable property pursuant to
this subchapter shall remain in place until such time as the real property is
sold to a non-related bona fide purchaser in an arm's length transaction or the
foreclosure action has been dismissed.
   REGISTRY. A web-based electronic database of searchable real property
records, used by the city to allow mortgagees the opportunity to register
properties and pay applicable fees as required in this chapter.
   SEMI-ANNUAL REGISTRATION. Shall mean six months from the date of the first
action that requires registration, as determined by the city, or its designee,
and every subsequent six months. The date of the initial registration may be
different than the date of the first action that required registration.
   UTILITIES AND SERVICES. Any utility and/or service that is essential for a
building to be habitable and/or perform a service necessary to comply with all
city codes. This includes, but is not limited to, electrical, gas, water,
sewer, trash service, lawn maintenance, and pool maintenance.
   VACANT. Any parcel of land in the city that contains any building or
structure to be used as a residence or for commercial or industrial purposes
that is not lawfully occupied or used for its accustomed and ordinary purpose,
as evidenced by conditions set forth in the definition of EVIDENCE OF VACANCY.
In the case of the use of residential real property, "used for its accustomed
and ordinary purpose" means as a place of abode.
(Ord. 2025-040, passed 9-23-2025)
§ 150.172 APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION.
   This chapter applies to all real property within the city.
(Ord. 2025-040, passed 9-23-2025)
§ 150.173 ESTABLISHMENT OF A REGISTRY.
   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of this section of the code, the city, or
its designee, shall establish a registry cataloging each registrable property
within the city, containing the information required by this chapter.
   (B)   The city may, at its discretion, create, maintain and administer this
registry independently, retain the professional services of an experienced
reputable third party, or participate in a shared services or interlocal
agreement with other local units, counties, and/or county improvement
authorities for the creation, maintenance and administration of the registry
pursuant to a professional services agreement.
   (C)   No officer or employee of the city shall access, distribute, or use
the registry for personal, commercial, or non-official purposes.
(Ord. 2025-040, passed 9-23-2025)
§ 150.174 INSPECTION AND REGISTRATION OF REAL PROPERTY UNDER FORECLOSURE.
   (A)   Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within the
city shall perform an inspection of the real property upon default by the
mortgagor as evidenced by the filing of a foreclosure action, Lis Pendens, or
notice of trustee's sale, thus making it a "Registrable Property." Inspection
means a careful examination of the registrable property to determine occupancy
and if it is in compliance with all applicable building, maintenance, and
housing codes.
   (B)   Registrable property inspected pursuant to division (A) above that
remains in foreclosure shall be inspected every 30 days by the mortgagee or
mortgagee's designee. If an inspection shows a change in the registrable
property's occupancy status the mortgagee shall, within ten days of that
inspection, update the occupancy status of the registrable property in the
registry.
   (C)   Within ten days of the date any mortgagee files a foreclosure action,
the mortgagee shall register the registrable property with the city registry,
and, at the time of registration, indicate whether the registrable property is
vacant, and if so shall designate in writing a property manager to inspect,
maintain, and secure the registrable property subject to the mortgage under a
foreclosure action. A separate registration is required for each real property
subject to a foreclosure action, regardless of whether it is occupied or
vacant.
      (1)   Mortgagees who have existing registrable property on the effective
date of this subchapter have 30 calendar days from the effective date to
register as indicated in this section. A separate registration is required for
each real property, whether it is vacant or occupied.
   (D)   Registration pursuant to this section shall contain the name of the
mortgagee and the mortgage servicer, the direct mailing address of both
parties, a direct contact name and telephone number for both parties, a
facsimile number and/or e-mail address for both parties, the folio or tax
number, and the name and 24-hour contact telephone number of the property
management company responsible for the security and maintenance of the
registrable property.
   (E)   At the time of initial registration each registrant shall pay a non-
refundable semi-annual registration fee of $500 for each registrable property.
Subsequent non-refundable semi-annual renewal registrations of properties and
fees in the amount of $500 are due within ten days of the expiration of the
previous registration. Said fees shall be used to offset the costs of: (1)
registration and registration enforcement; (2) code enforcement and mitigation
related to defaulted real properties; (3) post-closing counseling and
foreclosure intervention limited to owner-occupied persons in default, which
may not include cash and mortgage modification assistance; and (4) for any
related purposes as may be adopted in the policy set forth in this chapter.
Said fees shall be deposited to a special account in the city's department
dedicated to the cost of implementation and enforcement of this subchapter and
fulfilling the purpose and intent of this chapter. None of the funds provided
for in this section shall be utilized for the legal defense of foreclosure
actions.
   (F)   If the mortgage and/or servicing on a registrable property is sold or
transferred, the new mortgagee / servicer is subject to all the terms of this
chapter. Within ten days of the transfer, the new mortgagee shall register the
registrable property, if not already registered, or update the existing
registration in the registry. The previous mortgagee(s) / servicer(s) will not
be released from the responsibility of paying all previous unpaid fees, fines,
and penalties accrued during their involvement with the registrable property.
   (G)   If the mortgagee sells or transfers the registrable property in a non-
arm's length transaction to a related entity or person, the transferee is
subject to all the terms of this chapter. Within ten days of the transfer, the
transferee shall register the registrable property or update the existing
registration in the registry. Any and all previous unpaid fees, fines, and
penalties, regardless of who the mortgagee was at the time registration was
required, including, but not limited to, unregistered periods during the
foreclosure process, are the responsibility of the transferee and are due and
payable with the registration. The previous mortgagee will not be released from
the responsibility of paying all previous unpaid fees, fines, and penalties
accrued during that mortgagee's involvement with the registrable property.
   (H)   If the registrable property is not registered, or the registration fee
is not paid within 30 days of when the registration or renewal is required
pursuant to this section, a late fee equivalent to 10% of the semi-annual
registration fee shall be charged for every 30-day period, or portion thereof,
the registrable property is not registered and shall be due and payable with
the registration.
   (I)   This section shall also apply to real property that has been the
subject of a foreclosure sale where title is transferred to the mortgagee as
well as any real property transferred to the mortgagee under a deed in lieu of
foreclosure or by any other legal means.
   (J)   Properties subject to this section shall remain subject to the semi-
annual registration requirement, and the inspection, security, and maintenance
standards of this section as long as the real property remains registrable
property.
   (K)   Any person or corporation that has registered a registrable property
under this section must report any change of information contained in the
city's registry within ten days of the change to the city's registry.
   (L)   Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly
register or to modify the registration to reflect a change of circumstances as
required by this subchapter is a violation of this chapter and shall be subject
to enforcement by any of the enforcement means available to the city.
   (M)   If any registrable property is in violation of this chapter, the city
may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with and/or place a lien on
the registrable property for the cost of the outstanding obligation and any
additional cost incurred to bring the registrable property into compliance.
(Ord. 2025-040, passed 9-23-2025)
§ 150.175 MANTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Properties subject to this chapter shall be kept free of weeds,
overgrown brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any
accumulation of newspaper circulars, flyers, notices, except those required by
federal, state or local law, discarded personal items including, but not
limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed material,
or any other items that give the appearance that the registrable property is
abandoned.
   (B)   Registrable property shall be maintained free of graffiti or similar
markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches
the color of the exterior structure.
   (C)   Front, side, and rear yards, including landscaping, of registrable
property shall be maintained in accordance with the applicable code(s) at the
time registration is required.
   (D)   Registrable property yard maintenance shall include, but not be
limited to, grass, ground covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings,
decorative rock or bark or artificial turf/sod. Acceptable maintenance of yards
and/or landscape shall not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt or
similar material.
   (E)   Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, watering,
irrigation, cutting and mowing of required ground cover or landscape and
removal of all trimmings.
   (F)   Pools and spas of shall be maintained so the water remains free and
clear of pollutants and debris and shall comply with the regulations set forth
in the applicable code(s).
   (G)   Failure of the mortgagee and transferees to properly maintain the
registrable property as required by this chapter may result in a violation of
the applicable code(s) and issuance of a citation or notice of violation in
accordance with the applicable code of the city. Pursuant to a finding and
determination by the City Sheriff, Magistrate or a court of competent
jurisdiction, the city may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with
this section.
   (H)   In addition to the above, the registrable property is required to be
maintained in accordance with the applicable code(s) of the city.
(Ord. 2025-040, passed 9-23-2025)
§ 150.176 SECURITY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Properties subject to these sections shall be maintained in a secure
manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons.
   (B)   A "secure manner" shall include, but not be limited to, the closure
and locking of windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that may
allow a child to access the interior of the registrable property or structure.
Broken windows, doors, gates, and other openings of such size that may allow a
child to access the interior of the registrable property or structure must be
repaired. Broken windows shall be secured by re-glazing of the window.
   (C)   If a registrable property is or has become vacant or blighted, a
property manager shall be designated by the mortgagee to perform the work
necessary to bring the registrable property into compliance with the applicable
code(s), and the property manager must perform regular inspections to verify
compliance with the requirements of this chapter, and any other applicable
laws.
   (D)   In addition to the above, the registrable property is required to be
secured in accordance with the applicable code(s) of the city.
   (E)   When a registrable property subject to this chapter becomes vacant, it
shall be posted with the name and 24-hour contact telephone number of the
property manager. The property manager shall be available to be contacted by
the city Monday through Friday between 9:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M., legal holidays
excepted. The sign shall be placed in a window facing the street and shall be
visible from the street. The posting shall be no less than eight and a half
(8.5) inches by 11 inches and shall be of a font that is legible from a
distance of 45 feet. The posting shall contain the following language with
supporting information:
THIS PROPERTY IS MANAGED BY  .
AND IS INSPECTED ON A REGULAR
BASIS.                                                              .
THE PROPERTY MANAGER CAN BE CONTACTED
                                                  .
BY TELEPHONE AT                                         .
OR BY EMAIL AT                                             .
   (F)   The posting required in division (E) above shall be placed on the
interior of a window-facing the street to the front of the registrable property
so that it is visible from the street, or secured to the exterior of the
building/structure facing the street to the front of the registrable property
so that it is visible from the street or if no such area exists, on a stake of
sufficient size to support the posting in a location that is at all times
visible from the street to the front of the registrable property but not
readily accessible to vandals. Exterior posting shall be constructed of and
printed with weather-resistant materials.
   (G)   Failure of the mortgagee to properly inspect and secure a registrable
property subject to this chapter, and post and maintain the signage noted in
this section, is a violation and shall be subject to enforcement by any of the
enforcement means available to the city. The city may take the necessary action
to ensure compliance with this section, and recover costs and expenses in
support thereof.
(Ord. 2025-040, passed 9-23-2025)
§ 150.177 PROVISIONS SUPPLEMENTAL.
   The provisions of this chapter are cumulative with and in addition to other
available remedies. Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit the city
from collecting on fees, fines, and penalties in any lawful manner; or
enforcing its codes by any other means, including, but not limited to,
injunction, abatement, or as otherwise provided by law or ordinance.
(Ord. 2025-040, passed 9-23-2025)
§ 150.178 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   All registrable property is at risk of being a public nuisance and if vacant
or blighted can constitute a public nuisance, the abatement of which pursuant
to the police power is hereby declared to be necessary for the health, welfare,
and safety of the residents of the city.
(Ord. 2025-040, passed 9-23-2025)
§ 150.179 ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY.
   (A)   If the enforcement officer has reason to believe that a registrable
property subject to the provisions of this chapter is posing a serious threat
to the public health, safety, and welfare, the code enforcement officer may
temporarily secure the registrable property at the expense of the mortgagee and
may bring the violations before the hearing officer during administrative
hearings or the Circuit Court of Cook County as soon as possible to address the
conditions of the registrable property. Nothing herein shall limit the city
from abating any nuisance or unsafe condition by any other legal means
available to it.
   (B)   The Sheriff, code enforcement, City Council or special magistrate
shall have the authority to require the mortgagee or owner affected by this
section, to implement additional maintenance and/or security measures
including, but not limited to, securing any and all doors, windows or other
openings, employment of an on-site security guard or other measures as may be
reasonably required to help prevent further decline of the registrable
property.
   (C)   If there is a finding that the condition of the registrable property
is posing a serious threat to the public health, safety, and welfare, then the
Sheriff, code enforcement. City Council or special magistrate may direct the
city to abate the violations and charge the mortgagee or owner with the cost of
the abatement.
   (D)   If the mortgagee does not reimburse the city for the cost of
temporarily securing the registrable property, or of any abatement directed by
the Sheriff, code enforcement officer, code enforcement, City Council or
special magistrate, within 30 days of the city sending the mortgagee the
invoice then the city may lien the registrable property with such cost, along
with an administrative fee as determined in the city's fee ordinance to recover
the administrative personnel services. In addition to filing a lien the city
may pursue financial penalties against the mortgagee.
   (E)   The city may contract with a third party to implement this chapter,
and, if so, any reference to the enforcement officer herein shall include the
third party the city contracts with for that purpose.
(Ord. 2025-040, passed 9-23-2025)
§ 150.180 OPPOSING, OBSTRUCTING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER; PENALTY.
   Whoever opposes obstructs or resists any enforcement officer or any person
authorized by the enforcement office in the discharge of duties as provided in
this chapter shall be punishable as provided in the applicable code(s) or a
court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2025-040, passed 9-23-2025)
§ 150.181 IMMUNITY OF ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   Any enforcement officer or any person authorized by the city to enforce the
sections here within shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for
reasonable, good faith entry upon registrable property while in the discharge
of duties imposed by this chapter.
(Ord. 2025-040, passed 9-23-2025)
§ 150.182 PENALTIES.
   Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, a violation of this chapter
is declared unlawful.
(Ord. 2025-040, passed 9-23-2025)
§ 150.183 AMENDMENTS.
   The registration fees and penalties stipulated in this chapter may be
subject to modification through a resolution duly passed and adopted by the
Mayor and Aidermen of the city. These fees and penalties may be periodically
adjusted on an annual basis to account for increases consistent with public
indices for inflation.
(Ord. 2025-040, passed 9-23-2025)
§ 150.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   In addition to such other remedies as are provided by law, any person,
firm or corporation violating or fairing to comply with any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $25, nor more than $750.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
   (B)   Any person, firm, partnership or corporation required by the terms of
§
150.002 of this chapter to pay a registration fee, permit fee, inspection fee,
rate or other charge who fails to do so or violates or fails to comply with any
provision of §
150.002 of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than
$50, nor more than $750, for each offense, and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during on or which a violation occurs or
continues.
   (C)   Unless otherwise specified in the body of §§
150.015 through
150.033 of this chapter any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys,
omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of
any of the provisions adopted by reference, or who refuses to remedy a
violation of any such provision or to remedy a hazard of fire explosion,
collapse, contagion or spread of infectious disease found to exist and duly
ordered eliminated, shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $50,
nor more than $750, for each offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent
the city from pursuing such other lawful action as is necessary for the
restraint, correction and abatement of any violations.
(Prior Code, § 150.999) (Ord. 99-247, passed 4-6-1999; Ord. 12-168, passed 3-
13-2012)
APPENDIX A: PERMIT FEE WAIVER APPLICATION
City of Blue Island
13051 Greenwood Avenue
Blue Island, IL 60406
www.blueisland.org
   PERMIT FEE WAIVER APPLICATION
______________________________________________________________________________
Property Address
______________________________________________________________________________
Property Owner                           Phone #
_______________________________________________________________________________
Number of Units Reduced
_______________________________________________________________________________
Number of Units at Present
_______________________________________________________________________________
Coach House Conversion
_______________________________________________________________________________
Contractor                              Phone #
This application is for the waiver of permit fees for the conversion of a
multifamily building to a single family house in an R1 or UTOD zone. All
permits must be applied for and issued, a copy of the revised deed that is
recorded at Cook County shall be filed with the City of Blue Island between the
rough and final inspection, and all work must be completed within twelve (12)
months or all fees will be reinstated. This application must be reviewed and
approved before permits are issued for the fees to be waived.
_________________________________         _________________________________
Owner’s Signature         Date            Approved by            Date
(Ord. 2019-042, passed 8-27-2019)
CHAPTER 151: PLUMBING CODE
Section
   
151.01   Plumbing Code; adoption of state code
   
151.02   Plumbing fixtures and irrigation controls
 
   
151.99   Penalty
§ 151.01 PLUMBING CODE; ADOPTION OF STATE CODE.
   The provisions of the Illinois State Plumbing Code, current edition, is
hereby adopted and shall govern all details of plumbing installation and repair
within the city. All new or existing plumbing installed within the city shall
be installed in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 2015-040, passed 12-8-2015; Ord. 2025-033, passed 6-24-2025)
§ 151.02 PLUMBING FIXTURES AND IRRIGATION CONTROLS.
   Pursuant to 17 Ill. Admin. Code 3730.307(c)(4) and subject to the Illinois
Plumbing Code (77 Ill. Admin. Code 890) and the Lawn Irrigation Contractor and
Lawn Sprinkler System Registration Code (77 Ill. Admin. Code 892), all new
plumbing fixtures and irrigation controllers installed after the effective date
of the ordinance adopting this provision shall bear the Watersense label (as
designated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Watersense program),
when such labeled fixtures are available.
(Ord. 2015-040, passed 12-8-2015)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any persons, firm, corporation or other entity violating or failing to
comply with any of the permitting provisions herein shall be subject to fines
and penalties pursuant to the administrative adjudication ordinance.
   (B)   Any person who practices, offers to practice, attempts to practice, or
holds himself or herself out to practice as a plumber or plumbing contractor or
irrigation contractor without being licensed or registered under applicable
state law shall be reported to the Illinois Department of Public Health.
(Ord. 2015-040, passed 12-8-2015)
CHAPTER 152: SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
Section
   
152.01   Purpose and scope
   
152.02   Definitions
   
152.03   Regulation of small wireless facilities
   
152.04   Dispute resolution
   
152.05   Indemnification
   
152.06   Insurance
   
152.07   Effective date
§ 152.01 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations,
standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless
facilities on rights-of-way within the city’s jurisdiction, or outside the
rights-of-way on property zoned by the city exclusively for commercial or
industrial use, in a manner that is consistent with the Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act, being 50 ILCS 840/1 et seq.
   (B)   Conflicts with other ordinances. This chapter supersedes all
ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict
herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
   (C)   Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws
or regulations.
(Ord. 2018-037, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 152.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
   APPLICABLE CODES. Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing or mechanical
codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to
those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
   APPLICANT. Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
   APPLICATION. A request submitted by an applicant to the city for a permit to
collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any
applicable fee for the review of such application.
   COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
utility pole.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6), as
amended; information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(53), as amended;
mobile service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(33), as amended; or wireless
service other than mobile service.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER. A cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C. §
522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
§ 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C. §
153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
   FEE. A one-time charge.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK. A building, property, or site, or
group of buildings, properties or sites that are either:
      (1)   Listed in the National Register of Historic Places or formally
determined eligible for listing by the keeper of the National Register, the
individual who has been delegated the authority by the federal agency to list
properties and determine their eligibility for the National Register, in
accordance with Section VI.D.1.a.i through Section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide
Programmatic Agreement codified at 47 C.F.R. part 1, Appendix C; or
      (2)   Designated as a locally landmarked building, property, site or
historic district by an ordinance adopted by the city pursuant to a
preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified Local
Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or where
such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State Historic
Preservation Office is pending.
   LAW. A federal or state statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order
or local ordinance or resolution.
   MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY. A small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height
and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches.
   MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE. A utility pole owned or operated by the city in
public rights-of-way.
   PERMIT. A written authorization required by the city to perform an action or
initiate, continue or complete a project.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, trust, or other entity or organization.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY. The functional division of the federal government, the
state, a unit of local government or a special purpose district located in
whole or in part within this state, that provides or has authority to provide
firefighting, police, ambulance, medical or other emergency services to respond
to and manage emergency incidents.
   RATE. A recurring charge.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, public sidewalk, alley or utility easement dedicated for compatible
use. RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include city-owned aerial lines.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY.
      (1)   A wireless facility that meets both of the following
qualifications:
         (a)   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six
cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements,
the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary
enclosure of no more than six cubic feet; and
         (b)   All other wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole
associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in
volume.
      (2)   The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not
included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter; concealment
elements; telecommunications demarcation box; ground-based enclosures;
grounding equipment; power transfer switch; cut-off switch; and vertical cable
runs for the connection of power and other services.
   UTILITY POLE. A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part
by a communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting,
traffic control or a similar function.
   WIRELESS FACILITY.
      (1)   Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications
between user equipment and a communications network, including:
         (a)   Equipment associated with wireless communications; and
         (b)   Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable,
regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of
technological configuration.
      (2)   WIRELESS FACILITY includes small wireless facilities.
      (3)   WIRELESS FACILITY does not include:
         (a)   The structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated; or
         (b)   Wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that
is between wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial, or fiber
optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly
associated with an antenna.
   WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER. Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the state that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but is
acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the city.
   WIRELESS PROVIDER. A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services
provider.
   WIRELESS SERVICES. Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
   WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER. A person who provides wireless services.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE does not include a utility pole.
(Ord. 2018-037, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 152.03 REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES.
   (A)   Permitted use. Small wireless facilities shall be classified as
permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided in
division (C)(9) below regarding height exceptions or variances, but not subject
to zoning review or approval if they are collocated:
      (1)   In rights-of-way in any zoning district; or
      (2)   Outside rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively for commercial
or industrial use.
   (B)   Permit required. An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from
the city to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be
received and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following
conditions and requirements.
      (1)   Application requirements. A wireless provider shall provide the
following information to the city, together with the city’s small cell
facilities permit application, as a condition of any permit application to
collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support
structure:
         (a)   Site specific structural integrity and, for a municipal utility
pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989, being
225 ILCS 340/4;
         (b)   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or
utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each
proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility
poles or structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the
completed facility;
         (c)   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer,
as that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act
of 1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application
as it is proposed to be installed;
         (d)   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all
other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
         (e)   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved;
         (f)   Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation
requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant’s
knowledge; and
         (g)   In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be
attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the city, the
wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of
the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
      (2)   Application process. The city shall process applications as
follows.
         (a)   The first completed application shall have priority over
applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same
utility pole or wireless support structure.
         (b)   1.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the city fails to
approve or deny the application within 90 days after the submission of a
completed application.
            2.   However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the city in
writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than 75
days after the submission of a completed application.
            3.   The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the
ninetieth day after submission of the complete application or the tenth day
after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the city. The receipt of the
deemed approved notice shall not preclude the city’s denial of the permit
request within the time limits as provided under this chapter.
         (c)   1.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility that
includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the city fails to approve or
deny the application within 120 days after the submission of a completed
application.
            2.   However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the city in
writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than
105 days after the submission of a completed application.
            3.   The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the one
hundredth and twenty day after submission of the complete application or the
tenth day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the city. The
receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the city’s denial of
the permit request within the time limits as provided under this chapter.
         (d)   1.   The city shall deny an application which does not meet the
requirements of this chapter.
            2.   If the city determines that applicable codes, ordinances or
regulations that concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and
conditions contained herein require that the utility pole or wireless support
structure be replaced before the requested collocation, approval shall be
conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or wireless support
structure at the cost of the provider.
            3.   The city shall document the basis for a denial, including the
specific code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is
based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the
city denies an application.
            4.   The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the city
and resubmit the revised application once within 30 days after notice of denial
is sent to the applicant without paying an additional application fee. The city
shall approve or deny the revised application within 30 days after the
applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved. Failure to
resubmit the revised application within 30 days of denial shall require the
application to submit a new application with applicable fees, and
recommencement of the city’s review period.
            5.   The applicant must notify the city in writing of its intention
to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be
submitted with the revised application.
            6.   Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the
deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised application does not
apply if the cure requires the review of a new location, new or different
structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment
associated with the small wireless facility.
         (e)   1.   Pole attachment agreement: within 30 days after an approved
permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the
city and the applicant shall enter into a master pole attachment agreement,
provided by the city for the initial collocation on a municipal utility pole by
the application.
            2.   For subsequent approved permits to collocate on a small
wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the city and the applicant shall
enter into a license supplement of the master pole attachment agreement.
      (3)   Completeness of application.
         (a)   Within 30 days after receiving an application, the city shall
determine whether the application is complete and notify the applicant. If an
application is incomplete, the city must specifically identify the missing
information. An application shall be deemed complete if the city fails to
provide notification to the applicant within 30 days after all documents,
information and fees specifically enumerated in the city’s permit application
form are submitted by the applicant to the city.
         (b)   Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the city sends the
notice of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing
information.
      (4)   Tolling. The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
         (a)   An express written agreement by both the applicant and the city;
or
         (b)   A local, state or federal disaster declaration or similar
emergency that causes the delay.
      (5)   Consolidated applications.
         (a)   An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities
within the jurisdiction of the city shall be allowed, at the applicant’s
discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for
the collocation of up to 25 small wireless facilities if the collocations each
involve substantially the same type of small wireless facility and
substantially the same type of structure.
         (b)   If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities,
the city may remove small wireless facility collocations from the application
and treat separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete
information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment
or that are denied. The city may issue separate permits for each collocation
that is approved in a consolidated application.
      (6)   Duration of permits.
         (a)   The duration of a permit shall be for a period of not less than
five years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent durations unless the
city makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the new or modified
utility pole do not comply with the applicable city codes or any provision,
condition or requirement contained in this chapter.
         (b)   If the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act, being 50 ILCS
840/1 et seq., is repealed as provided in Section 90 therein, renewals of
permits shall be subject to the applicable City code provisions or regulations
in effect at the time of renewal.
      (7)   Means of submitting applications. Applicants shall submit
applications, supporting information and notices to the city by personal
delivery at the city’s designated place of business, by regular mail postmarked
on the date due or by any other commonly used means, including electronic mail.
   (C)   Collocation requirements and conditions.
      (1)   Public safety space reservation. The city may reserve space on
municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the city’s electric
utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the
collocation of a small wireless facility unless the city reasonably determines
that the municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
      (2)   Installation and maintenance. The wireless provider shall install,
maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and
good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this
chapter. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or
contracts that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations.
      (3)   No interference with public safety communication frequencies.
         (a)   The wireless provider’s operation of the small wireless
facilities shall not interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety
agency for public safety communications.
         (b)   A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of
the type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a
public safety agency’s communications equipment.
         (c)   Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in
accordance with industry standards and the FCC’s regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum
licensed by a public safety agency.
         (d)   If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the
wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference by the
public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy
the interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC
including 47 C.F.R. §§ 22.970 through 22.973 and 47 C.F.R. §§ 90.672 through
90.675.
         (e)   The city may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility
based on such interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with
the Code of Federal Regulations cited in division (C)(3)(d) above. Failure to
remedy the interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
      (4)   Collocation.
         (a)   The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless
facilities on city utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or
transmission system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or
the electric supply zone of the pole.
         (b)   However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless
facility may be located in the communications space on the city utility pole
and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless
provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
         (c)   For purposes of this division (C)(4) the terms COMMUNICATIONS
SPACE, COMMUNICATION WORKER SAFETY ZONE and ELECTRIC SUPPLY ZONE have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published
by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
      (5)   Codes and local code provisions. The wireless provider shall comply
with all applicable codes and local code provisions or regulations that concern
public safety.
      (6)   Written design standards. The wireless provider shall comply with
written design standards that are generally applicable for decorative utility
poles, or reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements that are
set forth in a city ordinance, written policy adopted by the city, a
comprehensive plan or other written design plan that applies to other occupiers
of the rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark or in a historic
district.
      (7)   Alternate placements.
         (a)   Except as provided in this division (C), a wireless provider
shall not be required to collocation small wireless facilities on any specific
utility pole, or category of utility poles, or be required to collocate
multiple antenna systems on a single utility pole. However, with respect to an
application for the collocation of a small wireless facility associated with a
new utility pole, the city may propose that the small wireless facility be
collocated on an existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure
within 100 feet of the proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept
if it has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and
conditions, and the alternate location and structure does not impose technical
limits or additional material costs as determined by the applicant.
         (b)   If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the city, the
applicant shall provide written certification describing the property rights,
technical limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not
satisfy the criteria in this division (C)(7).
      (8)   Height limitations.
         (a)   The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be no more
than ten feet above the utility pole or wireless support structure on which the
small wireless facility is collocated.
         (b)   New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures
on which small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
            1.   Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole,
other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place
on the date the application is submitted to the city, that is located within
300 feet of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure
and that is in the same right-of-way within the jurisdictional boundary of the
city, provided the city may designate which intersecting right-of-way within
300 feet of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall
control the height limitation for such facility; or
            2.   Forty-five feet above ground level.
      (9)   Height exceptions or variances. If an applicant proposes a height
for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on
which the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant
shall apply for a wireless facilities permit application in conformance with
procedures, terms and conditions set forth therein.
      (10)   Contractual design requirements. The wireless provider shall
comply with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the city and a
private property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable
to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
      (11)   Ground-mounted equipment spacing. The wireless provider shall
comply with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances
concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way
if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses
wireless provider requests for exception or variance and do not prohibit
granting of such exceptions or variances.
      (12)   Undergrounding regulations. The wireless provider shall comply
with local code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding
requirements that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of
existing utility poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the
requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses requests
to install such new utility poles or modify such existing utility poles and do
not prohibit the replacement of utility poles.
      (13)   Collocation completion deadline. Collocation for which a permit is
granted shall be completed within 180 days after issuance of the permit, unless
the city and the wireless provider agree to extend this period or a delay is
caused by make-ready work for a municipal utility pole or by the lack of
commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided the wireless
provider has made a timely request within 60 days after the issuance of the
permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time to
complete installation does not exceed 360 days after issuance of the permit.
Otherwise, the permit shall be void unless the city grants an extension in
writing to the applicant.
   (D)   Application fees. Application fees are imposed as follows.
      (1)   The applicant shall pay an application fee of $650 for an
application to collocate a single small wireless facility on an existing
utility pole or wireless support structure, and $350 for each small wireless
facility addressed in a consolidated application to collocate more than one
small wireless facility on existing utility poles or wireless support
structures.
      (2)   The applicant shall pay an application fee of $1,000 for each small
wireless facility addressed in an application that includes the installation of
a new utility pole for such collocation.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of state law or local
ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the
required application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
      (4)   The city shall not require an application, approval or permit, or
require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider
authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
         (a)   Routine maintenance;
         (b)   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities
that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless
provider notifies the city at least ten days prior to the planned replacement
and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of equipment
consistent with division (B)(1)(d) above; or
         (c)   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or
replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung
between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes.
      (5)   Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the city to work
within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require
lane closures.
   (E)   Exceptions to applicability. Nothing in this chapter authorizes a
person to collocate small wireless facilities on:
      (1)   Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled
by the city or another unit of local government that is not located within
rights-of-way, or a privately owned utility pole or wireless support structure
without the consent of the property owner;
      (2)   Property owned, leased or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
      (3)   (a)   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under § 18c-7201
of the Illinois Vehicle Code, being 625 ILCS 5/18c-7201, Metra Commuter Rail or
any other public commuter rail service, or an electric utility as defined in §
16-102 of the Public Utilities Act, being 220 ILCS 5/16-102, without the
consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail service, or electric utility.
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to an electric or gas public
utility or such utility wireless facilities if the facilities are being used,
developed and maintained consistent with the provisions of § 16-108.5(i) of the
Public Utilities Act, being 220 ILCS 5/16-108.5(i).
         (b)   1.   For the purposes of this division (E), PUBLIC UTILITY has
the meaning given to that term in § 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act, being
220 ILCS 5/3-105.
            2.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to relieve any
person from any requirement:
               a.   To obtain a franchise or a state-issued authorization to
offer cable service or video service; or
               b.   To obtain any required permission to install, place,
maintain or operate communications facilities, other than small wireless
facilities subject to this chapter.
   (F)   Pre-existing agreements.
      (1)   Existing agreements between the city and wireless providers that
relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities in the right-of-way,
including the collocation of small wireless facilities on city utility poles,
that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for all small wireless
facilities collocated on the city’s utility poles pursuant to applications
submitted to the city before June 1, 2018, subject to applicable termination
provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into after June 1, 2018, shall
comply with this chapter.
      (2)   A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the city on
the effective date of the Act may accept the rates, fees and terms that the
city makes available under this chapter for the collocation of small wireless
facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the collocation of
small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application submitted two
or more years after the effective date of the Act by notifying the city that it
opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The existing agreement remains in
effect, subject to applicable termination provisions, for the small wireless
facilities the wireless provider has collocated on the city’s utility poles
pursuant to applications submitted to the city before the wireless provider
provides such notice and exercises its option under this division (F).
   (G)   Annual recurring rate.
      (1)   A wireless provider shall pay to the city an annual recurring rate
to collocate a small wireless facility on a city utility pole located in a
right-of-way that equals:
         (a)   Two hundred dollars per year; or
         (b)   The actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the wireless
provider’s use of space on the city utility pole.
      (2)   If the city has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct
costs, the fee shall be $200 payable on the first day after the first annual
anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent to collocate, and
on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
   (H)   Abandonment.
      (1)   A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous
period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of the facility
shall remove the small wireless facility within 90 days after receipt of
written notice from the city notifying the wireless provider of the
abandonment.
      (2)   The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return
receipt requested, by the city to the owner at the last known address of the
wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within 90 days
of such notice, the city may remove or cause the removal of such facility
pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for municipal utility
poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by
other law for removal and cost recovery.
      (3)   A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the city if it
sells or transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the
city. Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new
wireless provider.
(Ord. 2018-037, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 152.04 DISPUTE RESOLUTION.
   The Circuit Court of the county shall have exclusive jurisdiction to resolve
all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act, being
50 ILCS 840/1 et seq. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for
collocation of small wireless facilities on municipal utility poles within the
right-of-way, the city shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its
poles at annual rates of no more than $200 per year per municipal utility pole,
with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute.
(Ord. 2018-037, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 152.05 INDEMNIFICATION.
   A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the city harmless against any
and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting
from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the city
improvements or right-of-way associated with such improvements by the wireless
provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and
privileges granted under this chapter and the Act. A wireless provider has no
obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any liabilities and losses as
may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the city or its employees or
agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any claims that they may have
against the city with respect to consequential, incidental or special damages,
however caused, based on the theory of liability.
(Ord. 2018-037, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 152.06 INSURANCE.
   (A)   The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider’s own cost
and expense, the following insurance:
      (1)   Property insurance for its property’s replacement cost against all
risks;
      (2)   Workers’ compensation insurance, as required by law; or
      (3)   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its
activities on the city improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum
protection limits consistent with its requirements of other users of city
improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and
property damage.
   (B)   The wireless provider shall include the city as an additional insured
on the commercial general liability policy and provide certification and
documentation of inclusion of the city in a commercial general liability policy
prior to the collocation of any wireless facility.
   (C)   A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance
coverage and limit requirement required by the city. A wireless provider that
self-insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply
with the requirement for the name of additional insureds under this section. A
wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the city evidence
sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance
coverage limits required by the city.
(Ord. 2018-037, passed 7-24-2018)
§ 152.07 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effect on July 24, 2018.
(Ord. 2018-037, passed 7-24-2018)
CHAPTER 153: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Section
   
153.01   Adoption of Comprehensive Plan
§ 153.01 ADOPTION OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   The city’s Comprehensive Plan is hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as if set out in full.
(Prior Code, § 154.01) (Ord. 12-190, passed 6-26-2012)
CHAPTER 154: ENTERPRISE ZONES
Section
   
154.01   Enterprise Zone benefits and boundaries
§ 154.01 ENTERPRISE ZONE BENEFITS AND BOUNDARIES.
   The city’s provisions establishing and amending Enterprise Zone benefits and
boundaries are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if set
out in full.
(Prior Code, § 155.01) (Ord. 2675, passed 12-26-1984; Ord. 89-184, passed 10-
10-1989; Ord. 90-201, passed 1-23-1990; Ord. 90-205, passed 3-15-1990; Ord. 92-
317, passed 7-14-1992)
CHAPTER 155: EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
Section
General Provisions
   
155.01   Purpose
   
155.02   Definitions
   
155.03   Compliance required
   
155.04   Adoption of area regulations by reference
Site Development
   
155.15   General standards
   
155.16   Site development permit required
   
155.17   Application
   
155.18   Bond
   
155.19   Filing fees; deposit
   
155.20   Term
   
155.21   Revocation
   
155.22   Building permit or other plan approval also required
   
155.23   Safety precautions may be imposed
   
155.24   Maintenance of nuisance prohibited
   
155.25   Exceptions
Administration and Enforcement
   
155.40   Inspections
   
155.41   Records to be kept
   
155.42   Disclaimer of liability
 
   
155.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Building Regulations; Construction, see
Ch. 150
   Contractors and Buildings; Construction, see
Ch. 118
   Floodplain Management, see
Ch. 156
   Public Works, see Title V
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to safeguard
persons, protect property and to promote the public welfare by regulating and
controlling the design, construction, quality of materials and use and
maintenance of any development or other activity which disturbs or breaks the
topsoil or otherwise results in the movement of earth on land situated in the
city.
(Prior Code, § 156.01) (Ord. 2419, passed 10-24-1978)
§ 155.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING PERMIT. A permit issued by the city for the construction, erection
or alteration of a structure or building.
   CERTIFY or CERTIFICATION. The specific inspections and tests, where
required, have been performed, and the tests comply with the applicable
requirements of this chapter.
   CUBIC YARDS. The amount of material in excavation or fill measured by the
method of “average end areas”.
   EXCAVATIONS. Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or
any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed. The term includes the conditions resulting
from any excavation or fill.
   LAND SURVEYOR. A registered surveyor of the state.
   PARCEL. All contiguous land in one ownership.
   PERMITTEE. Any person to whom a site development permit is issued.
   REMOVAL. Cutting vegetation to the ground or stumps, complete extraction or
lolling by spraying.
   SITE. A lot or parcel of land or a contiguous combination where grading work
is performed as a single unified operation.
   SITE DEVELOPMENT. Altering terrain or vegetation and constructing driveways.
   VACANT. Land on which there are no structures or only structures which are
secondary to the use or maintenance of the land itself.
(Prior Code, § 156.02) (Ord. 2419, passed 10-24-1978)
§ 155.03 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   All earth moving, grading and grading operations not specifically exempted
by the provisions of this chapter shall comply with the applicable standards
and requirements set forth herein.
(Prior Code, § 156.03) (Ord. 2419, passed 10-24-1978)
§ 155.04 ADOPTION OF AREA REGULATIONS BY REFERENCE.
   The handbook entitled “Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control in Northeastern Illinois”, first edition, as compiled by area
county soil and water conservation districts are incorporated into this chapter
by reference for the purpose of delineating procedures and methods of operation
under the development plans approved in §§
155.15 through
155.25 of this chapter. In the event of conflict between provisions of the
handbook and other provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter
shall govern.
(Prior Code, § 156.04) (Ord. 2419, passed 10-24-1978)
SITE DEVELOPMENT
§ 155.15 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   The following general principles shall apply to any movement of earth, any
sedimentation and erosion control plan, and the granting of a permit for the
execution of the plan.
   (A)   The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any given time
during development.
   (B)   The minimum area exposure shall be kept to as short a duration of time
as is practical.
   (C)   Temporary vegetation or, where appropriate, mulching or other non-
viable cover shall be used to protect areas exposed during development.
   (D)   Sediment basins, debris basins, desilting basins or silt traps shall
be installed and maintained to remove sediment from run-off waters from land
undergoing development.
   (E)   Provision shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased run-
off caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development.
   (F)   Permanent, final plant covering or structures shall be installed as
soon as possible.
   (G)   The plan of development shall relate to the topography and soils of
the site so that the lowest potential for erosion is created.
   (H)   Natural plant covering shall be retained and protected so far as is
consistent with developing the site.
(Prior Code, § 156.15) (Ord. 2419, passed 10-24-1978) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.16 SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Before land is cleared, graded, filled, transported or otherwise
disturbed by the movement of earth for purposes including, but not limited to,
the construction of buildings, the mining of minerals including sand and
gravel, the development of golf courses, the filling of land, and the
construction of roads and streets by any person, partnership or corporation
within the city, a site development permit embodying the proposed earth
movement shall be obtained from the city. Unless the development is exempted by
division (B) below, development comes under any one or more of the following
provisions:
      (1)   Excavation, fill or any combination thereof which will exceed 25
cubic yards;
      (2)   Fill which will exceed one foot in vertical depth at its deepest
point measured from the natural ground surface;
      (3)   Excavation which will exceed one foot in vertical depth at its
deepest point;
      (4)   Excavation, fill or any combination thereof which will exceed an
area of 500 square feet; and/or
      (5)   Plant cover which is to be removed from an area exceeding 500
square feet on any vacant parcel of land or any parcel of land in excess of one
acre.
   (B)   A site development permit shall not be required in the following
cases:
      (1)   Excavations below finished grade for septic tanks and drain fields,
tanks, vaults, tunnels, equipment basements, swimming pools, cellars or
footings of buildings or structures for which a building permit has been issued
by the city, unless part of a development which would otherwise require a
permit;
      (2)   Excavation or removal of vegetation in public utility easements by
public utility companies for the purpose of installing underground utilities;
      (3)   Tilling of the soil for fire protection purposes; or
      (4)   Engraving in the following if, but only if, in connection with a
farming or other agricultural or conservation enterprise and upon property
zoned solely for farming or agricultural purposes and uses:
         (a)   The construction of sod waterways;
         (b)   The construction of terraces;
         (c)   The construction of surface water diversions;
         (d)   The construction of grade stabilization structures; or
         (e)   The tilling of soil.
(Prior Code, § 156.16) (Ord. 2419, passed 10-24-1978)
§ 155.17 APPLICATION.
   (A)   No site development or building permit shall be issued until the
developer submits a site development plan, together with other submissions
required by this chapter, and certifies that any land-clearing construction or
development involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with the
plan and submissions.
   (B)   Each application for a site development or his or her authorized agent
to the City Engineer and the Superintendent of Public Works for their approval.
When grading or plant cover removal is proposed as a part of a building permit,
application may be combined in one plot plan and the number of copies required
by the City Engineer and Superintendent of Public Works may be submitted
showing building plans and site development plans. In such instances, a
registered land surveyor shall certify as to the accuracy of the existing and
proposed contour lines. Each application shall be accompanied by the following:
      (1)   With respect to site developments, a vicinity sketch showing
acreage of site, boundary line survey, zoning, type of proposed sewer and water
facilities, and the location of existing utilities, buildings, and drains on
and within 100 feet of the site, together with a legend and scale. There shall
be included on or with the vicinity sketch:
         (a)   A soil map of the subject property showing the predominant soil
types on the site;
         (b)   Enough information on those areas abutting or adjacent to the
site to show existing drainage patterns and the drainage course that may
affect, or be affected by, the development of the site;
         (c)   The name and address of the developer or owner;
         (d)   The name and address of any consulting firm retained by the
applicant, together with the name of applicant’s principal contact at the firm;
         (e)   Limits of the natural floodplain, if any;
         (f)   Areas to be sodded, seeded, mulched or paved;
         (g)   Acreage of area to be vegetatively stabilized, if any; and
         (h)   Areas to be left undisturbed.
      (2)   With respect to site grading, existing topography of the site and a
100-foot adjacent peripheral strip, proposed contours and final grades, and
street profiles; and indicating what measures will be employed to protect cut
and fill slopes from surface run-off.
      (3)   Storm drainage by means of a plan including a drainage area map and
computations, and indicating what conditions now prevail at proposed and
natural outlets such as:
         (a)   Whether the drainage course is bare earth or vegetated;
         (b)   Whether the constructed outlet will be in open sun, open shade
or dense shade;
         (c)   Whether the natural or proposed outlet is subject to long-term
or continuous flow;
         (d)   Whether the existing outlet is actively eroding;
         (e)   Whether there is evidence of a high water table (permanent or
seasonal);
         (f)   Whether the area is subject to seepage or spring flow;
         (g)   The elevation of normal water level in all proposed and natural
outlets;
         (h)   A profile below outlet for a sufficient distance to indicate the
natural gradient of the accepting natural outlet or stream channel;
         (i)   A cross-section and profile of existing stream channels where
applicable; and
         (j)   A ditch design and computations for all seeded, sodded or bare
earth outlets, ditches and similar water conduction facilities.
      (4)   Estimate schedule and phasing of development of the site:
         (a)   Phase I, stripping or clearing;
         (b)   Phase II, rough grading and construction;
         (c)   Phase III, final grading and vegetative establishment; and
         (d)   Phase IV, maintenance.
   (C)   (1)   All erosion and sediment control plans submitted to the City
Engineer and Superintendent of Public Works for approval shall show all the
erosion and sediment control measures needed to provide protection throughout
all phases of construction listed above.
      (2)   These plans shall also include any off-site borrow and spoil areas,
sewer lines, utility lines and haul and access roads, and shall further
indicate:
         (a)   The start of clearing date;
         (b)   Duration of exposure of disturbed areas;
         (c)   Installation of temporary sediment control measures (vegetative
and structural) by phase and date;
         (d)   Installation of storm drainage and date;
         (e)   Paving of streets and parking areas, if any, by phase and date;
         (f)   Establishment of permanent vegetative cover (plans will show
what will be done to shorten the duration of exposure of disturbed areas as
soon after grading as possible), including seeding mixes and rates, type of
sod, seedbed preparation, seeding dates, limes and fertilizer application,
temporary seedings, if needed, mulching or similar stabilization procedures;
         (g)   Details of all structural sediment control measures; and
         (h)   Computations for sediment basins, if any.
   (D)   The handbook adopted by reference in §
155.04 of this chapter shall exemplify the considerations and factors which
should enter into the preparation of a site development plan.
(Prior Code, § 156.17) (Ord. 2419, passed 10-24-1978)
§ 155.18 BOND.
   The applicant may be required to file with the City Clerk a faithful
performance bond or other improvement security satisfactory to the city in the
amount deemed sufficient by the city to cover all the cost of improvements,
landscaping and maintenance of landscaping for periods specified by the city,
engineering, inspection fees and incidental expenses.
(Prior Code, § 156.18) (Ord. 2419, passed 10-24-1978)
§ 155.19 FILING FEES; DEPOSIT.
   Filing fees and deposits for services shall be as set forth in city
ordinances or as deemed necessary for specific projects.
(Prior Code, § 156.19) (Ord. 2419, passed 10-24-1978)
§ 155.20 TERM.
   Every site development permit shall expire by limitation and become null and
void if the work authorized by the permit has not been commenced within 180
days, or is not completed within one year from the date of issue; except that,
the City Council may, if the permit holder presents satisfactory evidence that
unusual difficulties have prevented work being started or completed within the
specified time limits, grant a reasonable extension of time if written
application is made before the expiration date of the permit.
(Prior Code, § 156.20) (Ord. 2419, passed 10-24-1978)
§ 155.21 REVOCATION.
   (A)   In the event any person holding a site development permit pursuant to
this chapter violates the terms of the permit, conducts or carries on the site
development in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the health,
welfare or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the
property of the permittee, or conducts or carries on the site development so
that it is materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to
property or improvements in the neighborhood, the Mayor and City Council shall
revoke or suspend the site development permit.
   (B)   No site development permit shall be permanently revoked or suspended
until a review is held by the Mayor and City Council. Written notice of the
review shall be served upon the permittee, either personally or by registered
mail, and shall state:
      (1)   The grounds for complaint or reasons for the revocation or
suspension, in clear and concise language; and
      (2)   The time when and the place where the review is to be held.
   (C)   The notice shall be served by registered mail or personal service on
the permittee at least five days prior to the date set for the review. At the
review, the permittee shall be given an opportunity to be heard, and he or she
may call witnesses and present evidence on his or her behalf. Upon conclusion
of the review, the Mayor and City Council shall determine whether or not the
permit shall be suspended or revoked.
   (D)   The Mayor and City Council shall hold the hearing to consider
recommendations for revocation or suspension of permits which have been
temporarily suspended at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the City
Council at which all conditions of divisions (B) and (C) above can be
fulfilled.
(Prior Code, § 156.21) (Ord. 2419, passed 10-24-1978)
§ 155.22 BUILDING PERMIT OR OTHER PLAN APPROVAL ALSO REQUIRED.
   No site development permit shall be issued for an intended building site
unless:
   (A)   The permit is accompanied by or combined with a valid building permit
issued by the city; or
   (B)   The proposed earth moving is coordinated with any overall plan
previously approved by the city for the area in which the site is situated.
(Prior Code, § 156.22) (Ord. 2419, passed 10-24-1978)
§ 155.23 SAFETY PRECAUTIONS MAY BE IMPOSED.
   (A)   If, at any stage of the grading, the City Engineer or Superintendent
of Public Works determines by inspection that the nature of the formation is
such that further work as authorized by an existing permit is likely to imperil
any property, public way, watercourse or drainage structure, he or she may
require, as a condition to allowing the work to be done, that reasonable safety
precautions be taken to avoid the likelihood of peril. Special precautions may
include, but shall not be limited to, specifying a more level exposed slope;
construction of additional drainage facilities, berms, terracing, compaction,
leveling or cribbing; installation of plant material for erosion control; and
reports of a registered engineering geologist whose recommendations may be made
requirements for further work.
   (B)   Where it appears that storm damage may result because the grading is
not complete, work may be stopped and the permittee required to install
temporary planting to control erosion, install temporary structures or take
other measures as may be required to protect adjoining property or the public
safety. On large operations or where unusual site conditions prevail, the City
Engineer or Superintendent of Public Works may specify the time of starting
grading and time of completion or may require that the operations be conducted
in specific stages to ensure completion of protective measures or devices prior
to the advent of seasonal rains.
(Prior Code, § 156.23) (Ord. 2419, passed 10-24-1978)
§ 155.24 MAINTENANCE OF NUISANCE PROHIBITED.
   This chapter shall not be construed as authorizing any person to maintain a
private or public nuisance upon his or her property. Compliance with the
provisions of this chapter shall not be a defense in any action to abate the
nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 156.24) (Ord. 2419, passed 10-24-1978)
§ 155.25 EXCEPTIONS.
   The Mayor and City Council may authorize exceptions to any of the
requirements and regulations set forth in this chapter, as follows.
   (A)   Application for any exception shall be made by a verified petition of
the applicant stating fully the grounds of the application and the facts relied
upon by the petitioner. The petition shall be filed with the site development
permit application. In order for the land referred to in the petition to come
within the provisions of this section, it shall be necessary that the Mayor and
City Council find all of the following facts with respect thereto:
      (1)   The land is of such shape or size, is affected by such physical
conditions, or is subject to such title limitations or record that it is
impossible or impractical for the subdivider or property owner to comply with
all of the regulations of this chapter;
      (2)   The exception is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a
substantial property right of the petitioner; and
      (3)   The granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to other property in the vicinity of the subject property.
   (B)   Each proposed exception shall be referred to the City Engineer and
Superintendent of Public Works. They shall transmit to the Mayor and City
Council their recommendations which shall be reviewed prior to the granting of
any exception.
   (C)   After review, the Mayor and City Council, by resolution, may approve
the site development permit application with the exceptions and conditions it
deems necessary, it may disapprove the site development permit application and
exception application, or it may take other appropriate action.
(Prior Code, § 156.25) (Ord. 2419, passed 10-24-1978)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 155.40 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The City Engineer and the Superintendent of Public Works shall make
inspections as required and shall either approve that portion of the work
completed or shall notify the permittee where the work fails to comply with the
site development plan. Where it is found by inspection that conditions are not
substantially as stated or shown in the plan, they may order further work
stopped until approval is obtained for a revised grading plan conforming to the
existing conditions.
   (B)   Plans for grading work bearing the stamp of approval of the City
Engineer and Superintendent of Public Works shall be maintained at the site
during the progress of the grading. Until the final inspection is made, a sign
issued by the city indicating that permission to grade has been granted by the
city shall be prominently displayed on the front property line of the property
involved. The sign shall be visible from the street on which the property
fronts.
   (C)   In order to obtain inspections in accordance with the following
schedule, the permittee shall notify the City Engineer and Superintendent of
Public Works at least two full working days before the inspection is to be
made. The inspection shall be made for:
      (1)   Rough grading when all rough grading has been completed; and
      (2)   Final inspection when all work, including installation of all
drainage and other structures and required planting, has been completed.
(Prior Code, § 156.40) (Ord. 2419, passed 10-24-1978)
§ 155.41 RECORDS TO BE KEPT.
   Plans, specifications and reports for all site developments shall be
retained in original form by the Superintendent of Public Works.
(Prior Code, § 156.41) (Ord. 2419, passed 10-24-1978)
§ 155.42 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   Failure of city officials to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly
conditions, or to recommend denial of the site development permit, shall not
relieve the permittee from responsibility for the condition or damage resulting
and shall not result in the city, its officers or agents being responsible for
any condition or damage resulting.
(Prior Code, § 156.42) (Ord. 2419, passed 10-24-1978)
§ 155.99 PENALTY.
   No person, firm or corporation shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair or
maintain any grading, excavation or fill, or cause the same to be done,
contrary to or in violation of any provisions of this chapter. Any person, firm
or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each
and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted. Upon
conviction of any such violation, the person shall be punished by a fine of not
more than $750 or by imprisonment for not more than 180 days, or both.
(Prior Code, § 156.99)
CHAPTER 156: FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
156.001   Purpose
   
156.002   Definitions
   
156.003   How to use chapter
   
156.004   Base flood elevation
   
156.005   Development requirements generally
   
156.006   Variances
   
156.007   Disclaimer of liability
   
156.008   Abrogation and greater restriction
   
156.009   Effective date
City’s Duties
   
156.020   Determining the floodplain designation
   
156.021   Professional engineer review
   
156.022   Dam safety requirements
   
156.023   Other permit requirements
   
156.024   Plan review and permit issuance
   
156.025   Inspection review
   
156.026   Damage determinations
   
156.027   Elevation and floodproofing certificates
   
156.028   Records for public inspection
   
156.029   State permits
   
156.030   Cooperation with other agencies
   
156.031   Promulgation of regulations
Flood Fringe Areas; Occupation and Use
   
156.045   Generally
   
156.046   Development permit
   
156.047   Preventing increased damages
Designated Floodways; Occupation and Use
   
156.060   Generally
   
156.061   Development permit
   
156.062   Preventing increased damages; list of appropriate uses
SFHAs Where Floodways are Not Identified;
Occupation and Use
   
156.075   Generally
   
156.076   Development permit
   
156.077   Preventing increased damages
All Floodplain Areas; Permitting Requirements
   
156.090   Generally
   
156.091   Public health standards
   
156.092   Carrying capacity and notification
   
156.093   Protecting buildings
 
   
156.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.001 PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to the
city by 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 65 ILCS 5/11-12-12, 65 ILCS 5/11-30-2, 65 ILCS 5/11-
30-8 and 65 ILCS 5/11-31-2. The purpose of this chapter is to maintain the
city’s eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program; to minimize
potential losses due to periodic flooding including loss of life, loss of
property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental
services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief,
and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety and general welfare; and to preserve and enhance the quality of
surface waters, conserve economic and natural values and provide for the wise
utilization of water and related land resources.
   (B)   This chapter is adopted in order to accomplish the following specific
purposes:
      (1)   To meet the requirements of 615 ILCS 5/18g, Rivers, Lakes and
Streams Act;
      (2)   To assure that new development does not increase the flood or
drainage hazards to others, or creating unstable conditions susceptible to
erosion;
      (3)   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from
flood damage;
      (4)   To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;
      (5)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects,
repairs to flood-damaged public facilities and utilities and flood rescue and
relief operations;
      (6)   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property
in the city by fulfilling the requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Program;
      (7)   To comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program codified as 44 C.F.R. parts 59 through 79, being 42 U.S.C. §§
4001 through 4138, as amended;
      (8)   To protect, conserve and promote the orderly development of land
and water resources; and
      (9)   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of
watercourses and floodplains in order to moderate flood and storm water
impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and
riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic
benefits and enhance community and economic development.
(Prior Code, § 157.001) (Ord. 08-023, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 156.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A non-habitable structure which is on the same parcel
of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure.
   ACT. An Act in Relation to the Regulation of the Rivers, Lakes and Streams
of the state, 615 ILCS 5/5 et seq.
   APPLICANT. Any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an
application.
   APPROPRIATE USE. Only uses of the designated floodway that are permissible
and will be considered for permit issuance. The only uses that will be allowed
are as specified in §
156.062 of this chapter.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year. The BASE FLOOD is also known as the 100-YEAR FREQUENCY FLOOD EVENT.
Application of the base flood elevation at any location is as defined in §
156.004 of this chapter.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation in relation to mean sea level of
the crest of the base flood.
   BASEMENT. The portion of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
   BUILDING. A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally above ground, including manufactured homes,
prefabricated buildings and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes
recreational vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than 180
days per year.
   CHANNEL. Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully,
ravine, wash or natural or human-made drainageway, which has a definite bed and
banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or ground water flows, either
perennially or intermittently.
   CHANNEL MODIFICATION. Alteration of a channel by changing the physical
dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. CHANNEL MODIFICATION includes
damming, rip-rapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening,
relocating, lining and significant removal of native vegetation from the bottom
or banks. CHANNEL MODIFICATION does not include the clearing of dead or dying
vegetation, debris or trash from the channel. Channelization is a severe form
of CHANNEL MODIFICATION involving a significant change in the channel cross-
section and typically involving relocation of the existing channel (e.g.
straightening).
   CITY. The City of Blue Island, an Illinois municipal corporation, the
corporate authorities of said city, and said city’s authorized designees,
employees or officers.
   COMPENSATORY STORAGE. An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent
volume of storage within the SFHA used to balance the loss of natural flood
storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed within the
floodplain. The uncompensated loss of natural floodplain storage can increase
off-site floodwater elevations and flows.
   CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF A DESIGNATED FLOODWAY MAP CHANGE. Preconstruction
approval by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of a proposed change to the floodway map. This
preconstruction approval, pursuant to this part, gives assurances to the
property owner that once an appropriate use is constructed according to
permitted plans, the floodway map can be changed, as previously agreed, upon
review and acceptance of as-built plans.
   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). A letter which indicates that
FEMA will revise base flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood
boundaries or floodway as shown on an effective Flood Hazard Boundary Map or
Flood Insurance Rate Map, once the as-built plans are submitted and approved.
   CONTROL STRUCTURE. A structure designed to control the rate of flow that
passes through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream water
surface elevation.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare
of the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these CRITICAL FACILITIES can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can
put special populations at risk. Examples of CRITICAL FACILITIES where flood
protection should be required include: emergency services facilities (such as
fire and police stations); schools; hospitals; retirement homes and senior care
facilities; major roads and bridges; critical utility sites (telephone
switching stations or electrical transformers); and hazardous material storage
facilities (chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances). Examples
of CRITICAL FACILITIES where flood protection is recommended include: sewage
treatment plants; water treatment plants; and pumping stations.
   DAM. All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their
abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing
or diverting water or creating a pool. DAMS may also include weirs, restrictive
culverts or impoundment structures. Underground water storage tanks are not
included.
   DESIGNATED FLOODWAY.
      (1)   The channel, including on-stream lakes, and that portion of the
floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse, generally depicted on the FEMA
FIRM map, which is needed to store and convey the existing 100-year frequency
flood discharge with no more than a 0.1 foot increase in stage due to the loss
of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a 10% increase in velocities.
      (2)   The floodways are designated for on the countywide Flood Insurance
Rate Map of Cook County prepared by FEMA and dated 8-19-2008. When two floodway
maps exist for a waterway, the more restrictive floodway limit shall prevail.
For the city, the REGULATORY/DESIGNATED FLOODWAYS are Midlothian Creek, Little
Calumet River and Stony Creek.
      (3)   The floodways for those parts of unincorporated Cook County that
are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city that may be annexed
into the county are designated for any streams flowing through the city’s
boundaries on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by FEMA and
dated 8-19-2008.
      (4)   To locate the designated floodway boundary on any site, the
designated floodway boundary should be scaled off the designated floodway map
and located on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where
interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of the designated
floodway boundary, IDNR/OWR should be contacted for the interpretation.
   DEVELOPMENT.
      (1)   Any human-made change to real estate, including:
         (a)   Construction, reconstruction, repair or placement of a building
or any addition to a building;
         (b)   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a
site for more than 180 days. If the travel trailer or recreational vehicle is
on site for more than 180 days, it must be fully licensed and ready for highway
use;
         (c)   Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads,
bridges or similar projects;
         (d)   Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site;
         (e)   Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction;
         (f)   Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams or
culverts; channel modification; filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving
or other non-agricultural alterations of the ground surface; storage of
materials; deposit of solid or liquid waste;
         (g)   Any other activity of humans that might change the direction,
height or velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive vegetation
removal; and
         (h)   Substantial improvement of an existing building.
      (2)   DEVELOPMENT does not include routine maintenance of existing
buildings and facilities such as re-roofing or re-surfacing of roads when there
is no increase in elevation, or gardening, plowing and similar agricultural
practices that do not involve filling, grading or construction of levees.
   ELEVATION CERTIFICATES. A form published by FEMA that is used to certify the
elevation to which a building has been elevated.
   EROSION. The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water or
wave action.
   EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS. Organizations which are exempt from this chapter per
Illinois Compiled Statutes (ILCS) including state, federal or local units of
government.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed before 4-1-1990.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency and its regulations at 44 C.F.R.
parts 59 through 79, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 4001 through 4138, as amended.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves, or the
unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD FREQUENCY. A period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during
which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or exceeded.
   FLOOD FRINGE. The portion of the floodplain outside of the designated
floodway. See commentary on “designated floodway”.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS (FIRM). A map prepared by FEMA that depicts the
special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a community. This map includes
insurance rate zones and floodplains and may or may not depict floodways.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
   FLOODPLAIN.
      (1)   Land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground surface
elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood
elevation. FLOODPLAINS may also include detached special flood hazard areas,
ponding areas and the like. The FLOODPLAIN is also known as the SPECIAL FLOOD
HAZARD AREA (SFHA).
      (2)   The FLOODPLAINS are those lands within the jurisdiction of the
county that are subject to inundation by the base flood or 100-year frequency
flood. The SFHAs of the city are generally identified as such on panel number
(s) 0637, 0645, 0639, 0643 and 0644 of the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map
of the city prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated 8-19-
2008.
      (3)   The SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or that may be annexed
into the city are generally identified as such on panel numbers(s) 0637, 0645,
0639, 0643 and 0644 of the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared for the
county by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated 8-19-2008.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form published by FEMA that is used to certify
that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry
floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The elevation of the base flood or 100-
year frequency floods, plus one foot of freeboard at any given location in the
SFHA.
   FLOODWAY. See DESIGNATED FLOODWAY.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminary determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminary determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminary
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by
the State Historic Preservation Agency; and
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that
has been certified by the State Historic Preservation Agency.
   HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC CALCULATIONS. Engineering analysis which determine
expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land characteristics and
rainfall events.
   IDNR/OWR. Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water
Resources.
   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). Official determination by FEMA that a
specific structure is not in a 100-year floodplain; amends the FIRM.
   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). Letter that revises base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevations, floodplains or floodways as shown on an effective
FIRM.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area
is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided that, such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-
elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other
similar vehicles placed on site for more than 180 consecutive days. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a “recreational vehicle”.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MITIGATION. Those measures necessary to minimize the negative effects which
floodplain development activities might have on the public health, safety and
welfare. Examples of MITIGATION include: excavation of compensatory storage,
soil erosion and sedimentation control and channel restoration. MITIGATION may
also include those activities taken to reduce a structure’s susceptibility to
flooding.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by
a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. Manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed on or after 4-1-
1990.
   NAVD 88. National American Vertical Datum of 1988. NAVD 88 supersedes the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD).
   NATURAL. When used in reference to channels means those channels formed by
the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by man. A
NATURAL stream tends to follow a meandering path; its floodplain is not
constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not been cleared, mowed or
cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geologic materials typical of the
area with no substantial alteration of the course or cross-section of the
stream caused by filling or excavating. A modified channel may regain some
NATURAL characteristics over time as the channel meanders and vegetation is re-
established. Similarly, a modified channel may be restored to more NATURAL
conditions by humans through regarding and revegetation.
   ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM). The point on the bank or shore up to which
the presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to leave a
distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial
vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized
characteristics.
   PUBLIC BODIES OF WATERS. All open public streams and lakes capable of being
navigated by watercraft, in whole or in part, for commercial uses and purposes,
and all lakes, rivers and streams which, in their natural condition, were
capable of being improved and made navigable, or that are connected with or
discharge their waters into navigable lakes or rivers within, or upon the
borders of the state, together with all bayous, sloughs, backwaters and
submerged lands that are open to the main channel or body of water directly
accessible thereto.
   PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT. A flood control project which will be operated
and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to existing buildings
and structures, including a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing and
proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this definition shall preclude
the design, engineering, construction or financing, in whole or in part, of a
flood control project by persons or parties who are not public agencies.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE or TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REGIONAL PERMITS. Regional permits are offered for pre-approved projects
which are considered minor projects that are permissible per IDNR/OWR part 3708
rules for Northeastern Illinois regulatory floodways. A complete listing of the
terms and conditions for specific project types can be obtained from the IDNR/
OWR website.
   REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR. A land surveyor registered in the state under the
State Land Surveyors Act (225 ILCS 330/1 et seq.).
   REGISTERED OR LICENSED PROFES- SIONAL ENGINEER. An engineer registered in
the state under the State Professional Engineering Practice Act (225 ILCS 325/
1 et seq.).
   REPAIR, REMODELING OR MAINTE- NANCE. Development activities which do not
result in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any changes
to the dimensions of a structure.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the structure before the damaged occurred.
   RETENTION/DETENTION FACILITY. A RETENTION FACILITY stores storm water runoff
without a gravity release. A DETENTION FACILITY provides for storage of storm
water runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a flood or
storm.
   RIVERINE SFHA. Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek,
intermittent stream, ditch, on-stream lake system or any other identified
channel. This term does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes,
ponding areas, areas of sheet flow or other areas not subject to overbank
flooding.
   RUNOFF. The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land
surface, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or
conduits.
   SEDIMENTATION. The processes that deposit soils, debris and other materials
either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or watercourses.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). See FLOODPLAIN.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the building permit was issued; provided, the actual START of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual START means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation.
   STATEWIDE PERMITS. Statewide permits are offered for pre-approved projects
that are considered minor projects which are permissible per the IDNR/OWR part
3700 rules. A complete listing of the STATEWIDE PERMITS and permit requirements
can be obtained from the IDNR/OWR website.
   STRUCTURE. See BUILDING.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cumulative percentage of damage subsequent to the adoption of this chapter
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and
materials must be included in this determination. The term includes repetitive
loss buildings. See REPETITIVE LOSS.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a
structure taking place subsequent to the adoption of this chapter in which the
cumulative percentage of improvements equals or exceeds 50% of the market value
of the structure before the improvement or repair is started.
      (2)   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building. This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss
or substantial damage, regardless of the actual work done.
      (3)   The term does not, however, include either:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local Health, Sanitary or Safety Code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
         (b)   Any alteration of a historic structure listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places;
provided that, the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued
designation as a historic structure.
   TRANSITION SECTION. Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from
a narrow cross-section to a wide cross-section or vice versa.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or
other evidence of compliance is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time as
that documentation is provided.
(Prior Code, § 157.002) (Ord. 08-023, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 156.003 HOW TO USE CHAPTER.
   (A)   The city shall be responsible for fulfilling all of the duties listed
in §§
156.020 through
156.031 of this chapter.
   (B)   To fulfill those duties, the city should first use the criteria listed
in §
156.004 of this chapter to determine whether the development site is located
within a floodplain.
   (C)   Once it has been determined that a site is located within a
floodplain, the city must determine whether the development site is within a
flood fringe, a designated floodway or within a SFHA or floodplain for which no
floodway has been identified.
      (1)   If the site is within a flood fringe, the city shall require that
the minimum requirements of §§
156.045 through
156.047 of this chapter be met.
      (2)   If the site is within a floodway, the city shall require that the
minimum requirements of §§
156.060 through
156.062 of this chapter be met.
      (3)   If the site is located within a SFHA or floodplain for which no
detailed study has been completed and approved, the city shall require that the
minimum requirements of §§
156.075 through
156.077 of this chapter be met.
   (D)   In addition, the general requirements of §§
156.090 through
156.093 of this chapter shall be met for all developments meeting the
requirements of §§
156.045 through
156.047,
156.060 through
156.062 or
156.075 through
156.077 of this chapter.
   (E)   The city shall assure that all subdivision proposals shall meet the
requirements of §§
156.090 through
156.093 of this chapter.
   (F)   If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the city shall review
the requirements of §
156.006 of this chapter to make sure they are met. In addition, the city shall
complete all notification requirements.
   (G)   In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as required in
this chapter, the city may take any and all actions as outlined in §
156.999 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 157.003) (Ord. 08-023, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 156.004 BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.
   (A)   This chapter’s protection standard is based on the Flood Insurance
Study for the city.
      (1)   If a base flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood elevation is
not available for a particular site, then the protection standard shall be
according to the best existing data available from federal, state or other
sources.
      (2)   When a party disagrees with the best available data, they shall
submit a detailed engineering study needed to replace existing data with better
data and submit it to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for review and consideration prior to
any development of the site.
   (B)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of
any streams flowing through the city’s boundaries shall be as delineated on the
100-year flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of Cook County prepared by
FEMA dated 8-19-2008, and such amendments to such study and maps as may be
prepared from time to time.
   (C)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of
those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city or that may be annexed into the city shall be as
delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of Cook
County by FEMA and dated 8-19-2008, and such amendments or revisions to such
study and maps as may be prepared from time to time.
   (D)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each SFHA
delineated as an “AH Zone” or “AO Zone” shall be that elevation (or depth)
delineated on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Cook County.
   (E)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each of the
remaining SFHAs delineated as an “A Zone” on the countywide Flood Insurance
Rate Map of Cook County shall be according to the best existing data available
from federal, state or other sources. Should no other data exist, an
engineering study must be financed by the applicant to determine base flood
elevations.
      (1)   When no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation exists,
the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for a riverine SFHA shall
be determined from a backwater model, such as HEC-H, HEC-RAS or a dynamic model
such as HIP.
      (2)   The flood flows used in the hydraulic models shall be obtained from
a hydrologic model, such as HEC-HMS, HEC-1, TR-20 or HIP, or by techniques
presented in various publications prepared by the United States Geological
Survey for estimating peak flood discharges.
      (3)   For a non-riverine SFHA, the base flood elevation shall be the
historic flood of record, plus three feet, unless calculated by a detailed
engineering study.
      (4)   For an unmapped extended SFHA (with a drainage area less than one
square mile) which has been identified by the city pursuant to §
156.020(C) of this chapter, the base flood elevation shall be determined by the
applicant utilizing a method as approved in division (D) above.
(Prior Code, § 157.004) (Ord. 08-023, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 156.005 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY.
   The City Council shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that
they are known in all official actions related to land management, use and
development.
   (A)   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements and
planned unit developments (PUDs) within the SFHA shall be reviewed to assure
that the proposed developments are consistent with §§
156.045 through
156.047,
156.060 through
156.062,
156.075 through
156.077 and 156.090 through 156.093 of this chapter and the need to minimize
flood damage. Plats or plans for new subdivisions, mobile home parks and
planned unit developments (PUDs) shall include a signed statement by a licensed
professional engineer that the plat or plans account for changes in the
drainage of surface waters in accordance with the Plat Act (765 ILCS 205).
   (B)   (1)   Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, travel
trailer parks, planned unit developments (PUDs) and additions to manufactured
home parks and additions to subdivisions shall include base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation data and floodway delineations.
      (2)   Where this information is not available from an existing adopted
study, the applicant’s engineer shall be responsible for calculating the base
flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation per §
156.004(D) of this chapter and the floodway delineation per the definition in §
156.002 of this chapter.
   (C)   Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located
and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and
channels. Wherever possible, the floodplains shall be included within parks or
other public grounds.
   (D)   The City Council shall not approve any planned unit development (PUD)
or plat of subdivision located outside the corporate limits unless such
agreement or plat is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (E)   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
(Prior Code, § 157.005) (Ord. 08-023, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 156.006 VARIANCES.
   (A)   No variances shall be granted to any development located in a
designated floodway as defined in §
156.002 of this chapter.
   (B)   (1)   Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a
specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the City Board of
Appeals for a variance.
      (2)   The shall review the applicant’s request for a variance and shall
submit its recommendation to the City Board of Appeals. The city may attach
such conditions to granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the
flood protection intent of this chapter.
   (C)   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that
all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA;
      (2)   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted;
      (3)   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
      (4)   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety,
beneficial stream uses and functions, especially aquatic habitat, or creation
of a nuisance;
      (5)   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
lost environmental stream uses and functions, rescue or relief operations,
policing or repairs to streambeds and banks, roads, utilities or other public
facilities; and
      (6)   The provisions of §§
156.047 and
156.077 of this chapter shall still be met;
      (7)   The activity is not in a designated floodway;
      (8)   The applicant’s circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP;
      (9)   The granting of the variance will not alter the essential character
of the area involved including existing stream uses; and
      (10)   All other required state and federal permits or waivers have been
obtained.
   (D)   The city shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from the
requirements of §§
156.090 through
156.093 of this chapter that would lessen the degree of protection to a
building will:
      (1)   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts
as high as $25 per $100 of insurance coverage;
      (2)   Increase the risks to life and property; and
      (3)   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks
and that the applicant will acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk
and liability.
   (E)   Variances requested in connection with restoration of a historic site
or historic structure, as defined in §
156.002 of this chapter, may be granted using criteria more permissive than the
requirements of divisions (B) and (C) above, subject to the conditions that:
      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure; and
      (2)   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being
removed as a certified historic structure.
(Prior Code, § 157.006) (Ord. 08-023, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 156.007 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study.
   (B)   Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by human-
made or natural causes.
   (C)   This chapter does not imply that development, either inside or outside
of the SFHA, will be free from flooding or damage.
   (D)   This chapter does not create liability on the part of city or any
officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.
(Prior Code, § 157.007) (Ord. 08-023, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 156.008 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTION.
   (A)   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions.
   (B)   Where this chapter and other ordinance, easements, covenants or deed
restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
   (C)   This chapter is intended to repeal any original ordinance or
resolution which was adopted to meet the National Flood Insurance Program
regulations, but is not intended to repeal the resolution which the city passed
in order to establish initial eligibility for the program.
(Prior Code, § 157.008) (Ord. 08-023, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 156.009 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage
and approval and publication, as required by law.
(Prior Code, § 157.009) (Ord. 08-023, passed 7-22-2008)
CITY’S DUTIES
§ 156.020 DETERMINING THE FLOODPLAIN DESIGNATION.
   (A)   Check all new development sites to determine whether they are in a
special flood hazard area (SFHA);
   (B)   If they are in a SFHA, determine whether they are in a floodway, flood
fringe or in a floodplain for which a detailed study has not been conducted and
which drains more than one square mile; and
   (C)   Check whether the development is potentially within an extended SFHA
(with a drainage area less than one square mile), indicating that the
development would have adverse impacts regarding storage, conveyance or
inundation which would be the basis for the applicant being required to
delineate the floodplain and floodway and be subject to the remaining sections
of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 157.020) (Ord. 08-023, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 156.021 PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER REVIEW.
   (A)   If the development site is within a floodway or in a floodplain for
which a detailed study has not been conducted and which drains more than one
square mile, the permit shall be referred to a licensed professional engineer
under the employ or contract of the city for review to ensure that the
development meets §§
156.060 through
156.062 or
156.075 through
156.077 of this chapter.
   (B)   In the case of an appropriate use, the P.E. shall state in writing
that the development meets the requirements of §§
156.060 through
156.062 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 157.021) (Ord. 08-023, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 156.022 DAM SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Dams are classified as to their size and their hazard/damage potential
in the event of failure.
   (B)   The construction or major modification of all Class I (high hazard)
and Class II (moderate hazard) dams require an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit.
   (C)   Some Class III (low hazard) dams require an IDNR/OWR dam safety
permit, depending on the drainage area to the dam, the height of the dam and
the impounding capacity behind the dam. Most off-channel detention basins that
have an embankment are non-jurisdictional Class III dam. It is not required
that IDNR/OWR sign off on all non-jurisdictional Class III dams.
   (D)   A consulting engineer with dam safety knowledge can estimate a hazard
classification and determine if an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit is required.
   (E)   A permit application submittal must be made to IDNR/OWR for the
construction or major modification of jurisdictional dams.
   (F)   Regulated dams may include weirs, restrictive culverts or impoundment
structures.
(Prior Code, § 157.022) (Ord. 08-023, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 156.023 OTHER PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   Ensure any and all required federal, state and local permits are received
prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit.
(Prior Code, § 157.023) (Ord. 08-023, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 156.024 PLAN REVIEW AND PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Ensure that all development activities within the SFHAs of the
jurisdiction of the city meet the requirements of this chapter; and
   (B)   Issue a floodplain development permit in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and other regulations of this community when the
development meets the conditions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 157.024) (Ord. 08-023, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 156.025 INSPECTION REVIEW.
   (A)   Inspect all development projects before, during and after construction
to assure proper elevation of the structure and to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this chapter; and
   (B)   Schedule on an annual basis an inspection of the floodplain and
document results of the inspection.
(Prior Code, § 157.025) (Ord. 08-023, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 156.026 DAMAGE DETERMINATIONS.
   Make damage determinations of all damaged buildings in the SFHA after a
flood to determine substantially damaged structures which must comply with §
156.093(C) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 157.026) (Ord. 08-023, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 156.027 ELEVATION AND FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATES.
   Maintain permit files including:
   (A)   An elevation certificate certifying the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) of a residential or non-residential building subject to §§
156.090 through
156.093 of this chapter; and/or
   (B)   The elevation to which a non-residential building has been
floodproofed, using a floodproofing certificate, for all buildings subject to
§§
156.090 through
156.093 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 157.027) (Ord. 08-023, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 156.028 RECORDS FOR PUBLIC INSPECTION.
   Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request base flood data,
SFHA and designated floodway maps, copies of federal or state permit documents,
variance documentation, conditional letter of map revision, letter of map
revision, letter of map amendment and “as-built” elevation and floodproofing
and/or elevation certificates for all buildings constructed subject to this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 157.028) (Ord. 08-023, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 156.029 STATE PERMITS.
   (A)   Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by IDNR/OWR,
for all development projects subject to §§
156.045 through
156.047 and
156.060 through
156.062 of this chapter, unless enforcement responsibility has been delegated
to the city.
   (B)   However, the following review approvals are not delegated to the city
and shall require review or permits from IDNR/OWR:
      (1)   Organizations which are exempt from this chapter, as per the
Illinois Compiled Statutes;
      (2)   IDNR/OWR projects, dams or impoundment structures as defined in §
156.002 of this chapter and all other state, federal or local unit of
government projects, including projects of the city and county, except for
those projects meeting the requirements of §
156.062(A) of this chapter;
      (3)   An engineer’s determination that an existing bridge or culvert
crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the
proposed flood profile, per §
156.062(C)(5) of this chapter;
      (4)   An engineer’s analysis of the flood profile due to §
156.062(C)(4) of this chapter;
      (5)   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent
compensatory storage as indicated in §
156.062(C) of this chapter;
      (6)   Permit issuance of structures within, under or over publicly
navigable rivers, lakes and streams; and
      (7)   Any changes in the mapped floodway or published flood profiles.
(Prior Code, § 157.029) (Ord. 08-023, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 156.030 COOPERATION WITH OTHER AGENCIES.
   (A)   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
improve base flood or 100-year frequency flood and floodway data and to improve
the administration of this chapter;
   (B)   Submit data to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for proposed revisions of a
regulatory map within six months whenever a modification of the floodplain may
change the base flood elevation or result in a change to the floodplain map;
   (C)   Submit reports as required for the National Flood Insurance Program;
and
   (D)   Notify FEMA of any proposed amendments to this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 157.030) (Ord. 08-023, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 156.031 PROMULGATION OF REGULATIONS.
   Promulgate rules and regulations as necessary to administer and enforce the
provisions of this chapter, subject however to the review and approval of IDNR/
OWR and FEMA for any ordinance changes.
(Prior Code, § 157.031) (Ord. 08-023, passed 7-22-2008)
FLOOD FRINGE AREAS; OCCUPATION AND USE
§ 156.045 GENERALLY.
   Development in and/or filling of the flood fringe will be permitted if
protection is provided against the base flood or 100-year frequency flood by
proper elevation, and compensatory storage, and other applicable provisions of
this chapter. No use will be permitted which adversely affects the capacity of
drainage facilities or systems. Developments located within the flood fringe
shall meet the requirements of this subchapter, along with the requirements of
§§
156.090 through
156.093 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 157.045) (Ord. 08-023, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 156.046 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by law
shall commence any development in the SFHA without first obtaining a
development permit from the city.
   (B)   Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided
by the city.
      (1)   The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn
to scale, showing property line dimensions and legal description for the
property and sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or land surveyor;
existing grade elevations, using the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, and
all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling; the location and
dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings.
      (2)   For all proposed buildings, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted
plans and the development will be subject to the requirements of §§
156.090 through
156.093 of this chapter.
   (C)   Upon receipt of a development permit application, the city along with
the City Engineer shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or
100-year frequency flood elevation.
      (1)   Any development located on land that can be shown to be higher than
the base flood elevation of the current Flood Insurance Rate Map and which has
not been filled after the date of the site’s first Flood Insurance Rate Map
without a permit as required by this chapter is not in the SFHA and, therefore,
not subject to the requirements of this chapter. Conversely, any development
located on land shown to be below the base flood elevation and hydraulically
connected, but shown on the current Flood Insurance Rate Map is subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   The city shall maintain documentation of the existing ground
elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation
existed prior to the date of the site’s first Flood Insurance Rate Map
identification.
   (D)   A soil erosion and sediment control plan for disturbed areas shall be
submitted. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading
activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be
implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance.
   (E)   The city shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies
of all other federal, state and local permits, approvals or waivers that may be
required for this type of activity. The city shall not issue a permit unless
all other federal, state and local permits have been obtained.
(Prior Code, § 157.046) (Ord. 08-023, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 156.047 PREVENTING INCREASED DAMAGES.
   No development in the flood fringe shall create a threat to public health
and safety.
   (A)   Submission of data; LOMR. If fill is being used to elevate the site
above the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall
submit sufficient data and obtain a letter of map revision (LOMR) from FEMA for
the purpose of removing the site from the floodplain.
   (B)   Compensatory storage.
      (1)   Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the
volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated
for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
      (2)   The excavation volume shall be at least equal to one times the
volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure.
      (3)   In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be
made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied.
      (4)   All floodplain storage lost below the existing ten-year flood
elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All
floodplain storage lost above the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be
replaced above the proposed ten-year flood elevation.
      (5)   All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and
openly to the watercourse.
   (C)   Construction of the lowest floor below the base flood elevation (BFE).
A person who has obtained a letter of map revision based on fill that removes a
site in the flood fringe from the floodplain due to the use of fill to elevate
the site above the BFE, may apply for a permit from the city to construct the
lowest floor of a residential building below the BFE in the flood fringe. The
city shall not issue such a permit unless the applicant has complied with all
the criteria set forth in the following divisions.
      (1)   Compensatory storage shall be provided per division (B) above.
      (2)   The elevation of the lowest opening in the basement wall (i.e.,
window wells, access ways) shall be at or above the flood protection elevation
(FPE).
      (3)   The lowest adjacent grade to the foundation shall be at or above
the FPE, for a minimum distance of ten feet beyond the outside face of the
structure. However, if site conditions are such that this requirement cannot be
met, the city may waive the ten-foot minimum setback if a state licensed
professional engineer certify that an alternative method to protect the
building from damage due to hydrostatic pressures has been met. The
certifications shall be in the form of a detailed soils and structural design
analysis, which shall be submitted to the city for review. The city may require
such additional documentation as necessary to prove that the proposed shorter
setback distance will keep the structure reasonably safe. In no case shall the
setback distance be less than four feet.
      (4)   The grade around the perimeter of the structure, measured at a
distance of 20 feet from the structure, shall be above the BFE. However, if
site conditions are such that this requirement cannot be obtained, the city may
waive the 20-foot minimum setback distance if a state licensed professional
engineer certifies that an alternative method to protect the building from
damages due to hydrostatic pressures have been met. A detailed soils analysis
and structural design proving that a shorter setback distance will keep the
structure reasonably safe from flooding shall be submitted to the city for
review. In no case shall the setback distance be less than four feet.
      (5)   The ground around the building shall be compacted fill that meets
all requirements of this division (C) and is at least five feet thick under the
basement floor slab. Nothing in this division (C)(5) shall be interpreted to
require the removal or replacement of fill that was placed as part of a LOMR-F,
if such fill consists of material, including soils of similar classification
and degree permeability, such as those classified as CH, CL, SC or ML according
to ASTM standard D-2487, Classification of Soils for Engineering Purposes.
      (6)   The fill material must be homogeneous and isotropic; that is, the
soil must be all of one material, and the engineering priorities must be in the
same direction.
      (7)   All fill material and compaction shall be designed, certified and
inspected by a state licensed professional engineer, as warranted by the site
conditions.
      (8)   The basement floor shall be at an elevation that is no more than
five below the BFE.
      (9)   There shall be a granular drainage layer beneath the floor slab,
and minimum of one-quarter horsepower emergency backup sump pump with a backup
power supply shall be provided to remove seepage flow. The pump shall be rated
at four times the estimated seepage rate and shall discharge above the BFE and
away from the building in order to prevent flooding of the basement or uplift
of the floor under the effect of the seepage pressure.
      (10)   The drainage system shall be equipped with a positive means of
preventing backflow.
      (11)   All foundation elements shall be designed to withstand hydrostatic
pressure in accordance with accepted engineering practices.
      (12)   If the applicant is unable to meet all of the requirements set
forth in divisions (A) and (B) above, the city may allow the construction of a
basement below the BFE only if the applicant demonstrates that the proposed
fill and structure meet the guidelines and requirements set forth in FEMA
Technical Bulletin 10-01 and are reasonably safe from flooding, the order to
demonstrate that the proposed structure is reasonably safe from flooding, the
applicant shall submit a detailed engineering analysis of the proposed fill and
foundation wall. The engineered basement study shall be completed in accordance
with the latest edition of FEMA Technical Bulletin 10-01, with the analysis of
the fill being prepared by a state licensed professional engineer.
      (13)   In order to provide the required compensatory storage on site, in
no case shall the depth of excavation in the front and side yards of the lot
exceed 18 inches, as measured from the previously existing natural grade. The
rear yard shall be permitted to have a greater depth of excavation, if
necessary. All such excavation shall be constructed to drain freely and openly
to the watercourse or storm sewer system. The use of mechanical means to drain
the compensatory storage area will not be permitted.
(Prior Code, § 157.047) (Ord. 08-023, passed 7-22-2008)
DESIGNATED FLOODWAYS; OCCUPATION
AND USE
§ 156.060 GENERALLY.
   This subchapter applies to proposed development, redevelopment, site
modification or building modification within a designated floodway. The
designated floodway for any streams flowing through the city’s boundaries shall
be as delineated on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Cook County and
referenced in §
156.002 of this chapter. Only those uses and structures will be permitted which
meet the criteria in this section. All floodway modifications shall be the
minimum necessary to accomplish the purpose of the project. The development
shall also meet the requirements of §§
156.090 through
156.093 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 157.060) (Ord. 08-023, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 156.061 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by
state law shall commence any development in a floodway without first obtaining
a development permit from the city and IDNR/OWR.
   (B)   Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided
by the city. The application shall include the following information:
      (1)   Name and address of applicant;
      (2)   Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn
to scale, on the designated floodway map, indicating whether it is proposed to
be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
      (3)   Name of stream or body of water affected;
      (4)   Description of proposed activity;
      (5)   Statement of purpose of proposed activity;
      (6)   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
      (7)   Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject property if
different from the applicant;
      (8)   Signature of the applicant or the applicant’s agent;
      (9)   If the applicant is a corporation, the president or other
authorized officer shall sign the application form;
      (10)   If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall sign the
application form;
      (11)   If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer shall sign the
name of the trustee by him or her as trust officer. A disclosure affidavit
shall be filed with the application, identifying each beneficiary of the trust
by name and address and defining the respective interests therein;
      (12)   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as
a minimum:
         (a)   A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the
waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic
or numerical scale, and north arrow;
         (b)   A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing
existing and proposed conditions including the principal dimensions of the
structure or work, elevations using the North American Vertical Datum of 1988,
adjacent property lines and ownership, the drainage and flood control
easements, the location of any channels and any existing or future access
roads, the distance between proposed activity and the navigation channel (when
the proposed construction is near a commercially navigable body of water), the
designated floodway limit, the floodplain limit, the specifications and
dimensions of any proposed channel modifications, the location and orientation
of cross-sections, a north arrow and a graphic or numerical scale;
         (c)   Cross-section views of the project and engineering study reach
showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water
elevation, ten-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood
elevation and graphic or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical);
         (d)   A soil erosion and sediment control plan for disturbed areas.
This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and
the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to
mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final
stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a
responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance; and
         (e)   A copy of the designated floodway map, marked to reflect any
proposed change in the designated floodway location.
      (13)   Any and all other federal, state and local permits or approval
letters that maybe required for this type of development;
      (14)   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted
showing that the proposed work will meet the permit criteria of §
156.062 of this chapter;
      (15)   If the designated floodway delineation, base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation will change due to the proposed project, the
application will not be considered complete until IDNR/OWR has indicated
conditional approval of the designated floodway map change. No structures may
be built until a letter of map revision has been approved by FEMA;
      (16)   The application for a structure shall be accompanied by drawings
of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions and existing
ground elevations and all changes in grade resulting from any proposed
excavation or filling, and floodplain and floodway limits; sealed by a licensed
professional engineer, licensed architect or licensed land surveyor; the
location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and the
elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings
subject to the requirements of §§
156.090 through
156.093 of this chapter; and
      (17)   If the proposed project involves a channel modification, the
applicant shall submit the following information:
         (a)   A discussion of the purpose of and need for the proposed work;
         (b)   A discussion of the feasibility of using alternative locations
or methods (see §
156.062(C)(9) of this chapter) to accomplish the purpose of the proposed work;
         (c)   An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts each
feasible alternative identified in §
156.062(C)(9) of this chapter would have on the physical and biological
conditions of the body of water affected; and
         (d)   An analysis of the impacts of the proposed project, considering
cumulative effects on the physical and biological conditions of the body of
water affected.
   (C)   The city shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies
of all other federal, state and local permits and approvals that may be
required for this type of activity.
      (1)   The city shall not issue the development permit unless all required
federal and state permits have been obtained.
      (2)   A licensed professional engineer, under the employ or contract of
the city shall review and approve applications reviewed under this section.
(Prior Code, § 157.061) (Ord. 08-023, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 156.062 PREVENTING INCREASED DAMAGES; LIST OF APPROPRIATE USES.
   (A)   The only development in a floodway which will be allowed are
appropriate uses, which will not cause a rise in the base flood elevation, and
which will not create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood
heights or velocity or be a threat to public health and safety and welfare or
impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or
channel, or permanently impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat.
Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as
called for in this chapter. Only those appropriate uses listed in 17 Ill. Adm.
Code part 3708 will be allowed. The approved appropriate uses are as follows:
      (1)   Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public works or
private improvements relating to the control of drainage, flooding, erosion or
water quality or habitat for fish and wildlife;
      (2)   Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or requiring
access to, the water or shoreline, such as pumping and treatment facilities,
and facilities and improvements related to recreational boating, commercial
shipping and other functionally water dependent uses;
      (3)   Storm and sanitary sewer relief outfalls;
      (4)   Underground and overhead utilities;
      (5)   Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail systems,
including any related fencing (at least 50% open when viewed from any one
direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows, and including open
air pavilions and toilet facilities (four-stall maximum) that will not block
flood flows nor reduce floodway storage;
      (6)   Detached garages, storage sheds or other non-habitable accessory
structures that will not block flood flows nor reduce floodway storage;
      (7)   Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways, runways and
taxiways and any modification thereto;
      (8)   Parking lots built at or below existing grade where either:
         (a)   The depth of flooding at the 100-year frequency flood event will
not exceed one foot; or
         (b)   The applicant of a short-term recreational use facility parking
lot formally agrees to restrict access during overbank flooding events and
accepts liability for all damage caused by vehicular access during all overbank
flooding events.
      (9)   Designated floodway regarding, without fill, to create a positive
non-erosive slop toward a watercourse;
      (10)   Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful
structures including the construction of water-tight window wells, elevating
structures or construction of floodwalls around residential, commercial or
industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the floodwall shall be
no more than ten feet away from the exterior wall of the existing structure and
which are not considered substantial improvements to the structure;
      (11)   The replacement, reconstruction or repair of a damaged building;
provided that, the outside dimensions are not increased and, if the building
was damaged to 50% or more of the market value before the damage occurred, the
building will be protected from flooding to the flood protection elevation; and
      (12)   Modifications to an existing building that would not increase the
enclosed floor area of the building below the 100-year frequency flood
elevation, and which will not block flood flows including, but not limited to,
fireplaces, bay windows, decks, patios and second story additions. If the
building is improved to 50% or more of the market value before the modification
occurred (i.e., a substantial improvement), the building will be protected from
flooding to the flood protection elevation.
   (B)   Appropriate uses do not include the construction or placement of any
new structures, fill, building additions, buildings on stilts, excavation or
channel modifications done to accommodate otherwise non-appropriate uses in the
floodway, fencing (including landscaping or planting designed to act as a
fence) and storage of materials, except as specifically defined above as an
appropriate use.
   (C)   Within the designated floodway, the construction of an appropriate use
will be considered permissible; provided that, the proposed project meets the
following engineering and mitigation criteria and is so stated in writing with
supporting plans, calculations and data by a licensed professional engineer;
and, provided that, any structure meets the protection requirements of §§
156.090 through
156.093 of this chapter:
      (1)   Preservation of flood conveyance, so as not to increase flood
stages upstream. For appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert crossings,
on-stream structures or dams, all effective designated floodway conveyance lost
due to the project will be replaced for all flood events up to and including
the 100-year frequency flood. In calculating effective designated floodway
conveyance, the following factors shall be taken into consideration:
         (a)   Designated floodway conveyance, “K” = (1.486/n)(ARM), where “n”
is Manning’s roughness factor, “A” is the effective flow area of the cross-
section and “R” is the ratio of the area to the wetted perimeter. (See Ven Te
Chow, Open Channel Hydraulics, (McGraw-Hill, New York 1959))
         (b)   The same Manning’s “n” value shall be used for both existing and
proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement with a federal,
state or local unit of government can assure the proposed conditions will be
maintained or the land cover is changing from a vegetative to a non-vegetative
land cover.
         (c)   Transition sections shall be provided and used in calculations
of effective designated floodway conveyance. The following expansion and
contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant’s engineer can prove to
IDNR/OWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt
transitions may be used with the same efficiency.
            1.   When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider
section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one
foot horizontal for every four feet of the flooded stream’s length.
            2.   When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section,
the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one foot
horizontal for every one foot of the flooded stream’s length.
            3.   When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a
minimum of one foot vertical transition for every ten feet of stream length
shall be used.
            4.   Transition sections shall be provided between cross-sections
with rapid expansions and contractions and when meeting the designated floodway
delineation on adjacent properties.
            5.   All cross-sections used in the calculations shall be located
perpendicular to flood flows.
      (2)   Preservation of floodway storage so as not to increase downstream
flooding.
         (a)   Compensatory storage shall be provided for any designated
floodway storage lost due to the proposed work from the volume of fill or
structures placed and the impact of any related flood control projects.
         (b)   Compensatory storage for fill or structures shall be equal to at
least one times the volume of floodplain storage lost.
         (c)   Artificially created storage lost due to a reduction in head
loss behind a bridge shall not be required to be replaced.
         (d)   The compensatory designated floodway storage shall be placed
between the proposed normal water elevation and the proposed 100-year flood
elevation. All designated floodway storage lost below the existing ten-year
flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten-year flood elevation.
All designated floodway storage lost above the existing ten-year flood
elevation shall be replaced above the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All
such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the
watercourse.
         (e)   If the compensatory storage will not be placed at the location
of the proposed construction, the applicant’s engineer shall demonstrate
through a determination of flood discharges and water surface elevations that
the compensatory storage is hydraulically equivalent.
         (f)   There shall be no reduction in floodway surface area as a result
of a floodway modification, unless such modification is necessary to reduce
flooding at existing structure.
      (3)   Preservation of floodway velocities so as not to increase stream
erosion or flood heights.
         (a)   For all appropriate uses, except bridges or culverts or on-
stream structures, the proposed work will not result in an increase in the
average channel or designated floodway velocities or stage for all flood events
up to and including the 100-year frequency event.
         (b)   In the case of bridges or culverts or on-stream structures built
for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flows,
velocities may be increased at the structure site if scour, erosion and
sedimentation will be avoided by the use of rip-rap or other design measures.
      (4)   Construction of new bridges or culvert crossings and roadway
approaches.
         (a)   The proposed structure shall not result in an increase of
upstream flood stages greater than one-tenths foot when compared to the
existing conditions for all flood events up to and including the 100-year
frequency event; or the upstream flood stage increases will be contained within
the channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks)
such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or flood walls or
within recorded flood easements.
         (b)   If the proposed construction will increase upstream flood stages
greater than one-tenths foot, the developer must contact IDNR/OWR to obtain a
permit for a dam or waiver.
            1.   The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages must be
calculated using the flood study flows, and corresponding flood elevations for
tailwater conditions for the flood study specified in §
156.004 of this chapter. Bridges and culverts must be analyzed using any
commonly accepted FEMA approved hydraulic models.
            2.   Lost floodway storage must be compensated for per division (C)
(2) above.
            3.   Velocity increases must be mitigated per division (C)(3)
above.
            4.   If the crossing is proposed over a public water that is used
for recreational or commercial navigation, an IDNR/OWR permit must be received.
            5.   The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge
showing the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be
submitted to IDNR/OWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required by this
section.
            6.   All excavations for the construction of the crossing shall be
designed per division (C)(8) below.
      (5)   Reconstruction or modification of existing bridges, culverts and
approach roads.
         (a)   The bridge or culvert and roadway approach reconstruction or
modification shall be constructed with no more than one-tenths foot increase in
backwater over the existing flood profile for all flood frequencies up to and
including the 100-year event, if the existing structure is not a source of
flood damage.
         (b)   If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a
source of flood damage to buildings or structures in the upstream floodplain,
the applicant’s engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning the
structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into consideration the
effects on flood stages on upstream and downstream properties.
         (c)   The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing is
a source of flood damage and should be redesigned must be prepared in
accordance with 17 Ill. Adm. Code part 3708 (Floodway Construction in
Northeastern Illinois) and submitted to IDNR/OWR for review and concurrence
before a permit is issued.
      (6)   On-stream structures built for the purpose of backing up water.
         (a)   Any increase in upstream flood stages greater than zero foot
when compared to the existing conditions, for all flood events up to and
including the 100-year frequency event shall be contained within the channel
banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as
within the design protection grade of existing levees or flood walls or within
recorded flood easements.
         (b)   A permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must be
obtained from IDNR/OWR for any structure built for the purpose of backing up
water in the stream during normal or flood flow.
         (c)   All dams and impoundment structures as defined in §
156.002 of this chapter shall meet the permitting requirements of 17 Ill. Adm.
Code part 3702 (Construction and Maintenance of Dams). If the proposed activity
involves a modification of the channel or floodway to accommodate an
impoundment, it shall be demonstrated that:
            1.   The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest by
providing flood control, public recreation or regional storm water detention;
            2.   The impoundment will not prevent the migration of indigenous
fish species, which require access to upstream areas as part of their life
cycle, such as for spawning;
            3.   The impoundment will not cause or contribute to degraded water
quality or habitat conditions, impoundment design should include gradual bank
slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures and a pre-sedimentation basin;
            4.   A non-point source control plan has been implemented in the
upstream watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff as well as
minimize the input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals and other pollutants.
If there is more than one municipality in the upstream watershed, the city in
which the impoundment is constructed should coordinate with upstream
municipalities to ensure comprehensive watershed control; and
            5.   The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this
subchapter.
      (7)   Flood proofing of existing habitable, residential and commercial
structures.
         (a)   If construction is required beyond the outside dimensions of the
existing building, the outside perimeter of the floodproofing construction
shall be placed no further than ten feet from the outside of the building.
         (b)   Compensation of lost storage and conveyance will not be required
for floodproofing activities.
      (8)   Excavation in the floodway.
         (a)   When excavation is proposed in the design of bridges and culvert
openings, including the modifications to and replacement of existing bridge and
culvert structures, or to compensate for lost conveyance or other appropriate
uses, transition sections shall be provided for the excavation.
         (b)   The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used
unless an applicant’s engineer can prove to IDNR/OWR through engineering
calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be used with the
same efficiency:
            1.   When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider
section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one
foot horizontal for every four feet of the flooded stream’s length;
            2.   When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section,
the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one foot
horizontal for every one foot of the flooded stream’s length;
            3.   When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a
minimum of one foot vertical transition for every ten feet of stream length
shall be used; and
            4.   Erosion/scour protection shall be provided inland upstream and
downstream of the transition sections.
      (9)   Channel modification. If the proposed activity involves a channel
modification, it shall be demonstrated that:
         (a)   There are no practicable alternatives to the activity which
would accomplish its purpose with less impact to the natural conditions of the
body of water affected. Possible alternatives include levees, bank
stabilization, floodproofing of existing structures, removal of structures from
the floodplain, clearing the channel, high flow channel or the establishment of
a stream side buffer strip or green belt. Channel modification is acceptable if
the purpose is to restore natural conditions and improve water quality and fish
and wildlife habitat;
         (b)   Water quality, habitat and other natural functions would be
significantly improved by the modification and no significant habitat area may
be destroyed, or the impacts are offset by the replacement of an equivalent
degree of natural resource values;
         (c)   The activity has been planned and designed and will be
constructed in a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the natural
conditions of the body of water affected, consistent with the following
criteria.
            1.   The physical characteristics of the modified channel shall
match as closely as possible those of the existing channel in length, cross-
section, slope and sinuosity. If the existing channel has been previously
modified, restoration of more natural physical conditions should be
incorporated into channel modification design, where practical.
            2.   Hydraulically effective transitions shall be provided at both
the upstream and downstream ends of the project, designed such that they will
prevent erosion.
            3.   One-sided construction of a channel shall be used when
feasible. Removal of streamside (riparian) vegetation should be limited to one
side of the channel, where possible, to preserve the shading and stabilization
effects of the vegetation.
            4.   Clearing of stabilizing vegetation shall be limited to that
which is essential for construction of the channel.
            5.   Channel banks shall be constructed with a side slope no
steeper than three to one (3:1) horizontal to vertical, wherever practicable.
Native vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred methods for bank
stabilization. Where high velocities or sharp bends necessitate the use of
alternative stabilization measures, soil bioengineering techniques, natural
rock or rip-rap are preferred approaches. Artificial materials such as
concrete, gabions or construction rubble should be avoided unless there are no
practicable alternatives.
            6.   All disturbed areas associated with the modification shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon completion of
construction. Erosion blanket or an equivalent material shall be required to
stabilize disturbed channel banks prior to establishment of the vegetative
cover.
            7.   If the existing channel contains considerable bottom diversity
such as deep pools, riffles and other similar features, such features shall be
provided in the new channel. Spawning and nesting areas and flow
characteristics compatible with fish habitat shall also be established, where
appropriate.
            8.   A sediment basin shall be installed at the downstream end of
the modification to reduce sedimentation and degradation of downstream water
quality.
            9.   New or relocated channels should be built in the dry and all
items of construction, including vegetation, should be completed prior to
diversion of water into the new channel.
            10.   There shall be no increases in stage or velocity as the
channel enters or leaves the project site for any frequency flood unless
necessitated by a public flood control project or unless such an increase is
justified as part of a habitat improvement or erosion control project.
            11.   Unless the modification is for a public flood control
project, there shall be no reduction in the volume of floodwater storage
outside the floodway as a result of the modification.
         (d)   The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this
subchapter.
      (10)   Seeding and stabilization plan. For all activities located in a
floodway, a seeding and stabilization plan shall be submitted by the applicant.
      (11)   Soil erosion and sedimentation measures. For all activities in the
floodway, including grading, filling and excavation, in which there is
potential for erosion of exposed soil, soil erosion and sedimentation control
measures shall be employed consistent with the following criteria.
         (a)   The construction area shall be minimized to preserve the maximum
vegetation possible. Construction shall be scheduled to minimize the time soil
is exposed and unprotected. In no case shall the existing natural vegetation be
destroyed, removed or disturbed more than 15 days prior to the initiation of
improvements.
         (b)   Temporary and/or permanent soil stabilization shall be applied
to denuded areas as soon as possible. As a minimum, soil stabilization shall be
provided within 15 days after final grade is reached on any portion of the
site, and within 15 days to denuded areas which may not be at final grade, but
will remain undisturbed for longer than 60 days.
         (c)   Sedimentation control measures shall be installed before any
significant grading or filling is initiated on the site to prevent the movement
of eroded sediments off site or into the channel. Potential sediment control
devices include filter fences, straw bale fences, check dams, diversion ditches
and sediment traps and basins.
         (d)   A vegetated buffer strip of at least 25 feet in width shall be
preserved and/or re-established, where possible, along existing channels. (See
division (C)(16) below.) Construction vehicle use of channels shall be
minimized. Temporary stream crossings shall be constructed, where necessary, to
minimize erosion. Necessary construction in or along channels shall be re-
stabilized immediately.
         (e)   Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be
designed and implemented consistent with Procedures and Standards for Urban
Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois (1988) also known as the
Green Book and The Illinois Urban Manual (NRCS, 1995).
      (12)   Public flood control projects. For public flood control projects,
the permitting requirements of this section will be considered met if the
applicant can demonstrate to IDNR/OWR through hydraulic and hydrologic
calculations that the proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively
result in increased flood heights outside the project right-of-way or easements
for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event.
      (13)   General criteria for analysis of flood elevations.
         (a)   The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the designated
floodway study, referenced in §
156.004 of this chapter, must be used for analysis of the base conditions. If
the study data appears to be in error or conditions have changed, IDNR/OWR
shall be contacted for approval and concurrence on the appropriate base
conditions data to use.
            1.   If the 100-year designated floodway elevation at the site of
the proposed construction is affected by backwater from a downstream receiving
stream with a larger drainage area, the proposed construction shall be shown to
meet:
               a.   The requirements of this section for the 100-year frequency
flood elevations of the designated floodway conditions; and
               b.   Conditions with the receiving stream at normal water
elevations.
            2.   If the applicant learns from IDNR/OWR, local governments or a
private owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled to
be removed, reconstructed, modified or a regional flood control project is
scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the next five
years, the proposed construction shall be analyzed and shown to meet the
requirements of this section for both the existing conditions and the expected
flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control project is
built.
      (14)   Conditional letter of map revision.
         (a)   If the appropriate use would result in a change in the
designated floodway location or the 100-year frequency flood elevation, the
applicant shall submit to IDNR/OWR and FEMA all information, calculations and
documents necessary to be issued a conditional designated floodway map revision
and receive from IDNR/OWR a conditional concurrence of the designated floodway
change before a permit is issued.
         (b)   The final designated floodway map will not be changed by FEMA
until as-built plans or record drawings of initial filling, grading, dredging
or excavating activities are submitted and accepted by FEMA and IDNR/OWR.
         (c)   In the case of non-government projects, the city in incorporated
areas and the county in unincorporated areas shall concur with the proposed
conditional designated floodway map revision before IDNR/OWR approval can be
given.
         (d)   No filling, grading, dredging or excavating shall take place
until a conditional approval is issued.
         (e)   After initial filling, grading, dredging or excavating, no
activities shall take place until a final letter of map revision (LOMR) is
issued by FEMA with concurrence from IDNR/OWR.
      (15)   Professional engineer’s supervision. All engineering analyses
shall be performed by or under the supervision of a licensed professional
engineer.
      (16)   Criteria. For all activities in the floodway involving
construction within 25 feet of the channel, the following criteria shall be
met.
         (a)   A natural vegetation buffer strip shall be preserved within at
least 25 feet of the ordinary high water mark of the channel.
         (b)   Where it is impossible to protect this buffer strip during the
construction of an appropriate use, a vegetated buffer strip shall be
established upon completion of construction.
      (17)   Necessary materials. After receipt of conditional approval of the
designated floodway change and issuance of a permit and a conditional letter of
map revision, construction as necessary to change the floodway designation may
proceed, but no buildings or structures or other construction that is not an
appropriate use may be placed in that area until the designated floodway map is
changed and a final letter of map revision is received. The designated floodway
map will be revised upon acceptance and concurrence by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of the
“as-built” plans.
   (D)   Development activities in delegated communities requiring state
review. For those projects listed below located in a designated floodway, the
following criteria shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR for their review and
concurrence and/or permit prior to the issuance of a permit by a community or
county delegated state permitting authority in the floodway:
      (1)   An engineer’s analysis of the flood profile due to a proposed
bridge pursuant to division (C)(4) above;
      (2)   An engineer’s determination that an existing bridge or culvert
crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the
proposed flood profile, pursuant to division (C)(5) above;
      (3)   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent
storage pursuant to divisions (C)(1), (C)(2) and (C)(8) above;
      (4)   The construction of any IDNR/OWR projects, dams (as defined in §
156.002 of this chapter) and all other federal, state or local units of
government projects, including projects of the municipality or county;
      (5)   An engineer’s determination that a proposed bridge affected by
backwater from a downstream receiving stream may be built with a smaller
opening;
      (6)   Projects which revise or establish the floodway and/or flood
profiles; and
      (7)   Projects in public bodies of water.
   (E)   Other permits.
      (1)   In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, a
development permit for a site located in a floodway shall not be issued unless
the applicant first obtains a permit or written documentation that a permit is
not required from IDNR/OWR, issued pursuant to 615 ILCS 5/5 et seq.
      (2)   No correspondence from IDNR/OWR shall be required if the project
meets the requirements of Regional Permit 3.
      (3)   No permit from IDNR/OWR shall be required if IDNR/OWR has delegated
this responsibility to the city.
   (F)   Permits for dams.
      (1)   Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a
dam, as defined in §
156.002 of this chapter, per 17 Ill. Adm. Code part 3702 (Rules for
Construction of Dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of
construction of a dam.
      (2)   If the city finds a dam that does not have an IDNR/OWR permit, the
city shall immediately notify the IDNR/OWR Bartlett office.
      (3)   If the city then finds a dam which is believed to be in unsafe
condition, the city shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, the IDNR/OWR
Bartlett office, and the Illinois Emergency Management Agency (IEMA).
   (G)   Activities that do not require a licensed professional engineer’s
review. The following activities may be permitted without a licensed
professional engineer’s review. Such activities shall still meet the other
requirements of this chapter, including the mitigation requirements: Regional
Permit 3 which authorizes, for example, underground and overhead utilities,
storm and sanitary sewer outfalls, sidewalks, patios, athletic fields,
playground equipment and streambank protection activities.
(Prior Code, § 157.062) (Ord. 08-023, passed 7-22-2008)
SFHAS WHERE FLOODWAYS ARE NOT
IDENTIFIED; OCCUPATION AND USE
§ 156.075 GENERALLY.
   In SFHA or floodplains, (including AE, AH, AO and unnumbered A Zones) where
no floodways have been identified and no base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevations have been established by FEMA, and draining more than a square mile,
no development shall be permitted unless the cumulative effect of the
proposals, when combined with all other existing and anticipated uses and
structures, shall not significantly impede or increase the flow and passage of
the floodwaters nor significantly increase the base flood or 100-year frequency
flood elevation.
(Prior Code, § 157.075) (Ord. 08-023, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 156.076 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   No person, firm, corporation or governmental body, not exempted by
state law, shall commence any development in a SFHA or floodplain without first
obtaining a development permit from the city.
   (B)   Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided
by the city.
      (1)   The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn
to scale showing property line dimensions; and existing grade elevations and
all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling, sealed by a licensed
engineer, architect or surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings
and additions to buildings; and the elevations of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of §§
156.090 through
156.093 of this chapter.
      (2)   The application for a development permit shall also include the
following information:
         (a)   A detailed description of the proposed activity, its purpose and
intended use;
         (b)   Site location (including legal description) of the property,
drawn to scale, on the designated floodway maps, indicating whether it is
proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
         (c)   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
         (d)   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include
as a minimum:
            1.   A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the
waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic
or numerical scale, and north arrow;
            2.   A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing
existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
structure or work, elevations, using the North American Vertical Datum of 1988,
adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control easements,
distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed
construction is in or near a commercially navigable body of water), floodplain
limit, location and orientation of cross- sections, north arrow and a graphical
or numerical scale;
            3.   Cross-section views of the project perpendicular to the flow
of floodwater and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed
conditions including principal dimensions of the work as shown in plan view,
existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, ten-year frequency
flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood elevation and graphical or numerical
scales (horizontal and vertical); and
            4.   A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed
areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading
activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be
implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance.
      (3)   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted
showing that the proposed work will meet the criteria of §
156.077 of this chapter.
      (4)   Any and all other federal, state and local permits or approvals
that may be required for this type of development.
   (C)   Based on the best available existing data according to federal, state
or other sources, the city shall compare the elevation of the site to the base
flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
      (1)   Should no elevation information exist for the site, the developer’s
engineer shall calculate the elevation according to §
156.004(D) of this chapter.
      (2)   Any development located on land that can be shown to have been
higher than the base flood elevation of the current Flood Insurance Rate Map
identification is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the
requirements of this chapter.
      (3)   The city shall maintain documentation of the existing ground
elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation
existed prior to the date of the site’s first Flood Insurance Rate Map
identification.
      (4)   The city shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant
copies of all other federal, state and local permits, approvals or waivers that
may be required for this type of activity. The city shall not issue the
development permit unless all required federal, state and local permits have
been obtained.
(Prior Code, § 157.076) (Ord. 08-023, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 156.077 PREVENTING INCREASED DAMAGES.
   (A)   No development in the SFHA where a floodway has not been determined
shall create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or
velocity or threat to public health, safety and welfare or impair the natural
hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or impair
existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be
minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this chapter.
   (B)   Within all riverine SFHAs where the floodway has not been determined,
the following standards shall apply.
      (1)   The developer shall have a licensed professional engineer state in
writing and show through supporting plans, calculations and data that the
project meets the engineering requirements of divisions (C)(1) through (C)(9)
below for the entire floodplain as calculated under the provisions of §
156.004(D) of this chapter.
         (a)   As an alternative, the developer should have an engineering
study performed to determine a floodway and submit that engineering study to
IDNR/OWR and FEMA for acceptance as a designated floodway.
         (b)   Upon acceptance of the floodway by IDNR/OWR and FEMA, the
developer shall then demonstrate that the project meets the requirements of
this subchapter for the designated floodway. The floodway shall be defined
according to the definition in §
156.002 of this chapter.
      (2)   A development permit shall not be issued unless the applicant first
obtains a IDNR/OWR permit or a determination has been made that an IDNR/OWR
permit is not required.
      (3)   (a)   Any work involving the construction, modification or removal
of a dam as defined in §
156.002 of this chapter, per 17 Ill. Adm. Code part 3702 (Rules for
Construction of Dams), shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of
construction of a dam.
         (b)   If the city finds a dam that does not have an IDNR/OWR permit,
the city shall immediately notify the IDNR/OWR Bartlett office.
         (c)   If the city finds a dam which is believed to be in unsafe
condition, the city shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, the IDNR/OWR
Bartlett office and the Illinois Emergency Management Agency (IEMA).
   (C)   The following activities may be permitted without a licensed
professional engineer’s review or calculation of base flood elevation and
designated floodway. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements of
this chapter:
      (1)   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit 2;
      (2)   Barge fleeting facilities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide
Permit 3;
      (3)   Aerial utility crossings meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide
Permit 4;
      (4)   Minor boat docks meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit 5;
      (5)   Minor, non-obstructive activities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit 6; activities (not involving fill or positive change in grade)
are covered by this permit;
      (6)   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit 7;
      (7)   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit 8;
      (8)   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit 9;
      (9)   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential
buildings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit 10;
      (10)   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting conditions of DNR/
OWR Statewide Permit 11;
      (11)   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widenings
meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit 12;
      (12)   Temporary construction activities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit 13;
      (13)   Special uses of public waters meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit 14; and
      (14)   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway permit
requirements.
   (D)   The flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse
shall be maintained.
   (E)   (1)   Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the
volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated
for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
      (2)   The excavation volume shall be at least equal to one times the
volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure.
      (3)   In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be
made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied.
      (4)   All floodplain storage lost below the existing ten-year flood
elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All
floodplain storage lost above the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be
replaced above the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All such excavations
shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.
(Prior Code, § 157.077) (Ord. 08-023, passed 7-22-2008)
ALL FLOODPLAIN AREAS; PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS
§ 156.090 GENERALLY.
   In addition to the requirements found in §§
156.045 through
156.047,
156.060 through
156.062 and
156.075 through
156.077 of this chapter for development in flood fringes, designated floodways
and SFHA or floodplains where no floodways have been identified, the following
requirements shall be met.
(Prior Code, § 157.090) (Ord. 08-023, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 156.091 PUBLIC HEALTH STANDARDS.
   (A)   No developments in the SFHA shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable
liquids, pollutants or other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood
protection elevation (FPE) unless such materials are stored in a floodproofed
and anchored storage tank and certified by a professional engineer or
floodproofed building constructed according to the requirements of §
156.093 of this chapter.
   (B)   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric shall
be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
   (C)   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters.
   (D)   New and replacement water supply systems, wells, sanitary sewer lines
and on-site waste disposal systems may be permitted providing all manholes or
other above ground openings located below the FPE are water-tight.
   (E)   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
(Prior Code, § 157.091) (Ord. 08-023, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 156.092 CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   For all projects involving channel modification, fill or stream
maintenance (including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse
shall be maintained.
   (B)   In addition, the city shall notify adjacent communities in writing 30
days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of the
watercourse.
(Prior Code, § 157.092) (Ord. 08-023, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 156.093 PROTECTING BUILDINGS.
   (A)   All buildings located within a 100-year floodplain, also known as a
SFHA, shall be protected from flood damage below the flood protection
elevation. This building protection criteria applies to the following
situations:
      (1)   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than $1,000 or 70 square feet;
      (2)   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than 20% or equal or
exceed the market value by 50%. Alteration shall be figured cumulatively
subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. If substantially improved, the
existing structure and the addition must meet the flood protection standards of
this section;
      (3)   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. If
substantially damaged, the entire structure must meet the flood protection
standards of this section;
      (4)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site (the building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage);
      (5)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than 180 days per year; and
      (6)   Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in §
156.002 of this chapter. This building protection requirement may be met by one
of the following methods set out in this section.
   (B)   A residential or non-residential building, when allowed, may be
constructed on permanent land fill in accordance with the following:
      (1)   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation; and
      (2)   Fill requirements:
         (a)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
deep before compaction and should extend at least ten feet beyond the
foundation of the building before sloping below the flood protection elevation;
         (b)   The top of the fill shall be above the flood protection
elevation. However, the ten-foot minimum may be waived if a structural engineer
certifies an alternative method to protect the building from damages due to
hydrostatic pressures;
         (c)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap or other structural measure;
         (d)   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporate
debris or refuse materials; and
         (e)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow or surface drainage
from or onto neighboring properties, and when necessary, storm water management
techniques such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
   (C)   A residential or non-residential building may be elevated in
accordance with the following.
      (1)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawl space,
stilts, piles, walls or other foundation that is permanently open to flood
waters and not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood or
100-year frequency flood. Designs must either be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or architect or the permanent openings, one on each wall,
shall be no more than one foot above existing grade, and consists of a minimum
of two openings. The openings must have a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
below the base flood elevation.
      (2)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and aligned
in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to minimize exposure
to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice and floating debris.
      (3)   All areas below the flood protection elevation shall be constructed
of materials resistant to flood damage.
         (a)   The lowest floor (including basement) and all electrical,
heating, ventilating, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and utility
meters shall be located at or above the flood protection elevation; and
         (b)   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone fines,
submersible pumps and other water-proofed service facilities may be located
below the flood protection elevation provided they are water-proofed.
      (4)   The areas below the flood protection elevation may only be used for
the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement and not later modified or occupied as habitable space.
      (5)   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply with
these requirements may be certified by licensed professional engineer or
architect.
      (6)   Manufactured homes, and travel trailers to be installed on a site
for more than 180 days, shall be elevated to or above the flood protection
elevation; and, shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement by being tied down in accordance with the Rules and Regulations for
the Illinois Mobile Home Tie-Down Act, 210 ILCS 120, issued pursuant to 77 Ill.
Adm. Code part 870. In addition, all manufactured homes shall meet the
following elevation requirements.
         (a)   In the case of manufactured homes placed or substantially
improved outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; in a new
manufactured home park or subdivision; in an expansion to an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision; or in an existing manufactured home park
or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage
from a flood, the top of the lowest floor shall be elevated to or above the
flood protection elevation.
         (b)   In the case of manufactured homes placed or substantially
improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, the manufactured
home shall be elevated so that either the top of the lowest floor is above the
base flood elevation or the chassis is at least 36 inches in height above grade
and supported by reinforced piers or other foundations of equivalent strength,
whichever is less.
      (7)   Recreational vehicles or travel trailers shall be required to meet
the elevation and anchoring requirements of division (C)(6) above unless:
         (a)   They are on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
         (b)   They are fully licensed, ready for highway use, and used only
for recreation, camping, travel or seasonal use rather than as a permanent
dwelling. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utility and service devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
   (D)   Only a non-residential building may be structurally dry floodproofed
(in lieu of elevation); provided that:
      (1)   A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that
the building has been structurally dry floodproofed below the flood protection
elevation, the structure and attendant utility facilities are water-tight and
capable of resisting the effects of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood;
      (2)   The building design shall take into account flood velocities,
duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of
buoyancy and impacts from debris or ice; and
      (3)   Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention
and without an outside source of electricity (levees, berms, floodwalls and
similar works are not considered floodproofing for the purpose of this division
(D)(3)).
   (E)   A building may be constructed with a crawlspace located below the
flood protection elevation; provided that, the following conditions are met.
      (1)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
      (2)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall have
openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed
area. The openings shall be no more than one foot above grade.
      (3)   The interior grade of the crawlspace below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior
grade.
      (4)   The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the interior
grade of the crawl to the top of the foundation wall must not exceed four feet
at any point.
      (5)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove floodwaters
from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable period of time
after a flood event.
      (6)   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation must
be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage.
      (7)   Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above the
flood protection elevation.
   (F)   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet above the
level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation whichever is greater.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes
elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to
all critical facilities.
   (G)   Tool sheds, detached garages and other minor accessory structures on
an existing single-family platted lot may be constructed with the lowest floor
below the flood protection elevation in accordance with the following:
      (1)   The building is not used for human habitation;
      (2)   All areas below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation shall be constructed with water-proof material. Structures located in
a designated floodway shall be constructed and placed on a building site so as
not to block the flow of flood waters and shall also meet the appropriate use
criteria of §§
156.060 through
156.062 of this chapter. In addition, all other requirements of §§
156.045 through
156.047,
156.060 through
156.062 and
156.075 through
156.077 of this chapter must be met;
      (3)   The structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation;
      (4)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall
be elevated or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation;
      (5)   The building shall be valued at less than $10,000 and be less than
500 square feet in floor size;
      (6)   The building shall be used only for the storage of vehicles or
tools and may not contain other rooms, workshops, greenhouses or similar uses
and cannot be modified later into another use;
      (7)   The building shall meet the permanent opening criteria of division
(C)(1) above;
      (8)   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers and the like) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation;
and
      (9)   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications.
   (H)   Existing buildings located within a designated floodway shall also
meet the more restrictive appropriate use standards included in §§
156.060 through
156.062 of this chapter. Non-conforming structures located in a designated
floodway may remain in use and may only be enlarged, replaced or structurally
altered in accordance with §
156.062 of this chapter. A non-conforming structure damaged by flood, fire,
wind or other natural or human-made disaster may be restored unless the damage
exceeds 50% of its market value before it was damaged, in which case it shall
conform to this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 157.093) (Ord. 08-023, passed 7-22-2008)
§ 156.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   If such owner fails after ten days’ notice to correct the
violation, the city may make application to the Circuit Court for an injunction
requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as the Court.
      (2)   Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined not less than $50 or more than $1,000 for each offense.
      (3)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
      (4)   The city shall record a notice of violation on the title to the
property.
   (B)   The city shall inform the owner that any such violation is considered
a willful act to increase flood damages and, therefore, may cause coverage by a
Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be suspended.
      (1)   The city is authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension
of the subject development. The stop-work order shall be in writing, shall
indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary,
to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop-work order. The stop-work order
constitutes a suspension of the permit.
      (2)   (a)   No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or
revoked until a hearing is held by the City Board of Appeals. Written notice of
such hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall state:
            1.   The grounds for compliant or reasons for suspension or
revocation; and
            2.   The time and place of the hearing.
         (b)   At such hearing, the permittee shall be given an opportunity to
present evidence on his or her behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the
City Board of Appeals shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or
revoked.
   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible.
(Prior Code, § 157.999) (Ord. 08-023, passed 7-22-2008)
CHAPTER 157: HISTORIC PRESERVATION
Section
General Provisions
   
157.01   Statement of purpose
   
157.02   Recognition of existing historic district and landmarks
   
157.03   Definitions
   
157.04   Landmark designations
   
157.05   Historic district designations
   
157.06   Applications for nominations
   
157.07   Certificate of appropriateness
   
157.08   Certificate of economic hardship
   
157.09   Appeals
   
157.10   Natural destruction or demolition
   
157.11   Effective date
Historic Preservation Commission
   
157.25   Composition
   
157.26   Qualifications
   
157.27   Terms
   
157.28   Officers
   
157.29   Meetings
   
157.30   Powers and duties
   
157.31   Surveys and research
 
   
157.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 157.01 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the protection, enhancement,
perpetuation and use of improvements of special character or historical
interest or value in the interest of the health, prosperity, safety and welfare
of the people of the city by:
   (A)   Providing a mechanism to identify and preserve the historic and
architectural characteristics of the city which represents elements of the
city’s cultural, social, economic, political and architectural history;
   (B)   To promote civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the
past as represented in the city’s landmarks and historic districts;
   (C)   Stabilizing and improving the economic vitality and value of the
city’s landmarks and historic areas;
   (D)   Protecting and enhancing the attractiveness of the city to have
buyers, visitors and shoppers and thereby supporting business, commerce,
industry and providing economic benefit to the city; and
   (E)   Fostering and encouraging preservation, restoration of structures,
areas and neighborhoods and thereby preventing future urban blight.
(Prior Code, § 158.01) (Ord. 11-144, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 157.02 RECOGNITION OF EXISTING HISTORIC DISTRICT AND LANDMARKS.
   (A)   The area designated as the Old Western Avenue Historic District by
ordinance of the city adopted 9-8-1981 as Ord. 2563, as amended, and set forth
on the map on file in the office of the City Clerk as Exhibit A (attached to
the ordinance codified herein) and incorporated herein by reference, is hereby
recognized and reaffirmed as a designated historic district within the city.
   (B)   Those landmark properties designated by individual resolution of the
city and set forth on the map on file in the office of the City Clerk as
Exhibit B (attached to the ordinance codified herein) and incorporated herein
by reference, are hereby recognized and reaffirmed as designated landmarks
within the city.
(Prior Code, § 158.02) (Ord. 11-144, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 157.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALTERATION. Any act or process that changes one or more of the exterior
architectural features of a structure, including, but not limited to, the
erection, construction, reconstruction or removal of any structure.
   AREA. A specific geographic division of the city.
   ADDITION. Any act or process which changes one or more of the “exterior
architectural features” of a structure designated for preservation by adding
to, joining with or increasing the size or capacity of the structure.
   BUILDING. Any structure created for the support, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals or property of any kind and which is permanently affixed to
the land.
   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS. A certificate from the Historic Preservation
Commission authorizing plans for alterations, construction, removal or
demolition of a landmark or site within a designated historic district.
   CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP. A certificate issued by the Commission
authorizing an alteration, construction, removal or demolition even though a
certificate of appropriateness has been previously denied.
   COMMISSION. Blue Island Historic Preservation Commission.
   COMMISSIONERS. Voting members of the Blue Island Historic Preservation
Commission.
   CONSERVATION RIGHT. A term that includes easements, covenants, deeds
restrictions or any other type of less than full fee simple interest that might
be used to protect a landmark or historic district.
   CONSTRUCTION. The act of adding an addition to an existing structure or the
erection of a new principal or accessory structure on a lot or property.
   COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Blue Island.
   DEMOLITION. Any act or process that destroys in part or in whole a landmark
or site within a historic district.
   DESIGN GUIDELINE. A standard of appropriated activity that will preserve the
historic and architectural character of a structure or area.
   EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL APPEARANCE. The architectural and general composition
of the exterior of a structure, including, but not limited to the kind, color
and the texture of the building material and the type, design and character of
all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs and appurtenant elements.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT. An area designated as a historic district by ordinance of
the City Council and which may contain within definable geographic boundaries
one or more landmarks and which may have within its boundaries other properties
or structures that, while not of such historic and/or architectural
significance to be designated as landmarks, nevertheless contribute to the
overall visual characteristics of the landmark or landmarks located within the
historic district.
   IMPROVEMENT. Any visible built feature constituting a physical addition or
any part of such addition to a property, including any building, structure,
fixture, bridge, work of art, place, parking facility, fence, gate, wall,
landscaping or paving.
   LANDMARK. Any property, building, structure, site or area which has been so
designated by ordinance of the City Council, pursuant to procedures prescribed
herein, that is worthy of rehabilitation, restoration and preservation because
it its historic and/or architectural significance to the city.
   LANDSCAPE. The area surrounding a landmark or structure within a historic
district. This shall include, but not be limited to, fences, statues, signs,
plantings, paving and outbuildings, as well as landforms.
   OWNER OF RECORD. The person, corporation or other legal entity listed as
owner on the records of the County Recorder of Deeds.
   PROPERTY. Land and improvements identified as a separate lot for the
purposes of the zoning regulations of the city.
   REHABILITATION. The process of returning a property to a state of utility,
through repair or alteration, which makes possible an efficient contemporary
use while preserving those portions and features of the property which are
significant to its historic, architectural and cultural values.
   REMOVAL. Any relocation of an improvement on its site or to another site.
   REPAIR. Any change that does not require a building permit that is not
construction, relocation or alteration.
   SITE. The location of an event, activity, building, structure or
improvement.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
permanent or temporary location on or in the ground, including, but without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, buildings, fences, gazebos,
advertising signs, billboards, backstops for tennis courts, radio and
television antennas, including supporting towers, swimming pools, satellite
dishes, solar panels and wind generation.
   STRUCTURAL CHANGE. Any change or repair in the supporting members of a
building, structure, roof or exterior walls which would expand the building in
the height, width or bulk of the building.
(Prior Code, § 158.03) (Ord. 11-144, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 157.04 LANDMARK DESIGNATIONS.
   (A)   Criteria for landmark designation.
      (1)   Nominations shall be made to the Historic Preservation Commission
on a form provided by the Commission.
      (2)   The Commission shall, upon investigation as it deems necessary,
make a preliminary determination as to whether a property, structure or area
possesses the integrity of design, workmanship, materials, location or setting
and meets one or more of the following criteria:
         (a)   Significant value as part of the historic, heritage or cultural
characteristics of the community, county, state or nation;
         (b)   Its identification with a person or persons who significantly
contributed to the development of the community, county, state or county;
         (c)   Representative of the distinguishing characteristics of
architecture inherently valuable for the study of a period, type, method of
construction or use of indigenous materials;
         (d)   Notable work of a master builder, designer, architect or artist
whose individual work has influenced the development of the community, county,
state or nation;
         (e)   Its unique location or singular physical characteristics that
make it an established or familiar visual feature;
         (f)   Its character as a particularly fine or unique example of a
utilitarian structure, including, but not limited to, farmhouses, gas stations
or other commercial structures, with a high level of integrity or architectural
significance; and
         (g)   Area that has yielded or may be likely to yield, information
important in history or prehistory.
      (3)   A preliminary determination as to whether a property, structure or
area meets one or more of the foregoing criteria shall be made within 30 days
of filing of a nomination with the Commission.
   (B)   Landmark designation procedures. The Building and Zoning Department
shall supply, upon request, the application forms. Completed forms shall be
submitted to the Community Development Department which shall be forwarded to
the Commission for their consideration.
      (1)   Upon receipt of the application, the Secretary of the Commission
shall schedule a public hearing, to be held within 45 days after preliminary
approval of application.
         (a)   During the public hearing, the Commission shall review and
evaluate the application according to the criteria established by this chapter.
         (b)   If the Historic Preservation Commission finds at the time that
the application merits further consideration, then the Commission may table the
request until its next regularly scheduled meeting.
         (c)   A certificate of appropriateness shall be required for
alteration, construction, removal or demolition of a proposed landmark from the
date when the nomination form is presented to the Commission until the final
disposition of the request.
      (2)   Notice of date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing shall
be sent by mail to owner(s) of record and to the nominator(s) as well as to the
adjoining property owners, not less than 15, nor more than 30, days prior to
the date of the hearing. A public hearing notice also shall be published in a
newspaper having general circulation in the city. The notice shall state the
location of the property and a statement summarizing how the proposed landmark
meets the criteria set forth in division (A)(2) above.
      (3)   Upon notification, any owner or owners of a property who wish to
object shall submit to the City Clerk a notarized statement certifying that the
party is the sole or partial owner of the property, as appropriate, and objects
to the listing.
      (4)   A decision shall be made within 30 days following the date of the
closing of the public hearing.
         (a)   Following the public hearing, the Secretary of the Commission
shall prepare the Commission’s evaluation, recommendation and all available
information for submission to the City Council within 30 days.
         (b)   If the Commission determines that the landmark should be
designated, it shall do so by a resolution passed by a majority of the
Commission.
         (c)   The owner(s) of record shall be notified within five days by a
letter containing information of the Commission’s decision.
         (d)   A simple majority vote by the City Council is necessary for
approval of a landmark designation; provided, however, that, if the owner
objects to the landmark designation, then the City Council may not designate
the property, structure or area as a landmark without a two-thirds majority
vote by the City Council. If the City Council approves the application for
designation, a notice will be sent to the property owner, the Community
Development Department, the Building Commissioner, the City Clerk’s office and
recorded with the County Recorder of Deeds that the property has been
designated as such and shall be subject to issuance of certificate of
appropriateness.
         (e)   If the City Council denies the application, no petitioner or
applicant can file for 90 days to the Secretary of the Commission.
(Prior Code, § 158.04) (Ord. 11-144, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 157.05 HISTORIC DISTRICT DESIGNATIONS.
   (A)   Criteria for historic district designation. Nominations shall be made
to the Historic Preservation Commission on a form provided by the Commission.
      (1)   The following criteria shall be utilized by the City Historic
Preservation Commission in determining the designation of historic districts:
         (a)   The historic district contains one or more landmarks along with
such other buildings, places or areas within its definable geographic
boundaries which contribute to the overall visual characteristics of the
landmark or landmarks located in such district;
         (b)   At least 50% of the structures meet the standards of §
157.04(A)(2) of this chapter;
         (c)   Establishes a sense of time and place unique to the city; and
         (d)   Exemplifies or reflects the cultural, social, economic,
political and/or architectural history of the community, county, state or
nation.
      (2)   A preliminary determination as to whether a district or an area
meets one or more of the foregoing criteria shall be made within 60 days of the
filing of a nomination with the Commission.
   (B)   Historic district designation procedure. The Building and Zoning
Department shall supply, upon request, the application forms. Completed forms
shall be submitted to the Community Development Department which shall forward
them to the Commission for its consideration.
      (1)   The application form must be accompanied by a petition signed by no
less than 51% of the property owners.
      (2)   Upon receipt of the application, the Secretary of the Commission
shall schedule a public hearing to be held within 45 days after preliminary
approval of application.
         (a)   During the public hearing, the Commission shall review and
evaluate the application according to the criteria established by this chapter.
         (b)   If the Historic Preservation Commission finds at the time that
the application merits further consideration, then the Commission may table the
request until its next regularly scheduled meeting.
         (c)   A certificate of appropriateness shall be required for
alteration, construction, removal or demolition of a proposed landmark from the
date when the nomination form is presented to the Commission until the final
disposition of the request.
      (3)   Notice of date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing shall
be sent by mail to owner(s) of record and to the nominator(s) as well as to the
adjoining property owners, not less than 15, nor more than 30, days prior to
the date of the hearing. A public hearing notice also shall be published in a
newspaper having general circulation in the city. The notice shall state the
location of the property and a statement summarizing how the proposed historic
district meets the criteria set forth in division (A) above.
      (4)   Upon notification, any owner or owners of a property who wish to
object shall submit to the City Clerk a notarized statement certifying that the
party is the sole or partial owner of the property, as appropriate, and objects
to the listing.
      (5)   A decision shall be made within 30 days following the date of the
closing of the public hearing.
         (a)   Following the public hearing, the Secretary of the Commission
shall prepare the Commission’s evaluation, recommendation and all available
information for submission to the City Council within 30 days.
         (b)   If the Commission determines that the proposed historic district
should be designated, it shall do so by a resolution passed by a majority of
the Commission.
         (c)   The owner(s) of record shall be notified within five days by a
letter containing information of the Commission’s decision.
         (d)   A simple majority vote by the City Council is necessary for
approval of a historic preservation designation. If the City Council approves
the application for a designation, a notice will be sent to the property owner,
the Community Development Department, the Building Commissioner, the City
Clerk’s office and recorded with the County Recorder of Deeds that the area has
been designated as such and that buildings located within the boundaries of the
historic district shall be subject to issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness.
         (e)   If the City Council denies the application, no petitioner can
file for 90 days to the Secretary of the Commission.
(Prior Code, § 158.05) (Ord. 11-144, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 157.06 APPLICATIONS FOR NOMINATIONS.
   (A)   Any person, group of persons or association, may apply to the City
Historic Preservation Commission for the designation of a landmark or historic
district.
   (B)   Applications for a nomination shall be filed at the Building and
Zoning Department. Persons wishing guidance or advice prior to completing an
application may contact the staff of the Historic Preservation Commission. At a
minimum, the application shall include the following:
      (1)   For a landmark:
         (a)   The name and address of the property owner;
         (b)   The legal description and common street address of the property;
         (c)   A written statement describing the property and setting forth
reasons in support of the proposed designation;
         (d)   Documentation that the property owner has been notified or
consents to the application for designation;
         (e)   A list of significant exterior architectural features that
should be protected;
         (f)   An overall site plan and photographs of the landmark. The plan
shall also include a front, side and rear elevation drawing; and
         (g)   Additional documents as requested by the Building Commissioner,
Community Development Director or Historic Preservation Commission.
      (2)   For a historic district:
         (a)   The names and addresses of the property owners;
         (b)   A map delineating the boundaries of the area to be designated;
         (c)   A written statement describing the area and properties within
the historic district and setting form reasons in support of the proposed
designation;
         (d)   A list and photographs of significant exterior architectural
features of all properties in the district that should be protected; and
         (e)   Additional documents as requested by the Building Commissioner,
Community Development Director or Historic Preservation Commission.
(Prior Code, § 158.06) (Ord. 11-144, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 157.07 CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   A certificate of appropriateness issued by the Commission shall be
required before a building permit, moving or building permit or demolition
permit is issued for any designated historic landmark or any building,
structure or site or part thereof in the
historic district. It is required if the building, structure or site will be
altered, extended or repaired in such a manner as to produce a major change in
the exterior appearance of such building or structure. Such major changes
include, but are not limited to:
         (a)   Major changes by addition, alteration, maintenance,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, renovation or repair;
         (b)   Any new construction and demolition in whole or in part
requiring a permit from the city;
         (c)   Moving a building; and
         (d)   Any construction, alteration, demolition or removal affecting a
significant exterior architectural feature as specified in the ordinance
designating the landmark or historic district.
      (2)   An exception to the certificate of appropriateness shall be made if
the applicant shows to the Commission that a failure to grant the certificate
will cause an imminent threat to life, health or property. The Building
Commissioner or Fire Chief shall certify that such conditions exist.
   (B)   Application for certificate of appropriateness.
      (1)   Every application for a building permit or demolition permit,
including plans and specifications, shall be forwarded by the Building and
Zoning Department to the Historic Preservation Commission within 30 days
following receipt of the application by the Department.
      (2)   The application for issuance of a certificate of appropriateness
must include:
         (a)   Street address of the property involved;
         (b)   Legal description of the property involved;
         (c)   Brief description of the present improvements situated on the
property;
         (d)   A detailed description of the construction, alteration,
demolition or use proposed together with any architect drawings or sketches if
those services have been utilized by the applicant and if not, a sufficient
description of the construction, alteration, demolition and use to enable
anyone to determine what final appearance and use of the real estate will be;
         (e)   Owner’s name;
         (f)   Developer’s name, if different than owner;
         (g)   Architect’s name;
         (h)   Owner’s signature;
         (i)   Survey or site plan;
         (j)   Photographs of existing condition; and
         (k)   Additional documents as requested by the Building Commissioner,
Community Development Director or Historic Preservation Commission.
   (C)   Standards for certificate of appropriateness. In making a
determination whether to approve or deny an application for a certificate of
appropriateness, the City Historic Preservation Commission shall be guided by
the Secretary of the Interior’s “Standards for Rehabilitation”, as follows:
      (1)   A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a
new use that requires minimal change to the defining characteristics of the
building and its site environment;
      (2)   The historic character of a property shall be retained and
preserved. The removal of historic materials or alteration of features and
spaces that characterize a property shall be avoided;
      (3)   Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time,
place and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical development,
such as adding conjectural features or architectural elements from other
buildings, shall not be undertaken;
      (4)   Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired
historic significance in their own right shall be retained and preserved;
      (5)   Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship
that characterize a building, structure, or site shall be treated with
sensitivity;
      (6)   Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than
replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a
distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old in design, color,
texture and other visual qualities and, where possible, materials. Replacement
of missing features shall be substantiated by documentary, physical or
pictorial evidence;
      (7)   Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause
damage to historic materials shall not be used. The surface cleaning of the
structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the gentlest means
possible;
      (8)   Significant archaeological resources affected by a project shall be
protected and preserved. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation
measures shall be undertaken;
      (9)   New additions, exterior alterations or related new construction
shall not destroy historic materials mat characterize the property. The new
work shall be differentiated from the old and shall be compatible with the
massing, size, scale and architectural features to protect the historic
integrity of the property and its environment; and
      (10)   New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be
undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the future, the essential form
and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired.
   (D)   Design guidelines. Design guidelines for applying the criteria for
review of certificates of appropriateness shall at a minimum, consider the
following architectural criteria.
      (1)   Height. The height of any proposed alteration or construction
should be compatible with the style and character of the landmark and with
surrounding structures in a historic district.
      (2)   Proportions of windows and doors. The proportions and relationships
between doors and windows should be compatible with the architectural style and
character of the landmark.
      (3)   Relationship of building masses and spaces. The relationship of a
structure within a historic district to the open space between it and adjoining
structures should be compatible.
      (4)   Roof shape. The design of the roof, fascia and cornice should be
compatible with the architectural style and character of the landmark.
      (5)   Landscaping. Landscaping should be compatible with the
architectural character and appearance of the landmark.
      (6)   Scale. The scale of the structure after alteration, construction or
partial demolition should be compatible with its architectural style and
character and with surrounding structures in a historic district.
      (7)   Directional expression. Facades in historic districts should blend
with other structures with regard to directional expression. Structures in a
historic district should be compatible with the dominant horizontal or vertical
expression of surrounding structures. The direction expression of a landmark
after alteration, construction, or partial demolition should be compatible with
its original architectural style and character.
      (8)   Architectural details. Architectural details including types of
materials, colors and textures should be treated so as to make landmark
compatible with its original architectural style and character of a landmark or
historic district.
      (9)   New structures. New structures in a historic district shall be
compatible with the architectural styles and design in said districts.
   (E)   Hearing on application.
      (1)   Applications for a certificate of appropriateness are available
from the Building and Zoning Department. Such applications shall be completed
and submitted to the Department, which applications shall be forwarded to the
City Historic Preservation Commission. The Commission shall schedule a public
meeting for consideration of the application within 30 days of receipt of
application. A public notice for consideration of the application shall be made
not less than 15 days, nor more than 30 days, before the hearing in a newspaper
of general circulation published in the city.
      (2)   If the Historic Preservation Commission finds at the time that the
application merits further consideration, then the Commission may table the
request until its next regularly scheduled meeting.
   (F)   Issuance of a certificate of appropriateness.
      (1)   The City Historic Preservation Commission shall notify the
applicants of its decision within five days after the public meeting. Upon
approval of the application, the Commission shall direct the Building and
Zoning Department to issue signed certificate of appropriateness to the
applicant with copies forwarded to the Building Commissioner.
      (2)   A certificate of appropriateness shall be invalid if changes in the
plans reviewed by the Commission are necessary in obtaining a building permit
or if the building permit issued for the same work becomes invalid. The
certificate of appropriateness remains valid for the same period of validity as
the building permit (one year).
   (G)   Appeals for denial of a certificate of appropriateness.
      (1)   In the event of denial of an application for a certificate of
appropriateness, the Commission shall notify the applicant in writing within
five days of the disapproval and the reasons therefore and shall recommend
changes, if any, in proposed actions that would cause the Commission to
reconsider its denial.
      (2)   Within 15 days of receipt of the notification of disapproval, the
applicant may resubmit an amended application that takes into consideration the
recommendations of the Historic Preservation Commission. The application shall
be considered to be withdrawn if no written modification on request for public
hearing is received. Within 30 days of receipt of a written modification, the
Commission must either issue the certificate of appropriateness or hold a
hearing.
   (H)   Findings on appeal.
      (1)   The City Historic Preservation Commission shall select a reasonable
time and place for the hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof to the
applicant by mailing notice of the hearing, said mailing to be made at least
ten days prior to the date of the hearing.
      (2)   Notice of the time and place of such public hearing shall be
published not less than 15 days, nor more than 30 days, before the hearing in a
newspaper of general circulation published in the city.
      (3)   The Chairperson shall conduct the hearing and the City Historic
Preservation Commission and the applicant shall have the right to introduce
evidence and cross examine witnesses. A recorded or written transcript of the
hearing shall be made and kept.
      (4)   The Commission shall vote, announce its decision, make its
recommendation and notify the Building and Zoning Department and the applicant
within five days after the conclusion of the public hearing, unless the time is
extended by mutual agreement between the Commission and the applicant.
      (5)   In the event of a denial of appeal by the City Historic
Preservation Commission, the applicant may appeal the decision to the City
Council, whose decision in this matter shall be final subject only to judicial
review as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 158.07) (Ord. 11-144, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 157.08 CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any of the provisions of the ordinance to the
contrary, the Commission may issue a certificate of economic hardship to allow
the performance of work for which a certificate of appropriateness has been
denied.
   (B)   Applicants claiming economic hardship shall be required to apply to
the Community Development Department to determine eligibility for
rehabilitation assistance. The eligibility for and availability of financial
aid shall be considered by the Commission in making its decision.
   (C)   An applicant for a certificate of economic hardship may submit any or
all of the following information in order to assist the Commission in making
its determination on the application:
      (1)   The amount paid for the property, the date of purchase and the
party from whom purchased (including a description of the relationship, if any,
between the owner and the person from whom the property was purchased);
      (2)   The assessed value of the land and improvements thereon according
to the two most recent assessments;
      (3)   Real estate taxes for the previous two years;
      (4)   Remaining balance on mortgage, if any, and annual debt service, if
any, for the previous two years;
      (5)   All appraisals obtained within the previous two years by the owner
or applicant in connection with this purchase, financing or ownership of the
property;
      (6)   Any listing of the property for sale or rent, price asked and
offers received, if any;
      (7)   Any consideration by the owner as to profitable adaptive uses for
the property;
      (8)   If the property is income-producing, the annual gross income from
the property for the previous two years, itemized operating and maintenance
expenses for the previous two years, and annual cash flow before and after debt
service, if any during the same period;
      (9)   Form of ownership or operation of the property, whether sole
proprietorship, for-profit or not-for-profit corporation, limited partnership,
joint venture or other; and
      (10)   Any other information including the income tax bracket of the
owner, applicant or principal investors in the property, reasonably necessary
for a determination as to whether the property can be reasonably used or yield
a reasonable return to present or future owners.
   (C)   If the Commission finds that without approval of the proposed work,
the property cannot obtain a reasonable economic return therefrom, then the
application shall be delayed for a period not to exceed three months. During
this period of delay, the Commission shall investigate plans and make
recommendations to the City Council to allow for a reasonably beneficial use or
a reasonable economic return, or to otherwise preserve the subject property.
Such plans and recommendations may include, but not be limited to: a relaxation
of the provisions of the ordinance; a reduction in real property taxes;
financial assistance; Building Code modifications; and/or changes in zoning
regulations.
   (D)   If, by the end of this three-month period, the Commission has found
that without approval of the proposed work, the property cannot be put to a
reasonable beneficial use or the owner cannot obtain a reasonable economic
return therefrom, then the Commission shall issue a certificate of economic
hardship approving the proposed work. If the Commission finds otherwise, it
shall deny the application for a certificate of economic hardship.
(Prior Code, § 158.08) (Ord. 11-144, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 157.09 APPEALS.
   (A)   When a certificate of appropriateness or a certificate of economic
hardship is approved or denied for either a landmark or a structure within a
historic district, the applicant or any interested party may, within 30 days,
appeal the Commission’s decision to the City Council. The Council may receive
comments on the contents of the record, but no new matter may be considered by
the Council. The City Council may affirm the decision or recommend changes by a
majority vote of the Council after due consideration of the facts contained in
the record submitted to the Council by the Commission. The Council may overturn
the Commission’s decision by a majority vote of a quorum of the Council. If the
Council decides that a certificate of economic hardship should be issued, the
Secretary shall notify the applicant and the Building and Zoning Department
within seven days of the Council’s decision and the Building and Zoning
Department then shall issue the permit within 15 days.
   (B)   If the Council concurs with the Commission’s decision not to issue a
certificate of economic hardship, the Secretary shall notify the applicant and
the Building and Zoning Department within seven days.
(Prior Code, § 158.09) (Ord. 11-144, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 157.10 NATURAL DESTRUCTION OR DEMOLITION.
   (A)   In the case of partial or complete natural destruction or demolition
of a landmark or a property within a historic district, the owner will be
required to obtain a certificate of appropriateness from the Commission prior
to reconstruction.
   (B)   Although exact duplication of the previous structure may not be
required, the exterior design of the property shall be in harmony with:
      (1)   The exterior design of the structure prior to damage; and
      (2)   The character of the historic preservation district.
(Prior Code, § 158.10) (Ord. 11-144, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 157.11 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   (A)   This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage, approval and publication as provided by law.
   (B)   A full, true and complete copy of this chapter shall be published in
pamphlet form, by authority of the City Council, as corporate authorities.
(Prior Code, § 158.11) (Ord. 11-144, passed 10-11-2011)
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
§ 157.25 COMPOSITION.
   The City Historic Preservation Commission shall consist of seven voting
members, residents of the city, appointed by the Mayor and approved by the City
Council, and one ex officio non-voting member, a representative of the
Community Development Department.
(Prior Code, § 158.25) (Ord. 11-144, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 157.26 QUALIFICATIONS.
   The members shall be appointed on the basis of expertise, experience or
interest in the areas of local history, urban planning and design, architecture
and architectural history, landscape architecture, building construction or
engineering, finance, historical and architectural preservation, neighborhood
organizing or real estate.
(Prior Code, § 158.26) (Ord. 11-144, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 157.27 TERMS.
   (A)   Members of the Commission shall be appointed for terms of three years.
No members shall serve more than two successive three-year terms, but may be
reappointed after a one-year waiting period. Alternate members shall be
appointed to serve in the absence of or disqualification of the regular
members. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only. Members shall
serve without compensation.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, all members shall hold office until
their successors have been duly appointed, confirmed and qualified.
(Prior Code, § 158.27) (Ord. 11-144, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 157.28 OFFICERS.
   (A)   Officers shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and a
Secretary elected by the Preservation Commission who shall be serve a term of
one year and shall be eligible for re-election, but no members shall serve as
an officer for more than two consecutive years. The Chairperson shall preside
over meetings. In the absence of the Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson shall
perform the duties of the Chairperson. If both are absent, a temporary
Chairperson shall be elected by those present.
   (B)   The Secretary to the Preservation Commission shall have the following
duties:
      (1)   Take minutes of each Preservation Commission meeting;
      (2)   Be responsible for publication and distribution of copies of the
minutes, reports and decisions of the Preservation Commission to the members of
the Preservation Commission;
      (3)   Give notice as provided herein or by law for all public hearings
conducted by the Preservation Commission;
      (4)   Advise the Mayor of vacancies on the Preservation Commission and
expiring terms of members; and
      (5)   Prepare and submit to the City Council a complete record of the
proceedings before the Preservation Commission on any matter requiring Council
consideration.
(Prior Code, § 158.28) (Ord. 11-144, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 157.29 MEETINGS.
   (A)   A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. All decisions or
actions of the Historic Preservation Commission shall be made by a majority
vote of those members present and voting at any meeting where a quorum exists.
Meetings shall be held at regularly scheduled times to be established by
resolution of the Commission at the beginning of each calendar year or at any
time upon the call of the Chairperson. There shall be a minimum of four
meetings per year.
   (B)   No member of the Historic Preservation Commission shall vote on any
matter that may materially or apparently affect the property, income or
business interest of that member. No action shall be taken by the Commission
that could in any manner deprive or restrict the owner of property in its use,
modification, maintenance, disposition or demolition until such owner shall
first have had the opportunity to be heard at public meeting of the
Preservation Commission, as provided herein. The Chairperson and, in his or her
absence, the acting Chairperson may administer oaths and compel the attendance
of witnesses. All meetings of the Preservation Commission shall be open to the
public. The Preservation Commission keep minutes of its proceedings, showing
the vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records if its examinations and
other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office
of the Preservation Commission and shall be a public record.
(Prior Code, § 158.29) (Ord. 11-144, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 157.30 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   To adopt its own procedural regulations;
   (B)   To conduct an ongoing survey to identify historically and
architecturally significant properties, structures and areas;
   (C)   To investigate and recommend to the City Council the adoption of
ordinances designating properties having special historic, community or
architectural value as landmarks;
   (D)   To investigate and recommend to the City Council the adoption of
ordinances designating properties and structures having special historic,
community or architectural value as historic districts;
   (E)   To keep a register of all properties and structures that have been
designated as landmarks or historic districts, including all information
required for each designation;
   (F)   To determine an appropriate system of markers and make recommendations
for the design and implementation of specific markings of the streets and
routes leading from one landmark or historic district to another;
   (G)   To advise owners of landmarks and property or structures within
historic districts on physical and financial aspects of preservation,
renovation, rehabilitation and reuse, and on procedures for inclusion on the
State or National Register of Historic Places;
   (H)   To inform and educate the citizens of the city concerning the historic
and architectural heritage of the city by publishing appropriate maps,
newsletters, brochures and pamphlets, and by holding programs and seminars;
   (I)   To hold public hearings and to review applications for construction,
alteration, removal or demolition affecting proposed or designated landmarks or
structures or historic districts and issue or deny certificates of
appropriateness for such actions. Applicants shall be required to submit plans,
drawings, elevations, specifications and other information as may be necessary
to make decisions;
   (J)   To develop specific guidelines for the alteration, demolition,
construction or removal of landmarks or property and structures within historic
districts;
   (K)   To review proposed zoning amendments, applications for special use
permits or variances that affect proposed or designated landmarks and historic
districts. Such review shall be made prior to the date of the hearing by the
Plan Commission or the Zoning Board of Appeals;
   (L)   To administer on the behalf of the city any property or full or
partial interest in real property, including a conservation right as that term
is used in 765 ILCS 120, which the city may have or accept as a gift or
otherwise, upon designation by the City Council;
   (M)   To accept and administer on behalf of the city, upon designation by
the City Council, such gifts, grants and money as may be appropriate for the
purpose of this chapter;
   (N)   To call upon available city staff members as well as other experts for
technical advice;
   (O)   To testify before all boards and commissions, including the Planning
and Zoning Board of Appeals, on any matter affecting historically and
architecturally significant property and landmarks; and
   (P)   To periodically review the city’s zoning ordinance and to recommend to
the Plan Commission and the City Council any amendments appropriate for the
protection and continued use of landmarks or property and structures within
historic districts.
(Prior Code, § 158.30) (Ord. 11-144, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 157.31 SURVEYS AND RESEARCH.
   (A)   The Historic Preservation Commission shall undertake an ongoing survey
and research effort in the city to identify neighborhoods, areas, sites,
structures and objects that have historic, community, architectural or
aesthetic importance, interest or value. As part of the survey, the Historic
Preservation Commission shall review and evaluate any prior surveys and studies
by any unit of government or private organization and compile appropriate
descriptions, facts and photographs.
   (B)   The Historic Preservation Commission shall identify potential
landmarks and adopt procedures to nominate them in groups based upon the
following criteria:
      (1)   The potential landmarks in one identifiable neighborhood or
district geographical area of the city;
      (2)   The potential landmarks associated with a particular person, event
or historical period;
      (3)   The potential landmarks of a particular architectural style or
school, or of a particular architect, engineer, builder, designer or craftsman;
and
      (4)   Such other criteria as may be adopted by the Preservation
Commission to assure systematic survey and nomination of all potential
landmarks within the city.
(Prior Code, § 158.31) (Ord. 11-144, passed 10-11-2011)
§ 157.99 PENALTY.
   The Preservation Commission may establish an appropriate system of
processing fees for the review of nominations and certificates of
appropriateness. Any person who undertakes or causes an alteration,
construction, demolition or removal of any nominated or designated landmark or
property within a nominated or designated landmark or designated historic
district without a certificate of appropriateness shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not
less than $50, nor more than $750. Every day such violation shall continue to
exist shall constitute a separate violation. The Preservation Commission may
institute any appropriate action or proceeding in the name of the city to
enjoin, correct or abate any violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 158.99) (Ord. 11-144, passed 10-11-2011)
CHAPTER 158: NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION
Section
   
158.01   Purpose
   
158.02   Designated neighborhood preservation areas
§ 158.01 PURPOSE.
   The neighborhood preservation program is designed to secure the following
goals:
   (A)   To prevent the deterioration of housing and commercial and industrial
establishments in the hereinafter designated neighborhoods;
   (B)   To preserve, coordinate and concentrate maintenance efforts by the
city in the hereinafter designated neighborhoods;
   (C)   To promote private investment in housing and in the commercial and
industrial establishments located in the hereinafter designated neighborhoods;
and
   (D)   To promote community involvement in all such activities.
(Prior Code, § 159.01) (Ord. 2455, passed 1-23-1979)
§ 158.02 DESIGNATED NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION AREAS.
   The following neighborhoods are hereby designated as neighborhood
preservation areas:
   (A)   Northwest Neighborhood: includes the area north of Burr Oak and west
of Western Avenue;
   (B)   Northeast Neighborhood: includes the area north of Burr Oak and each
of Western Avenue;
   (C)   Central Neighborhood: includes the area bounded on the north by Burr
Oak, on the east by the Rock Island Railroad, on the south by the Calumet Sag
Channel and on the west by the city limits;
   (D)   East Neighborhood: includes the area bounded on the north by Burr Oak,
on the east by the city limits, on the south by the Calumet Sag Channel and on
the west by the Rock Island Railroad property;
   (E)   Southwest Neighborhood: includes the area abounded by the Calumet Sag
Channel on the north, Western Avenue on the east, 139th Street on the south and
the city limits on the west;
   (F)   Southeast Neighborhood: includes the area bounded on the north by the
Calumet Sag Channel, on the east by the city limits, on the south by 139th
Street and on the west by Western Avenue; and
   (G)   California Gardens Neighborhood: includes the area bounded by 139th
Street on the north, California Avenue on the east, the alley south of 142nd
Place on the south and Coopers Road and Kedzie Avenue on the west.
(Prior Code, § 159.02) (Ord. 2455, passed 1-23-1979)
CHAPTER 159: MOBILE HOME PARKS
Section
General Provisions
   
159.01   Definitions
   
159.02   Permissible number of parks in city
Licenses
   
159.15   Required; application procedure
   
159.16   Fee
   
159.17   Term
   
159.18   Ineligibility of certain persons
Operation Standards
   
159.30   Responsibility of management
   
159.31   Supervision
   
159.32   Compliance with other applicable regulations; underground wiring
required
   
159.33   Water and sewer regulations
   
159.34   Spacing
   
159.35   Garbage collection; pest control
   
159.36   Fire extinguishers for each mobile home
   
159.37   Attachment of porches or the like to mobile home
   
159.38   Streets and driveways
   
159.39   Electrical outlets for each site
   
159.40   Occupancy standards for mobile home
   
159.41   Community facilities
   
159.42   Lighting of park
 
   
159.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 159.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEPENDENT MOBILE HOME. A mobile home which does not have toilet and bath or
shower facilities.
   INDEPENDENT MOBILE HOME. A mobile home which has self-contained toilet and
bath or shower facilities.
   MOBILE HOME. A structure designed for permanent habitation and so
constructed as to permit its transport on wheels, temporarily or permanently
attached to its frame, from the place of its construction to the location or
subsequent locations, at which it is intended to be a permanent habitation and
designed to permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling place for one or more
persons; provided that, any such structure resting on a permanent foundation,
with wheels, tongue and hitch permanently removed shall not be considered to be
a MOBILE HOME.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. An area of land or lands upon which five or more
independent mobile homes are harbored either free of charge or for revenue
purposes, and shall include any building, structure, tent, vehicle or enclosure
used or intended for use as a part of the equipment of such MOBILE HOME PARK.
   PERMANENT HABITATION. A period of two or more months.
   SITE. The lot on which the mobile home is harbored.
(Prior Code, § 160.01) (Ord. 2169, passed 12-20-1971; Ord. 2479, passed 10-9-
1979; Ord. 2522, passed 9-9-1980)
§ 159.02 PERMISSIBLE NUMBER OF PARKS IN CITY.
   There shall be a limit of six mobile home parks within the city limits.
(Prior Code, § 160.02) (Ord. 2169, passed 12-20-1971; Ord. 2479, passed 10-9-
1979; Ord. 2522, passed 9-9-1980)
LICENSES
§ 159.15 REQUIRED; APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation
to establish, maintain or operate any mobile home park in the city without
first having obtained a license therefor. Application for such licenses shall
be made in writing to the Clerk in compliance with the ordinances relating to
license applications, and shall contain the name of the applicant, the location
of the proposed park, and the number of mobile homes to be accommodated.
   (B)   Each application shall be accompanied by a plat showing the size and
location of all buildings and structures.
(Prior Code, § 160.15) (Ord. 2169, passed 12-20-1971; Ord. 2479, passed 10-9-
1979; Ord. 2522, passed 9-9-1980) Penalty, see §
159.99
§ 159.16 FEE.
   (A)   The annual fee for such license shall be due and payable on May 1 of
each year and shall be determined on the basis of the maximum number of mobile
home sites in the mobile home park at any one time during the license year, in
accordance with the following schedule: $5 per mobile home site, but in no
event less than $100 per license.
   (B)   The applicant for a license shall, at the time of making application,
make a sworn statement as to the maximum number of mobile homes which he or she
expects to accommodate in such mobile home park during the license year for
which application is being made, and shall pay the fees therefor based upon the
schedule above set forth. In the event such maximum number is exceeded at any
time during such license year, the applicant shall, within three days, report
such increase and pay the additional license fee based upon the above schedule.
(Prior Code, § 160.16) (Ord. 2169, passed 12-20-1971; Ord. 2479, passed 10-9-
1979; Ord. 2522, passed 9-9-1980)
§ 159.17 TERM.
   Every license issued hereunder shall expire on April 30 next after its
issuance. Application for renewal of such license may be made at any time
within 60 days prior to such expiration date in the form of a written statement
signed by the applicant re-affirming the statements made in such applicant’s
original application for the license together with appropriate reference to any
change in circumstance which may have been made since the date of the original
application.
(Prior Code, § 160.17) (Ord. 2169, passed 12-20-1971; Ord. 2479, passed 10-9-
1979; Ord. 2522, passed 9-9-1980)
§ 159.18 INELIGIBILITY OF CERTAIN PERSONS.
   (A)   No such license shall be issued to any but a person of good character,
nor to any corporation if any officer or director thereof is not a person of
good character.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to hire or keep as manager, superintendent or
person in charge of a mobile home park as required under §
159.31 of this chapter, any person who is not a person of good character or who
has been convicted of a felony.
(Prior Code, § 160.18) (Ord. 2169, passed 12-20-1971; Ord. 2479, passed 10-9-
1979; Ord. 2522, passed 9-9-1980) Penalty, see §
159.99
OPERATION STANDARDS
§ 159.30 RESPONSIBILITY OF MANAGEMENT.
   The management of every park shall assume full responsibility for
maintaining in good repair and condition all sanitary, electrical and safety
appliances in the park, and shall promptly bring such action as is necessary to
prosecute or eject from the park any person or persons who willfully or
maliciously damage such appliances, or any person or persons who fail to comply
with the regulations of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 160.30) (Ord. 2169, passed 12-20-1971; Ord. 2479, passed 10-9-
1979; Ord. 2522, passed 9-9-1980)
§ 159.31 SUPERVISION.
   (A)   Each mobile home park, at all times while operated, shall be in the
charge of a responsible attendant or caretaker who shall be responsible, with
the licensee, for compliance with the provisions of this chapter relating to
the conduct of such parks.
   (B)   Every such park shall be in charge of a responsible attendant or
caretaker whose name shall be on file at all times with the city and whose duty
it shall be to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in a clean,
orderly and sanitary condition, and shall be responsible, with the licensee,
for any violation of the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 160.31) (Ord. 2169, passed 12-20-1971; Ord. 2479, passed 10-9-
1979; Ord. 2522, passed 9-9-1980) Penalty, see §
159.99
§ 159.32 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS; UNDERGROUND WIRING
REQUIRED.
   All buildings constructed or altered, all plumbing and all electrical and
heating installations shall be in accordance with all applicable ordinances of
the city. However, the construction of or addition to any new or existing
mobile home park shall provide for underground electrical wiring.
(Prior Code, § 160.32) (Ord. 2169, passed 12-20-1971; Ord. 2479, passed 10-9-
1979; Ord. 2522, passed 9-9-1980) Penalty, see §
159.99
§ 159.33 WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No park shall be so located so that the drainage of the park area will
endanger any water supply. All such parks shall be well drained. No wastewater
shall be deposited on the surface of the ground within the mobile home park.
   (B)   An adequate supply of water of a safe, sanitary, quality approved by
the city shall be furnished at each park. Where water from other sources than
that supplied by the city is proposed to be used, the source of such supply
shall first be approved by the city. Each site shall be provided with a cold
water tap located in accordance with regulations of the city.
   (C)   All sewage and other water-carried wastes shall be disposed of into
the municipal sewage system whenever the interceptor or sewer main of such
system is adjacent to the park. In parks in which such connections are not
available, disposal shall be into a private system which includes a sanitary
means of disposal, the operation of which creates neither a nuisance nor a
menace to health. When a water carriage system of sewage is used, each site
shall be provided with a sewer connection for the combined liquid waste outlet
or outlets of each mobile home. It shall be the duty of the owner or operator
of said park to provide an approved type of water and odor-tight connection
from the mobile home water drainage to the sewer connection, and it shall be
the duty of said owner or operator to make such connection and keep all
occupied mobile homes connected to said sewer while located in the park. Sewer
connections in unoccupied sites shall be so closed that they will emit no odors
or cause a breeding place for flies. No water or waste shall be allowed to fall
on the ground from a mobile home.
(Prior Code, § 160.33) (Ord. 2169, passed 12-20-1971; Ord. 2479, passed 10-9-
1979; Ord. 2522, passed 9-9-1980) Penalty, see §
159.99
§ 159.34 SPACING.
   No mobile home shall be parked closer than five feet to the side lot lines
of a park, or closer than ten feet to a public street, alley or building. Each
individual site shall abut or face on a private or public driveway or roadway
of not less than 24 feet in width, which driveway or roadway shall have
unobstructed access to a public highway or alley. There shall be an open space
of at least ten feet adjacent to the sides of every mobile home and at least
five feet adjacent to the ends of every mobile home.
(Prior Code, § 160.34) (Ord. 2169, passed 12-20-1971; Ord. 2479, passed 10-9-
1979; Ord. 2522, passed 9-9-1980) Penalty, see §
159.99
§ 159.35 GARBAGE COLLECTION; PEST CONTROL.
   (A)   A sufficient number of adequate fly-proof and water-tight containers
in accordance with the rules and regulations adopted by the city shall be
supplied for the storage of garbage, except where an adequate incinerator is
provided. Garbage containers shall be emptied at least once a week and shall
not be filled to overflowing or allowed to become foul smelling or a breeding
place for flies. Garbage and rubbish shall be disposed of in a manner which
creates neither a nuisance nor a menace to health and which is approved by the
city. The expense of garbage and refuse disposal shall be borne by the owner
and, at the time of the issuance of a license, the owner shall in writing agree
to be solely responsible for said expense.
   (B)   Adequate insect and rodent control measures shall be employed. All
buildings shall be fly- and rodent-proof and rodent harborages shall not be
permitted to exist in the park or pathways.
(Prior Code, § 160.35) (Ord. 2169, passed 12-20-1971; Ord. 2479, passed 10-9-
1979; Ord. 2522, passed 9-9-1980) Penalty, see §
159.99
§ 159.36 FIRE EXTINGUISHERS FOR EACH MOBILE HOME.
   Mobile homes in mobile home parks shall each be equipped with fire
extinguishers in working order, one in each end of the mobile home. In addition
to any other inspection required by statute, inspection of such equipment shall
be made by the Fire Department of the city.
(Prior Code, § 160.36) (Ord. 2169, passed 12-20-1971; Ord. 2479, passed 10-9-
1979; Ord. 2522, passed 9-9-1980) Penalty, see §
159.99
§ 159.37 ATTACHMENT OF PORCHES OR THE LIKE TO MOBILE HOME.
   Temporary porches, canvas-roofed canopies and skirts shall be permitted for
mobile homes, and auxiliary rooms may also be authorized by regulation of the
city if constructed of fire-resistant materials of such specifications as shall
be required by applicable regulations.
(Prior Code, § 160.37) (Ord. 2169, passed 12-20-1971; Ord. 2479, passed 10-9-
1979; Ord. 2522, passed 9-9-1980) Penalty, see §
159.99
§ 159.38 STREETS AND DRIVEWAYS.
   All streets and driveways in every park must be constructed and maintained
with a hard surface material such as macadam, asphalt or concrete, and all
streets and driveways shall have a minimum width of 24 feet, except such
streets and driveways constructed prior to 8-21-1967, which shall have a
minimum width of 20 feet. Curbing shall be required on all streets constructed
after the effective date of this chapter in accordance with the rules and
regulations promulgated by the Department of Public Works.
(Prior Code, § 160.38) (Ord. 2169, passed 12-20-1971; Ord. 2479, passed 10-9-
1979; Ord. 2522, passed 9-9-1980) Penalty, see §
159.99
§ 159.39 ELECTRICAL OUTLETS FOR EACH SITE.
   Electrical outlets for each individual site shall be provided and the
installation shall be in accordance with all state or local codes and
ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 160.39) (Ord. 2169, passed 12-20-1971; Ord. 2479, passed 10-9-
1979; Ord. 2522, passed 9-9-1980) Penalty, see §
159.99
§ 159.40 OCCUPANCY STANDARDS FOR MOBILE HOME.
   (A)   In no event shall a dependent mobile home or non-permanent shelter or
other vehicle designed or used for sleeping purposes, other than an independent
mobile home, be permitted for occupancy at any time in a mobile home park.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any mobile home
used for human habitation upon any plot of ground in the city, except in a
licensed mobile home park.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful to occupy for sleeping or other residence
purposes any mobile home which has been rendered immobile by the removal of
wheels, or placing the same on a foundation or on the ground, unless such
mobile home in construction and location complies with the ordinances relating
to the construction, wiring, plumbing, sewer facilities and other regulations
applicable to single-family dwellings.
(Prior Code, § 160.40) (Ord. 2169, passed 12-20-1971; Ord. 2479, passed 10-9-
1979; Ord. 2522, passed 9-9-1980) Penalty, see §
159.99
§ 159.41 COMMUNITY FACILITIES.
   When community kitchens, dining rooms, laundries or other faculties are
provided, such facilities and equipment as are supplied must be maintained in a
sanitary condition and kept in good repair, and shall be subject to all rules,
regulations and applicable ordinances of the city.
(Prior Code, § 160.41) (Ord. 2169, passed 12-20-1971; Ord. 2479, passed 10-9-
1979; Ord. 2522, passed 9-9-1980) Penalty, see §
159.99
§ 159.42 LIGHTING OF PARK.
   All parks shall be kept properly and adequately lighted at all times so that
the grounds shall be safe for occupants and visitors. All wiring shall be
underground.
(Prior Code, § 160.42) (Ord. 2169, passed 12-20-1971; Ord. 2479, passed 10-9-
1979; Ord. 2522, passed 9-9-1980) Penalty, see §
159.99
§ 159.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any provision of this
chapter shall be fined not less than $100, nor more than $750, for each
offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 160.99) (Ord. 2169, passed 12-20-1971; Ord. 2479, passed 10-9-
1979; Ord. 2522, passed 9-9-1980)
CHAPTER 160: MULTI-FAMILY RENTAL STRUCTURES
Section
   
160.01   Definitions
   
160.02   Disclaimer by city of any guarantees
   
160.03   Certificate of registration required
   
160.04   Suspension or revocation of certificate of registration
   
160.05   Certificate of housing inspection
§ 160.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING COMMITTEE. The Community Development and Human Services Committee.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms in a structure or portion thereof arranged,
designed and used as a residence or living quarters by one or more persons, and
containing therein bathroom and kitchen facilities.
   LANDLORD. The owner, lessor or sublessor of the dwelling unit or the
building of which it is a part.
   OWNER. One or more persons, a corporation, a partnership, or any other legal
entity, jointly or severally in whom is vested all or part of the legal title
to the premises, or all or part of the beneficial ownership and a right to
present use and enjoyment of the premises, including a mortgage holder in
possession.
   RENTAL MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING STRUCTURE. A dwelling structure containing four
or more dwelling units.
(Prior Code, § 161.01) (Ord. 2653, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 2693, passed 6-11-
1985)
§ 160.02 DISCLAIMER BY CITY OF ANY GUARANTEES.
   The city does not guarantee the condition of any property which is the
subject matter of this chapter and is not responsible for any claims arising
out of the subject property or the condition thereof. The city does not warrant
that all deficiencies are listed in a certificate of registration and does not
warrant anything as to the condition of the property or the habitability
thereof.
(Prior Code, § 161.02) (Ord. 2653, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 2693, passed 6-11-
1985)
§ 160.03 CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   No dwelling structure shall be operated as a rental multi-family
dwelling structure unless the owner or landlord of such structure holds a
current, unrevoked certificate of registration issued by the city in his, her
or its name for the specific named multi-family dwelling structure. For the
purpose of this section and this chapter, a dwelling structure containing four
or more dwelling units therein shall constitute a rental multi-family dwelling
structure.
   (B)   Every certificate of registration shall be issued for a period of one
year from its date of issuance unless sooner revoked, and may be renewed for
successive annual periods.
   (C)   No certificate of registration shall be issued or renewed unless the
owner or landlord has first made application therefor on an application form
provided by the City Building Department.
   (D)   The Building Commissioner is hereby authorized to investigate and to
issue new certificates of registration upon application therefore and renewals
therefor, in the names of applicant owners or operators of multi-family
dwelling structures. No such certificate shall be issued unless the multi-
family dwelling structure in connection with which the certificate is sought is
found, after inspection by the Building Commissioner or his or her designee, to
meet all requirements of the city code and of applicable rules and regulations
pursuant thereto. Each applicant shall be notified by the Building Commissioner
in advance of the date and time of such inspection.
   (E)   No certificate of registration shall be issued or renewed unless the
completed application form is accompanied by payment of an annual registration
fee. The annual registration fee for operating licenses for multi-family
dwellings shall be $5 per dwelling unit.
   (F)   No certificate of registration shall be issued or renewed for an
applicant unless such applicant has first designated an agent for the receipt
of service of complaints for violation of the provisions of any of the city
code, and for service of process pursuant thereto when said applicant is absent
from the city for 30 days or more. Such designation shall be made in writing
and shall accompany each application form.
   (G)   An application for renewal of a certificate of registration shall be
made 30 days prior to the expiration of the present certificate.
   (H)   Each certificate shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the
common ways of the multi-family dwelling. Every person holding a certificate
shall give notice in writing to the Building Commissioner within five days
after having transferred or otherwise disposed of the legal control of any
registered multi-family dwelling. Such notice shall include the name and
address of the person or persons succeeding to the ownership or control of such
multi-family dwelling.
(Prior Code, § 161.03) (Ord. 2653, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 2693, passed 6-11-
1985)
§ 160.04 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Whenever, upon inspection of a multi-family dwelling for initial
registration or renewal of a certificate of registration under the provisions
of this chapter, the Building Commissioner finds that conditions or practices
exist which are in violation of the provisions of this section, or of any
applicable provisions of the city code, or of any applicable rules or
regulations pursuant thereto, the Building Commissioner shall serve the owner
or operator with notice of such violation or violations. Such notice shall
state that unless the violations cited are corrected within a reasonable time
of not less than five days, except for emergency situations, the certificate of
registration may be suspended.
   (B)   At the end of the time the Building Commissioner has allowed for
correction of any violation cited, the Building Commissioner or his or her duly
authorized designee shall reinspect the multi-family dwelling and if he or she
determines that such conditions have not been corrected, he or she may issue an
order suspending the certificate to take effect five days following service
upon the landlord unless, in the interim, the landlord requests, in writing, a
hearing.
   (C)   Any person whose certificate of registration for a multi-family
dwelling is subject to suspension pursuant to a suspension order shall be
entitled to a hearing on the suspension action by filing with the City Clerk, a
written request for a hearing before the city’s Building Committee within two
business days following the receipt of the suspension order. Upon receipt of
said request, a hearing shall be scheduled to be held before the city’s
Building Committee at a date not more than ten business days thereafter. Upon
completion of the hearing, the city’s Building Committee may either:
      (1)   Confirm the suspension;
      (2)   Suspend the suspension and allow additional compliance time; or
      (3)   Rescind the suspension.
   (D)   If no petition for reconsideration of a suspension order is filed as
provided above, then the suspension order shall remain in effect until the
violations in question have been corrected, as determined by the Building
Commissioner upon inspection of the structure.
   (E)   In the event a certificate of registration is suspended and such
suspension is affirmed after a hearing, if any, then during the period of
suspension:
      (1)   No existing rental agreement shall be renewed and no new rental
agreement shall be entered into with respect to any rental unit located within
the dwelling; and
      (2)   They shall have the right to seek enforcement of any other
applicable law.
(Prior Code, § 161.04) (Ord. 2653, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 2693, passed 6-11-
1985)
§ 160.05 CERTIFICATE OF HOUSING INSPECTION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or landlord of any multi-family
rental structure to contract for the sale of said structure or to lease a
dwelling unit contained therein without having first tendered to the buyer or
lessee, a certificate of housing inspection of the subject property made within
one month before the date of the conveyance or lease of the subject property.
   (B)   All applications for a certificate of housing inspection shall be made
on such forms as prescribed by the Building Commissioner. The Building
Commissioner shall issue a certificate within 14 days after inspection of the
subject property which shall be consented to by the owner or landlord, in
writing, and after the payment of a $5 inspection fee for each dwelling unit
inspected. The Building Department shall inspect the subject property for
compliance with the Building, Housing, Property Maintenance and Zoning Codes,
and all other applicable ordinances of the city. All deficiencies shall be
noted on said certificate. It shall be unlawful for a person who is the owner
or landlord of a multi-family rental structure, to permit the occupancy of any
dwelling unit in said structure until all building deficiencies have been
remedied and the structure brought into compliance with the city’s code.
   (C)   No evidence obtained in a consented inspection of real property
pursuant to this chapter shall be used in the prosecution of any criminal or
ordinance violation other than for violations of division (B) above, against
the owner or landlord of the property when inspection was made.
   (D)   (1)   Where no consent has been given to enter or inspect any
property, no entry or inspection shall be made without the procurement of a
warrant from the Circuit Court of the county. The Court may consider any of the
following factors along with such other matters as it deems pertinent in its
decision as to whether a warrant shall issue:
         (a)   Eyewitness account of violation;
         (b)   Citizen complaints;
         (c)   Tenant complaints;
         (d)   Plain-view-violations;
         (e)   Violations apparent from city records;
         (f)   Property deterioration;
         (g)   Age of property;
         (h)   Nature of alleged violation;
         (i)   Similar properties in the area;
         (j)   Documented violations of similar properties in the area;
         (k)   Passage of time since last inspection; and
         (l)   Previous violation on the property.
      (2)   Cause for issuance of a warrant shall be deemed to exist in light
of reasonable legislative and administrative standards which show that there is
reason to believe that a condition of non-conformity exists with respect to a
particular property in violation of an ordinance of the city.
(Prior Code, § 161.05) (Ord. 2653, passed 3-27-1984; Ord. 2693, passed 6-11-
1985) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 161: REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREAS
Section
Interested Parties’ Registries
   
161.01   Findings
   
161.02   Creation of registries
   
161.03   Adoption authority
   
161.04   Effective date
   
161.05   Definitions
   
161.06   Establishment of registry
   
161.07   Maintenance of registry
   
161.08   Registration by residents
   
161.09   Registration by organizations
   
161.10   Determination of eligibility
   
161.11   Renewal and termination
   
161.12   Amendment to registration
   
161.13   Registries available for public inspection
   
161.14   Notices to be sent to interested parties
   
161.15   Non-interference
INTERESTED PARTIES’ REGISTRIES
§ 161.01 FINDINGS.
   (A)   The city has previously designated a “redevelopment project area,” as
defined in the Tax Increment Allocation Redevelopment Act, 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-
1 et seq., (the “Act”), known as the “Blue Island TIF No. 4”, and is now
considering designating an additional redevelopment project area (or areas)
pursuant to the provisions of the Act.
   (B)   Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-4.2 of the Act, the city is required to
establish certain interested parties’ registries (individually, a “registry”
and collectively, the “registries”) and adopt registration rules for such
registries.
   (C)   The city desires to adopt this subchapter in order to comply with such
requirements of the Act.
(Prior Code, § 162.01) (Ord. 07-078, passed 5-8-2007)
§ 161.02 CREATION OF REGISTRIES.
   The City Clerk or his or her designee is hereby authorized and directed to
create a registry in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-4.2 of the Act for each
redevelopment project area created under the Act and not terminated by the
city, whether now existing or created after the date of the adoption of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 162.02) (Ord. 07-078, passed 5-8-2007)
§ 161.03 ADOPTION AUTHORITY.
   (A)   (1)   In accordance with 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-4.2 of the Act, the city
hereby adopts the registration rules as follow as the rules for each registry.
The city’s corporate authorities may amend such rules from time to time as may
be necessary or desirable to comply with and carry out the purposes intended by
the Act.
      (2)   The City Clerk or his or her designee is hereby authorized and
directed to cause the publication of the notice that interested persons may
register with the city in order to receive information of the proposed
designation of the redevelopment project area (the “notice”), said notice being
substantially in the form attached to the ordinance codified herein as Exhibit
B and incorporated herein by reference, in a newspaper of general circulation
within the city.
   (B)   These registration rules may be amended by the city subject to and
consistent with the requirements of the Act.
(Prior Code, § 162.03) (Ord. 07-078, passed 5-8-2007)
§ 161.04 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage
and approval, as provided by law. If any provision of this subchapter is held
to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, that provision shall be
stricken from this subchapter and the remainder of this subchapter shall
continue in full force and effect to the extent possible.
(Prior Code, § 162.04) (Ord. 07-078, passed 5-8-2007)
§ 161.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Tax Increment Allocation Redevelopment Act, 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-1 et
seq., as amended from time to time.
   CITY. The City of Blue Island, Cook County, Illinois.
   CLERK. The Clerk of the city.
   INTERESTED PARTY(IES). Any individual or organization or entity registered
in a specific registry who has registered in such registry and whose
registration has not been terminated in accordance with these registration
rules.
   REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA. A Redevelopment Project Area that:
      (1)   Is intended to qualify (or has subsequently qualified) as a
“redevelopment project area” under the Act; and
      (2)   Is subject to the “interested parties” registry requirements of the
Act.
   REGISTRATION FORM. The form appended to these registration rules or such
revised form as may be approved by the city consistent with the requirements of
the Act.
   REGISTRY or REGISTRIES. Each interested parties registry, and all such
registries, collectively, established by the city pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-
74.4-4.2 of the Act for any and all redevelopment project areas in the city.
(Prior Code, § 162.05) (Ord. 07-078, passed 5-8-2007)
§ 161.06 ESTABLISHMENT OF REGISTRY.
   The city shall establish a separate interested parties registry for each
redevelopment project area, whether existing as of the date of the adoption of
these rules or hereafter established. The city shall establish a new registry
whenever it has identified an area for study and possible designation as a
redevelopment project area. In any event the process of establishing the new
registry must be completed prior to the deadline for sending any of the notices
required by §
161.14 of this chapter or any other notices required by the Act with respect to
the proposed redevelopment project area.
(Prior Code, § 162.06) (Ord. 07-078, passed 5-8-2007)
§ 161.07 MAINTENANCE OF REGISTRY.
   (A)   The registries shall be maintained by the Clerk or his or her
designee.
   (B)   In the event the city determines that an individual other than the
Clerk should maintain the registries, the city may transfer the responsibility
for maintaining the registries to such other department provided that the city:
      (1)   Gives prior written notice to all interested parties not less than
30 days prior to such transfer; and
      (2)   Published notice of such transfer in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city.
(Prior Code, § 162.07) (Ord. 07-078, passed 5-8-2007)
§ 161.08 REGISTRATION BY RESIDENTS.
   An individual seeking to register as an interested person with respect to a
redevelopment project area must complete and submit a registration form to the
Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 162.08) (Ord. 07-078, passed 5-8-2007)
§ 161.09 REGISTRATION BY ORGANIZATIONS.
   An organization seeking to register as an interested person with respect to
a redevelopment project area must complete and submit a registration form to
the Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 162.09) (Ord. 07-078, passed 5-8-2007)
§ 161.10 DETERMINATION OF ELIGIBILITY.
   All individuals and organizations whose registration form and supporting
documentation complies with these registration rules shall be registered in the
applicable registry within ten business days after the Clerk’s receipt of all
such documents. The Clerk shall provide written notice to the registrant
confirming such registration. Upon registration, interested parties shall be
entitled to receive all notices and documents required to be delivered under
these rules or as otherwise required under the Act with respect to the
applicable redevelopment project area. If the Clerk determines that a
registrant’s registration form and/or supporting documentation is incomplete or
does not comply with these registration rules, the Clerk shall give written
notice to the registrant specifying the defect(s) and the registrant shall be
entitled to correct any defects and resubmit a new registration form and
supporting documentation.
(Prior Code, § 162.10) (Ord. 07-078, passed 5-8-2007)
§ 161.11 RENEWAL AND TERMINATION.
   (A)   An interested person’s registration shall remain effective for a
period of three years. At any time after such three-year period, the Clerk may
provide written notice by regular mail to the interested person stating that
such registration shall terminate unless the interested person renews such
registration with 30 days after the Clerk’s mailing of written notice. To renew
such registration, the interested person shall, within such 30-day period,
complete and submit the same registration form then required of initial
registrants operations in the city. The registration of all individuals and
organizations whose registration form is submitted in a timely manner and
complies with these regulation rules shall be renewed for an additional,
consecutive three-year period.
   (B)   If the Clerk determines that a registrant’s renewal registration form
is incomplete or does not comply with these registration rules, the Clerk shall
give written notice to the registrant at the address specified in the renewal
registration form submitted by such registrant, specifying the defect(s). The
registrant shall be entitled to correct any defects and resubmit a new
registration form within 30 days after receipt of the Clerk’s notice. If all
defects are not corrected within 30 days after the interested person’s receipt
of the Clerk’s notice, the interested person’s registration shall be
terminated. Any interested person whose registration is terminated shall be
entitled to register again as if a first-time registrant.
(Prior Code, § 162.11) (Ord. 07-078, passed 5-8-2007)
§ 161.12 AMENDMENT TO REGISTRATION.
   (A)   An interested party may amend its registration by giving written
notice to the Clerk by certified mail of any of the following:
      (1)   Change in address for notice purposes;
      (2)   In the case of organizations, a change in the name of the contact
person; and
      (3)   A termination of registration.
   (B)   Upon receipt of such notice, the Clerk shall revise the applicable
registry accordingly.
(Prior Code, § 162.12) (Ord. 07-078, passed 5-8-2007)
§ 161.13 REGISTRIES AVAILABLE FOR PUBLIC INSPECTION.
   (A)   Each registry shall be available for public inspection during normal
business hours.
   (B)   The registry shall include the name, address and telephone number of
each interested person and for organizations, the name and phone number of a
designated contact person.
(Prior Code, § 162.13) (Ord. 07-078, passed 5-8-2007)
§ 161.14 NOTICES TO BE SENT TO INTERESTED PARTIES.
   Interested parties shall be sent the following notices and any other notices
required under the Act with respect to the applicable redevelopment project
area.
   (A)   Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-5(a) of the Act, notice of the
availability of a proposed redevelopment plan and eligibility report, including
how to obtain this information; such notice shall be sent by mail within a
reasonable period of time after the adoption of the ordinance fixing the public
hearing for the proposed redevelopment plan.
   (B)   (1)   Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-5(a) of the Act, notice of changes
to proposed redevelopment plans that do not:
         (a)   Add additional parcels of property to the proposed redevelopment
project area;
         (b)   Substantially affect the general land uses proposed in the
redevelopment plan;
         (c)   Substantially change the nature of or extend the life of the
redevelopment project; or
         (d)   Increase the number of inhabited residential units to be
displaced from the redevelopment project area, as measured from the time of
creation of the redevelopment project area, to a total of more than ten.
      (2)   Such notice shall be sent by mail not later than ten days following
the city’s adoption by ordinance of such changes.
   (C)   (1)   Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-5(c) of the Act, notice of
amendments to previously approved redevelopment plans that do not:
         (a)   Add additional parcels of property to the redevelopment project
area;
         (b)   Substantially affect the general land uses in the redevelopment
plan;
         (c)   Substantially change the nature of the redevelopment project;
         (d)   Increase the total estimated redevelopment project costs set out
in the redevelopment plan by more than 5% after adjustment for inflation from
the date the plan was adopted;
         (e)   Add additional redevelopment project costs to the itemized list
of redevelopment project costs set out in the redevelopment plan; or
         (f)   Increase the number of inhabited residential units to be
displaced from the redevelopment project area, as measured from the time of
creation of the redevelopment project, to a total of more than ten.
      (2)   Such notice will be sent by mail not later than ten days following
the city’s adoption by ordinance of such amendment.
   (D)   Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-5(d)(9) of the Act, for redevelopment
plans or projects that would result in the displacement of residents from ten
or more inhabited residential units or that contain 75 or more inhabited
residential units, notice of the availability of the annual report described by
65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-5(d) of the Act, including how to obtain the annual report;
such notice shall be sent by mail within a reasonable period of time after
completion of the certified audit report.
   (E)   Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-6(e) of the Act, notice of the
preliminary public meeting required under the Act for a proposed redevelopment
project area that will result in the displacement of residents from ten or more
inhabited residential units or which will contain 75 or more inhabited
residential units; such notice shall be sent by certified mail not less than 15
days before the date of such preliminary public meeting.
(Prior Code, § 162.14) (Ord. 07-078, passed 5-8-2007)
§ 161.15 NON-INTERFERENCE.
   These registration rules shall not be used to prohibit or otherwise
interfere with the ability of eligible organizations and individuals to
register for receipt of information to which they are entitled under the Act.
(Prior Code, § 162.15) (Ord. 07-078, passed 5-8-2007)
CHAPTER 162: LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING
Section
   
162.01   Purpose
   
162.02   Applicability
   
162.03   General requirements
   
162.04   Exemptions
   
162.05   Plant materials
   
162.06   Design and composition of landscaped areas
   
162.07   Landscape plan required
   
162.08   Street trees and parkway planting
   
162.09   Parking lot landscaping
   
162.10   Building foundation plantings
   
162.11   Screening of trash dumpsters and bins
   
162.12   Screening of residential areas
   
162.13   Screening of institutional uses
   
162.14   Application procedures
   
162.15   Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals modification
   
162.16   Installation and maintenance
   
162.17   Performance guarantees
   
162.18   Effective date
 
   
162.99   Penalty
§ 162.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   This purpose of this chapter is to improve and maintain a high quality
aesthetic appearance in the city and to meet the city’s sustainability
objectives.
   (B)   Specifically, this chapter is intended to:
      (1)   Enhance the aesthetic appearance of development in all areas of the
city by providing standards relating to quality, quantity and functional
aspects of landscaping, fencing and screening;
      (2)   Between residential and abutting commercial and industrial land
uses;
      (3)   Increase compatibility and mitigate negative impacts of non-
residential land uses on abutting and surrounding residential areas;
      (4)   Provide shade to reduce the heat and glare generated by pavement
and building surfaces;
      (5)   Protect public health, safety and welfare by minimizing the impact
of all forms of physical and visual pollution, controlling soil erosion,
preserving the integrity of neighborhoods and improving pedestrian and
vehicular safety;
      (6)   Implement the city’s sustainability goals and framework contained
in plans and ordinances; and
      (7)   Provide for and promote a sustainable built and natural environment
that protects, maintains and where possible restores the essential and
irreplaceable natural systems that operate with respect to land, air and water
in the city.
(Prior Code, § 163.01) (Ord. 12-172, passed 3-27-2012)
§ 162.02 APPLICABILITY.
   The standards of this section apply to the following, except where noted in
the list of exemptions:
   (A)   Multi-family, commercial, office, institutional or industrial
development where site plans, preliminary or final plats that are submitted
after the effective date of this chapter;
   (B)   Existing uses or structures wherein either the gross floor area or
gross lot area is expanded by 1,500 square feet or 25% whichever is less;
   (C)   Construction or installation of any surface parking area containing
five or more parking spaces;
   (D)   Repair, rehabilitation or expansion of a surface parking area that
would increase the number of existing parking spaces by more than 25% or five
spaces, whichever is more;
   (E)   Any existing parking lot that is accessory to an existing principal
building if such building or any portion thereof is repaired or rehabilitated
(including interior alteration and remodeling) and the cost of such repair or
rehabilitation exceeds 150% of the property’s assessed value or $10,000,
whichever is greater; and
   (F)   Any residential lot that is occupied by a non-conforming commercial or
industrial use.
(Prior Code, § 163.02) (Ord. 12-172, passed 3-27-2012)
§ 162.03 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Each project must provide and maintain landscaping in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter are minimum requirements.
   (C)   Landscaping that is installed and maintained in excess of these
requirements is encouraged and may be required by the Community Development
Director when necessary to achieve the purpose of these regulations.
(Prior Code, § 163.03) (Ord. 12-172, passed 3-27-2012)
§ 162.04 EXEMPTIONS.
   The requirements of this chapter do not apply to the following actions:
   (A)   Construction, repair or rehabilitation of or upon any detached house,
two-flat or three-flat (i.e., multi-unit buildings containing two or three
dwelling units, respectively);
   (B)   Restoration of any building or portion thereof damaged by fire,
explosion, flood, casualty or other calamity of any kind; and
   (C)   Automobile sales lots are exempt from this interior parking lot
landscaping requirement.
(Prior Code, § 163.04) (Ord. 12-172, passed 3-27-2012)
§ 162.05 PLANT MATERIALS.
   (A)   All plant material must comply with the provisions set forth by the
American Standard for Nursery Stock, ANSI Z60.1 (most recent edition) and be
healthy and free of insects and diseases.
   (B)   All plant material must be in a balled and burlapped or container
grown at the time of installation. No bare root material will be allowed.
   (C)   Plant material must be healthy, free of insects, disease and physical
damage such as bark bruises, scrapes or cracked branches.
   (D)   Plant material used in conformance with the provisions of this chapter
must be selected to provide:
      (1)   Climate hardiness of plant material;
      (2)   Disease and pest resistance and stress tolerance;
      (3)   Drought tolerance of trees and shrubs;
      (4)   Adaptability of proposed plant material to the particular
microclimate (sun, shade, dry or wet soils and the like) in which it is to be
located;
      (5)   Inclusion of native plant material wherever possible;
      (6)   Inclusion of plant materials that will have a mature appearance and
fill in its location on the landscape plan within six years of planting; and
      (7)   Overall year-round ornamental effect.
(Prior Code, § 163.05) (Ord. 12-172, passed 3-27-2012) Penalty, see §
162.99
§ 162.06 DESIGN AND COMPOSITION OF LANDSCAPED AREAS.
   (A)   Landscaping and open spaces must be designed as an integral part of
the overall site design. These elements should enhance the building appearance,
enhance public views and spaces, and provide buffers, transitions and
screening.
   (B)   Tree and shrub plantings should be grouped together in order to create
strong unified character.
   (C)   Groundcover should be planted to achieve 100% coverage within three
years.
   (D)   Inorganic groundcover or bark may be used in combination with live
plants and must be limited to an accent feature or mulch.
   (E)   All trees installed should survive for a minimum of one year and all
shrubs installed should survive for a minimum of three years from the date of
final approval of the building permit of the last unit of a development. All
dead plants must be replaced with like species at regular intervals.
   (F)   Trees and shrubs should be planted so that at maturity they do not
interfere with service lines, aqueducts or conduits.
(Prior Code, § 163.06) (Ord. 12-172, passed 3-27-2012) Penalty, see §
162.99
§ 162.07 LANDSCAPE PLAN REQUIRED.
   A landscape plan prepared and stamped by a landscape architect is required
to be submitted to the Community Development Director as part of any
development project that contains:
   (A)   North point and scale;
   (B)   Topographic information and proposed grades;
   (C)   Proposed structures and pavements;
   (D)   Existing and proposed utilities, above and below ground;
   (E)   Location, type, size, quantity and planting condition (balled and
burlapped or container) of all proposed landscape materials;
   (F)   Common and botanical names of all proposed plant material;
   (G)   Location, size and common/botanical name of existing vegetation to
remain;
   (H)   Standard notes as they relate to mulch, site lines, plant location,
planting depths and the like;
   (I)   All math calculations as they relate to plant units and number of
plants to be provided in each specific area required as per this chapter; and
   (J)   Symbols representing proposed plant material must be drawn to scale
showing two-thirds to full mature size and labeled as to quantity and type.
(Prior Code, § 163.07) (Ord. 12-172, passed 3-27-2012)
§ 162.08 STREET TREES AND PARKWAY PLANTING.
   (A)   Existing parkways (the planting strip between a public street and
sidewalk) adjacent to a site, or one that will be created as part of a
development plan, must be planted with at least one street tree per 40 lineal
feet. Trees are not required to be planted in precise 40-foot intervals,
however they should be installed as close to 40 feet as possible along the
street frontage, allowing for utilities and intersection visibility
requirements.
   (B)   Parkways adjacent to parking lots of five or more spaces are required
to have one street tree per 25 linear feet. The flexible spacing standard of
division (A) above applies to street trees required in this division (B).
   (C)   Street trees are not required where such installation would reduce the
width of any sidewalk clearance to less than five feet in a manner inconsistent
with federal and state requirements for access for persons with disabilities.
   (D)   The tree species planted must be canopy trees to provide shade and
visual relief with a clearance of nine feet over sidewalk. Ornamental trees may
also be planted where the use of canopy trees would conflict with the
visibility of traffic signals. The final design of street tree plantings
involving ornamental trees is subject to site plan review.
   (E)   All existing parkways within the dedicated right-of-way or other
public use areas that is disturbed due to construction must be restored with
salt-tolerant sod and any required trees that have been damaged or destroyed.
   (F)   Existing trees may be counted as fulfilling the requirements of this
section upon approval of the Community Development Director.
(Prior Code, § 163.08) (Ord. 12-172, passed 3-27-2012) Penalty, see §
162.99
§ 162.09 PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING.
   (A)   Parking lot perimeter landscaping. All parking lots containing five or
more parking spaces must be screened from public streets and sidewalks, public
open space and adjacent properties by complying with one of the following
perimeter landscaping options:
      (1)   A perimeter-landscaped area at least seven feet wide as measured
from the property line, and encircled by a six-inch concrete curb with no
ornamental fencing, masonry wall or wheel stops in the parking lot;
      (2)   A five- to seven-foot wide, landscaped perimeter area with
ornamental fencing or masonry wall and a maximum two-foot car overhang area or
no parking spaces adjacent to landscaping;
      (3)   A perimeter-landscaped area less than five feet wide; provided,
ornamental fencing or masonry wall and wheel stops or curbing in the parking
lot is installed to prevent car overhang into the landscaped area; or
      (4)   An ornamental fence or masonry wall without landscaping; provided
that, a parkway exists adjacent to the site and is already planted to the
minimum specifications of this section or is planted to such specifications by
the applicant with the approval of the Community Development Director.
   (B)   Interior parking lot landscaping. The parking lot interior-landscaping
requirements apply to new, private off-street parking lots of six spaces or
more and to existing lots which are expanded by more than 25% of existing
spaces to contain more than 15 spaces.
      (1)   Minimum standards.
         (a)   Parking lots with six to 100 spaces must have 5% of the total
interior area landscaped.
         (b)   Parking lots with more than 100 spaces must have 10% of the
interior area landscaped.
      (2)   Landscape islands. Landscaped islands must be spaced no more than
15 parking spaces apart. Internal landscaped diamonds must be at least 50
square feet in size and all other internal, landscaped islands must be at least
100 square feet in size with a minimum width of six feet.
      (3)   Required plant mix. Parking lots that contain six to 100 parking
spaces must have internal plantings of at least two trees and five shrubs per
ten spaces. Parking lots that contain more than 100 parking spaces must have at
least two trees and five shrubs per 15 spaces.
      (4)   Perimeter landscaping credit. Perimeter landscaping in excess of
the dimensions required in may be credited towards meeting the interior
landscaping standards on a square-foot-per-square-foot basis.
(Ord. 12-172, passed 3-27-2012) Penalty, see §
162.99
(Prior Code, § 163.09)
§ 162.10 BUILDING FOUNDATION PLANTINGS.
   (A)   A landscaped strip must be planted at the base of any building facade
that exceeds 50 lineal feet.
   (B)   The foundation landscaping must be located in a planting bed of at
least five feet in width adjacent to the building. Depth measurement will be
perpendicular to building foundation.
   (C)   Foundation landscaping must be provided at a quantity of 30 planted
for every 1,000 square foot planting bed area which is within five feet of the
foundation. Flowers, ornamental grasses and groundcover may also be used. Any
planting area not occupied by trees, shrubs, flowers, groundcover, ornamental
grasses or mulch must have sod.
(Prior Code, § 163.10) (Ord. 12-172, passed 3-27-2012) Penalty, see §
162.99
§ 162.11 SCREENING OF TRASH DUMPSTERS AND BINS.
   (A)   Trash containers, dumpsters, trash compactors and recycling bins
associated with multi-unit residential properties with four units or more and
all non-residential uses must be screened from public view on all sides with a
solid fence, wall or gate of six feet in height, constructed of cedar, redwood,
masonry or other similar building material reflecting the overall design of the
site. One side of the trash enclosure must contain of an opaque, lockable gate.
   (B)   Dumpsters and trash bins must be located behind the front building
line and located at or near the rear property line. The opening of any trash
enclosure may not be oriented toward an arterial street. On corner lots,
dumpsters must be located behind the front building line and setback a minimum
of 20 feet from any side street right-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 163.11) (Ord. 12-172, passed 3-27-2012; Ord. 2025-027, passed 5-
27-2025) Penalty, see §
162.99
§ 162.12 SCREENING OF RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
   All non-residential buildings and surface parking lots of five or more
spaces, whichever is less, must provide a solid screen fence or wall not less
than six feet in height along all rear and side property lines that abut
residential zoning districts and uses. Such screening may not extend in front
of the building line or in front of abutting dwellings. Such screening is not
required when similar screening exists on the abutting residential property.
(Prior Code, § 163.12) (Ord. 12-172, passed 3-27-2012) Penalty, see §
162.99
§ 162.13 SCREENING OF INSTITUTIONAL USES.
   The perimeter of all parking lots of 1,000 square feet or more must be
effectively screened from all abutting residentially zoned property and from
all institutional uses, including hospitals, nursing homes, places of worship,
community centers, schools and colleges.
(Prior Code, § 163.13) (Ord. 12-172, passed 3-27-2012) Penalty, see §
162.99
§ 162.14 APPLICATION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Any application for multi-family, commercial, industrial or public/
civic uses must include a landscape plan including each proposed plant being
identified as to botanical and common name, size and installed condition
(balled and burlapped or container).
   (B)   When an application is made for a rezoning or a preliminary plat for a
subdivision stage (if applicable), general locations and approximate quantities
must be shown. A list of typical plants proposed to be used must be submitted,
including common and botanical names, and approximate sizes.
   (C)   At the final plat stage, exact locations and specific quantities must
be shown. These quantities may not be less than what was approved at the
preliminary plat stage without written justification. Each proposed plant must
be identified as to botanical and common name, size at time of installation and
planting condition (balled and burlapped or container). The plants proposed for
the final plat stage must, for the most part, reflect the typical plant list
submitted at the preliminary plat stage. This list may be expanded upon;
however, additions must be of equal or greater quality regarding hardiness,
disease resistance and ornamental characteristics.
(Prior Code, § 163.14) (Ord. 12-172, passed 3-27-2012) Penalty, see §
162.99
§ 162.15 PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS MODIFICATION.
   (A)   The Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals may modify this requirement
to landscape all setbacks and open space areas.
   (B)   The modification may only be approved if the Planning and Zoning Board
of Appeals finds that the project provides:
      (1)   For outdoor dining activities, special paving or other examples of
exceptional architectural quality in the project’s design;
      (2)   A higher overall quality of landscaping design than would normally
be expected for a similar development project; and
      (3)   A superior landscape maintenance plan.
(Prior Code, § 163.15) (Ord. 12-172, passed 3-27-2012; Ord. 2021-024, passed 7-
13-2021)
§ 162.16 INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   All landscape materials required by this chapter must be installed in
accordance with standard practices of horticultural professionals and in good
and workmanlike manner and must be maintained by the property owner in good
condition.
   (B)   All applicants for landscape plan approval must file a maintenance
schedule and a scope of maintenance work with the Community Development
Director.
   (C)   Any damaged or dead trees, shrubs or ground cover must be promptly
replaced.
   (D)   Maintenance of landscaping must include continuous operations of
removal of weeds; mowing; trimming; edging; cultivation; reseeding; plant
replacement; appropriate fertilization; spraying; control of pests, insects and
rodents by non-toxic methods whenever possible; watering and other operations
necessary to assure normal plant growth.
   (E)   The obligation for continuous maintenance is binding on the applicant
for landscape plan approval, to any subsequent property owners or any other
parties having a controlling interest in the property.
(Prior Code, § 163.16) (Ord. 12-172, passed 3-27-2012) Penalty, see §
162.99
§ 162.17 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES.
   (A)   Requirement. A letter of credit, escrow, performance bond or other
surety in an amount equal to 125% of the value of the landscaping, or in an
amount deemed adequate by the Community Development Director, must be approved
by the City Attorney.
   (B)   Applicability. The financial guarantee authorizes the Community
Development Director to use the funds to complete the landscaping installation
and required maintenance practices if the responsible party defaults or does
not properly install or maintain the landscaping.
   (C)   Duration. The financial guarantee must remain in place for one year
after landscape installation to ensure proper maintenance of the landscaping in
accordance with this section.
   (D)   Conditions for release. The Director of Public Works may release the
portion of the financial guarantee established under this section, less any
costs incurred by the Director of Public Works to complete installation of
practices, upon submission of “as-built plans” by an appropriate licensed
professional.
   (E)   Pro-rate release. The Director of Public Works may make provisions for
a partial pro-rata release of the financial guarantee based on the completion
of various development stages.
(Prior Code, § 163.17) (Ord. 12-172, passed 3-27-2012)
§ 162.18 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval and publication in pamphlet form as provided by law. A full, true and
complete copy of this chapter shall be published in pamphlet form, by authority
of the City Council as corporate authorities.
(Prior Code, § 163.18) (Ord. 12-172, passed 3-27-2012)
§ 162.99 PENALTY.
   Any person or entity violating or failing to comply with the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $50, nor
more than $750, for each offense. Each day shall constitute a separate offense.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from pursuing such other lawful
action as is necessary for the restraint, correction and abatement of any
violations.
(Prior Code, § 163.99) (Ord. 12-172, passed 3-27-2012)
CHAPTER 163: FACILITIES IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Section
Construction of Utility Facilities in
the Rights-of-Way
   
163.01   Findings
   
163.02   Purpose and scope
   
163.03   Definitions
   
163.04   Annual registration required
   
163.05   Permit required; applications and fees
   
163.06   Action on permit applications
   
163.07   Effect of permit
   
163.08   Revised permit drawings
   
163.09   Insurance
   
163.10   Indemnification
   
163.11   Security
   
163.12   Permit suspension and revocation
   
163.13   Change of ownership or owner’s identity or legal status
   
163.14   Construction; standards, methods and materials
   
163.15   Traffic control
   
163.16   Location of facilities
   
163.17   Vegetation control
   
163.18   Removal, relocation or modifications of utility facilities
   
163.19   Cleanup and restoration
   
163.20   Maintenance and emergency maintenance
   
163.21   Variances
   
163.22   Effective date
 
   
163.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Building Regulations; Construction, see
Ch. 150
   Streets and Sidewalks, see
Ch. 51
   Water and Sewers, see
Ch. 52
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES
IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY
§ 163.01 FINDINGS.
   (A)   The city is a municipality in accordance with the Constitution of the
State of Illinois of 1970.
   (B)   The city has the authority to adopt ordinances and to promulgate rules
and regulations governing the use of public right-of-way and that protect the
public health, safety and welfare of its citizens.
   (C)   The city uses the public rights-of-way within its corporate limits to
provide essential public services to its residents and businesses, including
traffic- control signals, water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer.
   (D)   Other utility service providers, including electricity, telephone,
natural gas and cable television and video service providers have placed, or
from time to time may request to place, certain utility facilities in the
public rights-of-way within the city.
   (E)   Legislatures and regulatory agencies at the state and federal levels
have implemented changes in the regulatory framework to enhance competition in
the providing of various utility services.
   (F)   The combination of legislative and regulatory changes and the
development of new technologies has led additional service providers to seek
opportunities to provide services in the city.
   (G)   These regulatory and technological changes have resulted in demands
for access to and use of the public rights-of-way in the city as service
providers, particularly in the video and communications services, attempt to
provide new or additional services to compete with incumbent service providers.
   (H)   Unlike prior deregulations of utility services in which incumbent
service providers have been required to make their transmission and/or
distribution systems available to competitors, video and communications
services seeking to compete with incumbent service providers are seeking to
install their own facilities for delivering competing video and communications
services; thereby increasing the number of service providers seeking access to
and use of the public rights-of-way in the city.
   (I)   The public rights-of-way within the city are a limited public resource
held in trust by the city for the benefit of its citizens and the city has a
custodial duty to ensure that the public rights-of-way are used, repaired and
maintained in a manner that best serves the public interest.
   (J)   The corporate authorities of the city find and determine that it is
necessary to and in the best interests of the public health, safety and general
welfare to establish uniform standards and regulations for access to and use of
the public rights-of-way in the city by utility service providers and other
persons and entities that desire to place structures, facilities or equipment
in the public rights-of-way, so as to:
      (1)   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys and
other public ways and places by the city and the general public;
      (2)   Protect against visual and physical obstructions to vehicular and
pedestrian traffic;
      (3)   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
city’s utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in public rights-of-
way or property;
      (4)   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees,
from the installation of utility facilities;
      (5)   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
      (6)   Prevent visual blight; and
      (7)   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to utility facilities locations.
   (K)   This subchapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of:
      (1)   The Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-1-1 et seq., including,
without limitation, 65 ILCS 5/11-20-5, 65 ILCS 5/11-20-10, 65 ILCS 5/11-42-11,
65 ILCS 5/11-42-11.2, 65 ILCS 5/11-80-1, 65 ILCS 5/11-80-3, 65 ILCS 5/11-80-6,
65 ILCS 5/11-80-7, 65 ILCS 5/11-80-8, 65 ILCS 5/11-80-10 and 65 ILCS 5/11-80-
13;
      (2)   Section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 ILCS 65/4;
      (3)   The Illinois Highway Code, including, without limitation, Art. 7
and 9 thereof, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.;
      (4)   The Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act, 35 ILCS 636/5-
1 et seq.; and
      (5)   The Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007, 220 ILCS 5/21-100 et
seq.
   (L)   This subchapter establishes generally applicable standards for
construction on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the public
right-of-way, and for the use of and repair of the public right-of-way.
   (M)   In the enactment of this subchapter, the city has considered a variety
of standards for construction on, over, above, along, under, across, or within,
use of and repair of the public right-of-way, including, but not limited to,
the standards relating to accommodation of utilities on right-of-way of the
Illinois State Highway System promulgated by the State Department of
Transportation and found at 92 Ill. Adm. Code § 530.10 et seq.
   (N)   The city hereby finds that it is in the best interest of the city, the
public and the utilities using the public rights-of-way to establish a
comprehensive set of construction standards and requirements to achieve various
beneficial goals, including, without limitation, enhancing the planning of new
utility facilities; minimizing interference with, and damage to, rights-of-way
and the streets, sidewalks and other structures and improvements located in,
on, over and above the rights-of-way; and reducing costs and expenses to the
public.
   (O)   All prior city utility rights of way ordinances or cable televisions
ordinances, including Ord. 2450, 01-360, 2001-375, 2001-376 and 2001-377, are
hereby amended by the adoption of this subchapter, and where inconsistent with
this subchapter, this subchapter shall supersede said prior ordinance or
ordinances, as follows.
(Prior Code, § 164.01) (Ord. 07-103, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 163.02 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the city’s
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage and visual qualities of the city
rights-of-way and the city as a whole.
   (B)   Intent. In enacting this subchapter, the city intends to exercise its
authority over the rights-of-way in the city and, in particular, the use of the
public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to
address issues presented by utility facilities, including without limitation:
      (1)   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
      (2)   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      (3)   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
city’s utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or
public property;
      (4)   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees,
from the installation of utility facilities;
      (5)   Protect against increased storm water run-off due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
      (6)   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
      (7)   Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined parkways that
characterize the city’s residential neighborhoods;
      (8)   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the
rights-of-way; and
      (9)   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to utility facilities locations.
   (C)   Facilities subject to this subchapter. This subchapter applies to all
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the rights-of-
way within the jurisdiction of the city. A facility lawfully established prior
to the effective date of this subchapter may continue to be maintained,
repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located,
except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or
similar agreement.
   (D)   Franchises, licenses or similar agreements. The city, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the city
rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the city enter into such an agreement. In such an
agreement, the city may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this
subchapter.
   (E)   Effect of franchises, licenses or similar agreements.
      (1)   Utilities other than telecommunications providers. In the event
that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise,
license or similar agreement with the city, such franchise, license or similar
agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any
lawful renewal or extension thereof.
      (2)   Telecommunications providers. In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this subchapter and the provisions of
any franchise, license or similar agreement between the city and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   (F)   Conflicts with other ordinance. This subchapter supersedes all
ordinance or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict
herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
   (G)   Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
subchapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this subchapter
to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or
regulations.
   (H)   Sound engineering judgment.
      (1)   The city shall use sound engineering judgment when administering
this subchapter and may vary the standards, conditions and requirements
expressed in this subchapter when the city so determines.
      (2)   Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the city
to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health, safety
and welfare.
(Prior Code, § 164.02) (Ord. 07-103, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 163.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Any term
not defined in this subchapter shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Ill.
Adm. Code § 530.30, unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
   AASHTO. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
   ANSI. American National Standards Institute.
   APPLICANT. A person applying for a permit under this subchapter.
   ASTM. American Society for Testing and Materials.
   BACKFILL. The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a
trench or pit.
   BORE or BORING. To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the
insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
   CABLE OPERATOR. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(5).
   CABLE SERVICE. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).
   CABLE SYSTEM. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(7).
   CARRIER PIPE. The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be
transported.
   CASING. A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as:
carrier pipes; electrical conductors; and fiber optic devices.
   CITY. The City of Blue Island.
   CLEAR ZONE. The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope and a clear run-out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design
Guide.
   COATING. Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
   CODE. The municipal code of the City of Blue Island.
   CONDUCTOR. Wire carrying electrical current.
   CONDUIT. A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
   CONSTRUCTION or CONSTRUCT. The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of
facilities.
   COVER. The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
   CROSSING FACILITY. A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way lines of
a right-of-way.
   BUILDING DEPARTMENT COMMISSIONER. The City Building Department Commissioner
or his or her designee.
   DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY. For the purposes of this subchapter, any work that
obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of
the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage
to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include
the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially
obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
   EMERGENCY. Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety
of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
   ENCASEMENT. Provision of a protective casing.
   ENGINEER. The City Engineer or his or her designee.
   EQUIPMENT. Materials, tools, implements, supplies and/or other items used to
facilitate construction of facilities.
   EXCAVATION. The making of a hole or cavity by removing material or laying
bare by digging.
   EXTRA HEAVY PIPE. Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
   FACILITY. All structures, devices, objects and materials (including, but not
limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults,
boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates,
covers, pipes, cables and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across or within rights-of-way under this subchapter. For
purposes of this subchapter, the term FACILITY shall not include any facility
owned or operated by the city.
   FREESTANDING FACILITY. A facility that is not a crossing facility or a
parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump or meter station.
   FRONTAGE ROAD. Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent
to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location or other characteristics, is determined by the
City Building Department Commissioner to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk
to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological
balance of the environment, including, but not limited to, explosives,
radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons,
etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance
determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or
regulation.
   HIGHWAY. A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic
including rural or urban roads or streets. HIGHWAY includes all highway land
and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges,
drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
   HIGHWAY CODE. The Illinois Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., as
amended from time to time.
   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable and
Video Competition Law, 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
   IDOT. Illinois Department of Transportation.
   ICC. Illinois Commerce Commission.
   JACKING. Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means
with or without boring.
   JETTING. Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to
create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
   JOINT USE. The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two or
more utilities.
   J.U.L.I.E. The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators utility
notification program.
   MAJOR INTERSECTION. The intersection of two or more major arterial highways.
   OCCUPANCY. The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way.
   PARALLEL FACILITY. A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to
the centerline of a right-of-way.
   PARKWAY. Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk.
   PAVEMENT CUT. The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or
for the construction of a facility.
   PERMITTEE. That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to §§
163.05 and
163.06 of this chapter.
   PRACTICABLE. That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than
that which is simply convenient.
   PRESSURE. The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
   PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES. Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane or coal-slurry.
   PROMPT. That which is done within a period of time specified by the city. If
no time period is specified, the period shall be 30 days.
   PUBLIC ENTITY. A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at local, state or federal level.
   RESTORATION. The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway or other area
disrupted by the construction of a facility.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY. Any street, alley, other land or waterway,
dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar
purposes, including utility easements, in which the city has the right and
authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other
than those of the city. RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF- WAY shall not include any
real or personal city property that is not specifically described in the
previous two sentences and shall not include city buildings, fixtures and other
structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the
RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   ROADWAY. The part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
   SECURITY FUND. The amount of security required pursuant to §
163.11 of this chapter.
   SHOULDER. A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
   SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT. A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted
engineering principles, practices and experience.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer
exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile
telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any
other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite or similar facilities. “Private line” means a dedicated non-traffic
sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive
or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from
one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include value added services in which computer
processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol
of the information for purposes other than transmission. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications
service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such
provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-
to-end communications. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include the provision of
cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications
Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. §§ 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or
cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable
to the city through an open video system as defined in the rules of the Federal
Communications Commission (47 C.F.R. §§ 76.1500 and following), as now or
hereafter amended.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER. Any person that installs, owns, operates or
controls facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be used to transmit
telecommunications in any form.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER. Every person engaged in making sales of
telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
   TRENCH. A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
   UTILITY. The individual or entity owning or operating any facility as
defined in this subchapter.
   VENT. A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
   VIDEO SERVICE. The term as defined in § 21-201(v) of the Illinois Cable and
Video Competition Law of 2007, 220 ILCS 5/21-201(v).
   WATER LINES. Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
   WET BORING. Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.
(Prior Code, § 164.03) (Ord. 07-103, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 163.04 ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the city shall register on
January 1 of each year with the Building Department Commissioner, providing the
utility’s name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers,
the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in
connection with emergencies involving the utility’s facilities in the right-of-
way and a 24-hour telephone number for each such person, and evidence of
insurance as required in §
163.09 of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance.
(Prior Code, § 164.04) (Ord. 07-103, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 163.05 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES.
   (A)   Permit required.
      (1)   No person shall construct (as defined in this subchapter) any
facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within any city right-
of-way which does the following without first filing an application with the
City Building Department Commissioner and obtaining a permit from the city
therefor, except as otherwise provided in this subchapter:
         (a)   Changes the location of the facility;
         (b)   Adds a new facility;
         (c)   Disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this subchapter); or
         (d)   Materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the
facility on, over, above, along, under across or within the right-of-way.
      (2)   No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of
service connections to customers’ premises where there will be no disruption of
the right-of-way.
   (B)   Permit application. All applications for permits pursuant to this
subchapter shall be filed on a form provided by the city and shall be filed in
such number of duplicate copies as the city may designate. The applicant may
designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably
believes contain proprietary or confidential information as “proprietary” or
“confidential” by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
   (C)   Minimum general application requirements. The application shall be
made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at
a minimum, the following:
      (1)   The utility’s name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
      (2)   The applicant’s name and address, if different than the utility,
its telephone, telecopy numbers, email address and its interest in the work;
      (3)   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and email
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
      (4)   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      (5)   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the city:
         (a)   A written traffic-control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual
on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
         (b)   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the city and shall promote
protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC
regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this
chapter unless the city finds that additional information or assurances are
needed;
      (6)   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules and regulations;
      (7)   Evidence of insurance as required in §
163.09 of this chapter;
      (8)   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in §
163.09 of this chapter;
      (9)   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of §
163.21 of this chapter; and
      (10)   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
city.
   (D)   Supplemental application requirements for specific types of utilities.
In addition to the requirements of division (C) above, the permit application
shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific utility that
is the subject of the permit application:
      (1)   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or
natural gas distribution system, evidence that any “certificate of public
convenience and necessity” or other regulatory authorization that the applicant
is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has
been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
      (2)   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class and operating pressures;
      (3)   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies,
have been satisfied;
      (4)   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency,
Division of Water Pollution Control and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation
District, or other local or state entities with jurisdiction, have been
satisfied; or
      (5)   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or
types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure and the design
standard to be followed.
   (E)   Applicant’s duty to update information. Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the utility in writing to the city within 30 days after the change
necessitating the amendment.
   (F)   Application fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this subchapter
shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $125. No application fee is
required to be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the municipal
electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity
Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Law, 35 ILCS 645/5-1 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 164.05) (Ord. 07-103, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 163.06 ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   City review of permit applications. Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the City Building
Department Commissioner within a reasonable time after filing. If the
application does not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances,
codes, laws, rules and regulations, the City Building Department Commissioner
shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the
City Building Department Commissioner is satisfied that the proposed work
conforms to the requirements of this subchapter and applicable ordinances,
codes, laws, rules and regulations, the City Building Department Commissioner
shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it
shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the
City Building Department Commissioner, that the construction proposed under the
application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this
subchapter.
   (B)   Additional city review of applications of telecommunications
retailers.
      (1)   Pursuant to the Telephone Company Act, 220 ILCS 65/4, a
telecommunications retailer shall notify the city that it intends to commence
work governed by this subchapter for facilities for the provision of
telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans, specifications
and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the
facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications retailer to the
city not less than ten days prior to the commencement of work requiring no
excavation and not less than 30 days prior to the commencement of work
requiring excavation. The City Building Department Commissioner shall specify
the portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility may be placed, used and
constructed.
      (2)   In the event that the City Building Department Commissioner fails
to provide such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer
within either ten days after service of notice to the city by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for
new construction or 25 days after service of notice by the telecommunications
retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new construction, the
telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under
this subchapter.
      (3)   Upon the provision of such specification by the city, where a
permit is required for work pursuant to §
163.05 of this chapter, the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the
city an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such
application shall be subject to the requirements of division (A) above.
   (C)   Additional city review of applications of holders of state
authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007. Applications
by a utility that is a holder of a state-issued authorization under the Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007, 220 ILCS 5/21-100 et seq., shall be deemed
granted 45 days after submission to the city, unless otherwise acted upon by
the city; provided, the holder has complied with applicable city codes,
ordinances and regulations.
(Prior Code, § 164.06) (Ord. 07-103, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 163.07 EFFECT OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Authority granted; no property right or other interest created. A
permit from the city authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this subchapter on city rights-of-way, and does
not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon
the rights of others who may have an interest in the rights-of-way.
   (B)   Duration. No permit issued under this subchapter shall be valid for a
period longer than six months unless construction is actually begun within that
period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
   (C)   Pre-construction meeting required. No construction shall begin
pursuant to a permit issued under this subchapter prior to attendance by the
permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any
work under the permit at a pre-construction meeting. The pre-construction
meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the city with
such city representatives in attendance as the city deems necessary. The
meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and
reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur,
including, without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities
in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other
utilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access
and egress by adjacent property owners.
   (D)   Compliance with all laws required. The issuance of a permit by the
city does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the city and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.
(Prior Code, § 164.07) (Ord. 07-103, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 163.08 REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS.
   In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the city within 90 days after the
completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall
specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from
the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also
deviates from the requirements of this subchapter, it shall be treated as a
request for variance in accordance with §
163.21 of this chapter. If the city denies the request for a variance, then the
permittee shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the
facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans
therefor.
(Prior Code, § 164.08) (Ord. 07-103, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 163.09 INSURANCE.
   (A)   Required coverages and limits.
      (1)   Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license or similar
agreement, each utility occupying the right-of-way or constructing any facility
in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance
policies insuring the utility as named insured and naming the city, and its
elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees as additional
insureds on the policies listed in divisions (A)(1)(a) and (A)(1)(b) below:
         (a)   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse and underground hazard (commonly referred to as
“X”, “C” and “U” coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with
limits not less than:
            1.   Five million dollars for bodily injury or death to each
person;
            2.   Five million dollars for property damage resulting from any
one accident; and
            3.   Five million dollars for all other types of liability.
         (b)   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles
with a combined single limit of $1,000,000 for personal injury and property
damage for each accident;
         (c)   Worker’s compensation with statutory limits; and
         (d)   Employer’s liability insurance with limits of not less than
$1,000,000 per employee and per accident.
      (2)   If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the
contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this section.
   (B)   Excess or umbrella policies. The coverages required by this section
may be in any combination of primary, excess and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   (C)   Copies required. The utility shall provide copies of any of the
policies required by this section to the city within ten days following receipt
of a written request therefor from the city.
   (D)   Maintenance and renewal of required coverages.
      (1)   The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the
following endorsement:
         “It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be
canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until 30 days after receipt
by the city, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of
a written notice addressed to the City Mayor of such intent to cancel or not to
renew.”
      (2)   Within ten days after receipt by the city of said notice, and in no
event later than ten days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain
and furnish to the city evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the
requirements of this section.
   (E)   Self-insurance. A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required by division (A) above. A
utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-
insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds
under division (A) above, or the requirements of divisions (B), (C) and (D)
above. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the city evidence
sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance
coverage and limit requirements required under division (A) above, such as
evidence that the utility is a “private self insurer” under the Workers’
Compensation Act, 820 ILCS 305.
   (F)   Effect of insurance and self-insurance on utility’s liability. The
legal liability of the utility to the city and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or
self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
   (G)   Insurance companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this section
shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the state. (All insurance
carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated “A-“ or better and of a class
size “X” or higher by A.M. Best Company.)
(Prior Code, § 164.09) (Ord. 07-103, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 163.10 INDEMNIFICATION.
   By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility shall
be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the city and its elected and
appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives
harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs of
suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or
result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to
act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees,
agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or
occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the
facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or
prohibited by this subchapter or by a franchise, license or similar agreement;
provided, however, that the utility’s indemnity obligations hereunder shall not
apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses
arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this
subchapter by the city, its officials, officers, employees, agents or
representatives.
(Prior Code, § 164.10) (Ord. 07-103, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 163.11 SECURITY.
   (A)   Purpose. The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a form and
in an amount as set forth in this section. The Security Fund shall be
continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee’s sole
cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit.
The Security Fund shall serve as security for:
      (1)   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements
of this subchapter;
      (2)   Any expenditure, damage or loss incurred by the city occasioned by
the permittee’s failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders,
permits and other directives of the city issued pursuant to this subchapter;
and
      (3)   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs or expenses that the city may pay or incur by reason of any action or
non- performance by permittee in violation of this subchapter including,
without limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the
permittee is required by this subchapter to perform that the city must perform
itself or have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee’s failure to
perform or complete, and all other payments due the city from the permittee
pursuant to this subchapter or any other applicable law.
   (B)   Form. The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the city in the
form, at the permittee’s election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable
to the city, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the
city, in an amount of not less than $20,000 per location. Any surety bond or
letter of credit provided pursuant to this division (B) shall, at a minimum:
      (1)   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
city and the permittee;
      (2)   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the city of any amounts covered by it; and
      (3)   Shall provide a location convenient to the city and within the
state at which it can be drawn.
   (C)   Amount. The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the City Building Department Commissioner, and may
also include reasonable, directly related costs that the city estimates are
likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. In no
event shall said Security Fund be in an amount of less than $20,000 per work
location. Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will
be performed in phases in multiple locations in the city, with each phase
consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a related group of
locations, and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior
to substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the
City Building Department Commissioner may, in the exercise of sound discretion,
allow the permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be
applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of
the Security Fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount
that would have been required under the provisions of this division (C) for any
single phase.
   (D)   Withdrawals. The city, upon 14 days’ advance written notice clearly
stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights under
this division (D), may withdraw an amount from the Security Fund; provided
that, the permittee has not reimbursed the city for such amount within the 14-
day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
      (1)   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      (2)   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      (3)   Fails to reimburse the city for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the city has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or non-performance by the permittee; or
      (4)   Fails to comply with any provision of this subchapter that the city
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the Security Fund.
   (E)   Replenishment. Within 14 days after receipt of written notice from the
city that any amount has been withdrawn from the Security Fund, the permittee
shall restore the Security Fund to the amount specified in division (C) above.
   (F)   Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the Security Fund be returned to the permittee by the city,
upon written request for said withdrawal to the city; provided that, any such
withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the minimum balance required
in division (C) above.
   (G)   Closing and return of security fund. Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the Security Fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the city for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
subchapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the
permit, the Security Fund and any and all accrued interest therein shall become
the property of the city to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the city as a result of said revocation; provided
that, any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.
   (H)   Rights not limited. The rights reserved to the city with respect to
the Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether
reserved by this subchapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund shall affect
any other right the city may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city
shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its
rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated.
(Prior Code, § 164.11) (Ord. 07-103, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 163.12 PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   City right to revoke permit. The city may revoke or suspend a permit
issued pursuant to this subchapter for one or more of the following reasons:
      (1)   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      (2)   Non-compliance with this subchapter;
      (3)   Permittee’s physical presence or presence of permittee’s facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the rights-of-way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety or welfare;
or
      (4)   Permittee’s failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   (B)   Notice of revocation or suspension. The city shall send written notice
of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this subchapter
stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this section.
   (C)   Permittee alternatives upon receipt of notice of revocation or
suspension.
      (1)   Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the city, the permittee shall have the following options:
         (a)   Immediately provide the city with evidence that no cause exists
for the revocation or suspension;
         (b)   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the city, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the city within five working days after receipt of the written
notice of revocation; or
         (c)   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across or within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-
of-way to the satisfaction of the city providing written proof of such removal
to the city within ten days after receipt of the written notice of revocation.
      (2)   The city may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the
time periods provided in this division (C).
   (D)   Stop work order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the city may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery
of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within division (A) above.
   (E)   Failure or refusal of the permittee to comply.
      (1)   If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of division
(C) above, the city or its designee may, at the option of the city:
         (a)   Correct the deficiencies;
         (b)   Upon not less than 20 days’ notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or
         (c)   After not less than 30 days’ notice to the permittee of failure
to cure the non-compliance, deem them abandoned and property of the city.
      (2)   The permittee shall be liable in all events to the city for all
costs of removal.
(Prior Code, § 164.12) (Ord. 07-103, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 163.13 CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER’S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS.
   (A)   Notification of change. A utility shall notify the city no less than
30 days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right-of-way
or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or the
facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former
owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations, including this subchapter, with respect to the work and facilities
in the right-of-way.
   (B)   Amended permit. A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the city’s right-of-
way.
   (C)   Insurance and bonding. All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.
(Prior Code, § 164.13) (Ord. 07-103, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 163.14 CONSTRUCTION; STANDARDS, METHODS AND MATERIALS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Standards and principles. All construction in the right-of-way
shall be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws rules and
regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and
construction principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the
principles and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as
amended from time to time:
         (a)   Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;
         (b)   Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;
         (c)   Highway Design Manual;
         (d)   Highway Standards Manual;
         (e)   Standard Specifications for Traffic- Control Items;
         (f)   Applicable state law;
         (g)   Flagger’s Handbook; and
         (h)   Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations.
      (2)   Interpretation of municipal standards and principles. If a
discrepancy exists between or among differing principles and standards required
by this subchapter, the City Building Department Commissioner shall determine,
in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such
decision shall be final. If requested, the City Building Department
Commissioner shall state which standard or principle will apply to the
construction, maintenance or operation of a facility in the future.
   (B)   Methods and materials.
      (1)   Standards and requirements for particular types of construction
methods.
         (a)   Boring or jacking.
            1.   Pits and shoring. Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall
be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the City
Director of Public Works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or
jacking shall be excavated no more than 48 hours in advance of boring or
jacking operations and backfilled within 48 hours after boring or jacking
operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and
protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced
and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads
that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
            2.   Wet boring or jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
            3.   Borings with diameters greater than six inches. Borings over
six inches (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside
diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (25 mm).
            4.   Borings with diameters six inches or less. Borings of six
inches or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with
auger or auger and following pipe method.
            5.   Tree preservation. Any facility located within the drip line
of any tree designated by the city to be preserved or protected shall be bored
under or around the root system.
         (b)   Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair or
maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of § 603 of IDOT’s “Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction.”
            1.   Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only
one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special
permission is obtained from the City Building Department Commissioner.
            2.   Open trench and excavated material. Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by applicable state law.
Where practicable, the excavated material shall be deposited between the
roadway and the trench as added protection. Excavated material shall not be
allowed to remain on the paved portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width
does not allow for windrowing excavated material off the paved portion of the
roadway, excavated material shall be hauled to an off-road location.
            3.   Drip line of trees. The utility shall not trench within the
drip line of any tree designated by the city to be preserved.
         (c)   Backfilling.
            1.   Any pit, trench or excavation created during the installation
of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT’s Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction. When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
            2.   For a period of three years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the Building Department Commissioner, the utility, at its expense,
shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed
facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new
pavement, sidewalk, curbs and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by
the Building Department Commissioner.
         (d)   Pavement cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this division (B)(1)
(d) is permitted under §
163.21 of this chapter, the following requirements shall apply.
            1.   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and
compacted as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10
gradation, as designated by the Building Department Commissioner.
            2.   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as
soon as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be
provided immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or
the restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the city.
            3.   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
            4.   For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven years, or resurfaced in the last three
years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an
emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before the
time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
J.U.L.I.E. locate.
         (e)   Encasement.
            1.   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
city.
            2.   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No above-ground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of
the highway.
            3.   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement
shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or city approved
jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is
installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the city. Bell and spigot type pipe
shall be encased regardless of installation method.
            4.   In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less, encasement
may be eliminated.
            5.   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines
with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be eliminated only if:
               a.   Extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance
or repair; and
               b.   Cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
            6.   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right-of-way.
         (f)   Minimum cover of underground facilities. Cover shall be provided
and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for
minimum cover for the type of facility:
 
Type of Facility                      Minimum Cover
Communication, cable or video service 18 to 24 Inches (0.6 m, as determined by
lines                                 city)
Electric lines                        30 inches (0.8 m)
Gas or petroleum products             30 inches (0.8 m)
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or       Sufficient cover to provide freeze
drainage line                         protection
Water line                            Sufficient cover to provide freeze
                                      protection
 
      (2)   Standards and requirements for particular types of facilities.
         (a)   Electric power or communication lines.
            1.   Code compliance. Electric power or communications facilities
within city rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code part 305 (formerly General
Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled “Rules for Construction
of Electric Power and Communications Lines” and the National Electrical Safety
Code.
            2.   Overhead facilities. Overhead power or communication
facilities shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use
of poles shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design
the installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be
allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with
guy guards for maximum visibility.
            3.   Underground facilities.
               a.   Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing; provided
that, special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
               b.   If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if:
                  i.   The crossing is installed by the use of “moles”, “whip
augers” or other approved method which compress the earth to make the opening
for cable installation; or
                  ii.   The installation is by the open trench method which is
only permitted prior to roadway construction.
               c.   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National
Electrical Safety Code.
            4.   Burial of drops. All temporary service drops placed between
November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting,
unless otherwise permitted by the city. Weather permitting, utilities shall
bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten business days after
placement.
         (b)   Underground facilities other than electric power or
communication lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or
communication lines may be installed by:
            1.   The use of “moles”, “whip augers” or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
            2.   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
            3.   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch
lines or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
            4.   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is
not possible by other means.
         (c)   Gas transmission, distribution and service. Gas pipelines within
rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained and operated in a city approved
manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of Pipeline
Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192, Transportation of
Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety Standards (49 C.F.R.
part 192), IDOT’s Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, and
all other applicable laws, rules and regulations.
         (d)   Petroleum products pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines
within rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard
Code for Pressure Piping. (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-
B31.4).
         (e)   Waterlines, sanitary sewer lines, storm water sewer lines or
drainage lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines and
drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of
the current Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Illinois.
         (f)   Ground mounted appurtenances. Ground mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall
be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one foot (305 mm) in width
beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may be
provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or
similar material approved by the Building Department Commissioner. With the
approval of the Building Department Commissioner, shrubbery surrounding the
appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation-free area. The housing for
ground-mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the
surroundings.
      (3)   Materials.
         (a)   General standards. The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT’s Standards
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, the requirements of the
Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
         (b)   Material storage on right-of-way. No material shall be stored on
the right-of-way without the prior written approval of the City Building
Department Commissioner. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit,
wire, poles, cross arms or other materials shall be distributed along the
right-of-way prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards
to the public or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the
right-of-way and other property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way,
prior approval must be obtained from the city.
         (c)   Hazardous materials. The plans submitted by the utility to the
city shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the
construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
      (4)   Operational restrictions.
         (a)   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion
of the city, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other
property.
         (b)   These restrictions may be waived by the Building Department
Commissioner when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
         (c)   Unless otherwise permitted by the city, the hours of
construction are those set forth in city code.
         (e)   Location of existing facilities. Any utility proposing to
construct facilities in the city shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain the
presence and location of existing above-ground and underground facilities
within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The city
will make its permit records available to a utility for the purpose of
identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when
requested by the city or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and physically
mark its underground facilities within 48 hours, excluding weekends and
holidays, in accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage
Prevention Act (220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.).
(Prior Code, § 164.14) (Ord. 07-103, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 163.15 TRAFFIC CONTROL.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. The city’s minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT’s Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control
Devices and this code.
   (B)   Warning signs, protective devices and flaggers. The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility’s workers when
performing any work on the rights-of-way.
   (C)   Interference with traffic. All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   (D)   Notice when access is blocked. At least 48 hours prior to beginning
work that will partially or completely block access to any residence, business
or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution
of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided, however,
that, in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to §
163.20 of this chapter, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable
under the circumstances.
   (E)   Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility’s attention by the city.
(Prior Code, § 164.15) (Ord. 07-103, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 163.16 LOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   General requirements. In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of
type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this division
(A).
      (1)   No interference with city facilities. No utility facilities shall
be placed in any location if the City Building Department Commissioner
determines that the proposed location will require the relocation or
displacement of any of the city’s utility facilities or will otherwise
interfere with the operation or maintenance of any of the city’s utility
facilities.
      (2)   Minimum interference and impact. The proposed location shall cause
only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right-of-
way.
      (3)   No interference with travel. No utility facility shall be placed in
any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way.
      (4)   No limitations on visibility. No utility facility shall be placed
in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way.
      (5)   Size of utility facilities. The proposed installation shall use the
smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the
particular application.
   (B)   Parallel facilities located within highways.
      (1)   Overhead parallel facilities. An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way
line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole
alignment will permit;
         (b)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable
from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (0.6 m) behind the face of
the curb, where available;
         (c)   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         (d)   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         (e)   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (0.3
m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way line.
      (2)   Underground parallel facilities. An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (2.4 m) from and parallel to the
right- of-way line;
         (b)   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         (c)   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not
more than five feet (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line and any above-grounded
appurtenance shall be located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line
or as near as practicable.
   (C)   Facilities crossing highways.
      (1)   No future disruption. The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of city highways may
require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or
additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      (2)   Cattle passes, culverts or drainage facilities. Crossing facilities
shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts or drainage facilities.
      (3)   Ninety-degree crossing required. Crossing facilities shall cross at
or as near to a 90- degree angle to the centerline as practicable.
      (4)   Overhead power or communication facility. An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC’s
rules entitled, “Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines” (83
Ill. Adm. Code part 305);
         (b)   Poles are located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way
line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         (c)   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      (5)   Underground power or communication facility. An underground power
or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance-free service life; and
         (b)   Capacity for the utility’s foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      (6)   Markers. The city may require the utility to provide a marker at
each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current federal regulations (49 C.F.R. § 192.707).
   (D)   Facilities to be located within particular rights-of-way. The city may
require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are not
highways, rather than within particular highways.
   (E)   Freestanding facilities.
      (1)   The city may restrict the location and size of any freestanding
facility located within a right-of-way.
      (2)   The city may require any freestanding facility located within a
right-of-way to be screened from view.
   (F)   Facilities installed above ground. Above ground facilities may be
installed only if:
      (1)   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      (2)   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
      (3)   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever
practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly
discouraged.
   (G)   Facility attachments to bridges or roadway structures.
      (1)   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not
permitted.
      (2)   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         (a)   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         (b)   The type, length, value and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         (c)   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         (d)   The proposed method of attachment;
         (e)   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         (f)   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         (g)   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         (h)   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved.
   (H)   Appearance standards.
      (1)   The city may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular
locations in order to preserve visual quality.
      (2)   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it
does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.
(Prior Code, § 164.16) (Ord. 07-103, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 163.17 VEGETATION CONTROL.
   (A)   Electric utilities; compliance with state laws and regulations. An
electric utility shall conduct all tree-trimming and vegetation control
activities in the right-of-way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and
regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement
with the city as permitted by law.
   (B)   Other utilities; tree trimming permit required. Tree trimming that is
done by any other utility with facilities in the right-of-way and that is not
performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically
governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but
shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition
to any other permit required under this subchapter.
      (1)   Application for tree trimming permit. Applications for tree
trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by
competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      (2)   Damage to trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The city will require
compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed without
authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The city may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
   (C)   Specimen trees or trees of special significance. The city may require
that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special
significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm
extensions, covered wire or other means.
   (D)   Chemical use.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (D)(2) below, no utility shall
spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation
in the city for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or
disease.
      (2)   Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be
permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction
of the Building Department Commissioner that such spraying is the only
practicable method of vegetation control.
(Prior Code, § 164.17) (Ord. 07-103, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 163.18 REMOVAL, RELOCATION OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES.
   (A)   Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the city, a
utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently
disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility
facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate authorities have
determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably
necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any city
improvement in or upon, or the operations of the city in or upon, the rights-
of-way.
   (B)   Removal of unauthorized facilities. Within 30 days following written
notice from the city, any utility that owns, controls or maintains any
unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights-of-way shall,
at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances
from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in
the following circumstances:
      (1)   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee’s license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      (2)   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior
grant of a license or franchise, if required;
      (3)   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this subchapter; or
      (4)   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee’s license or franchise.
   (C)   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The city retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-
way of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary, appropriate or
useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances
permit, the city shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to
cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after
cutting or removing a facility.
   (D)   Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility within the
rights-of-way of the city, the utility shall notify the city within 90 days.
Following receipt of such notice the city may direct the utility to remove all
or any portion of the facility if the City Building Department Commissioner
determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health,
safety and welfare. In the event that the city does not direct the utility that
abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the
city, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or
removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person.
(Prior Code, § 164.18) (Ord. 07-103, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 163.19 CLEANUP AND RESTORATION.
   The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and
terrain and other property within ten days after any portion of the rights-of-
way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by
the utility, all to the satisfaction of the city. This includes restoration of
entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using
materials and methods approved by the City Building Department Commissioner.
Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading,
reseeding, resodding or any other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a
condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the
commencement of the project. The time period provided in this section may be
extended by the City Building Department Commissioner for good cause shown.
(Prior Code, § 164.19) (Ord. 07-103, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 163.20 MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or
within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the city and at the utility’s expense.
   (B)   Emergency maintenance procedures. Emergencies may justify non-
compliance with normal procedures for securing a permit.
      (1)   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does
not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
      (2)   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the
City Building Department Commissioner or his or her duly authorized agent of
the emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for
protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the
necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with
the free movement of traffic, the city police shall be notified immediately.
      (3)   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to
complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to
the traveling public.
   (C)   Emergency repairs. The utility must file in writing with the city a
description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within 48 hours after
an emergency repair.
(Prior Code, § 164.20) (Ord. 07-103, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 163.21 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Request for variance. A utility requesting a variance from one or more
of the provisions of this subchapter must do so in writing to the City Building
Department Commissioner as a part of the permit application. The request shall
identify each provision of this subchapter from which a variance is requested
and the reasons why a variance should be granted.
   (B)   Authority to grant variances. The City Building Department
Commissioner shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision
of this subchapter identified in the variance request on an individual basis.
   (C)   Conditions for granting of variance. The City Building Department
Commissioner may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the
variance has demonstrated that:
      (1)   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such
as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special
hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the
public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      (2)   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   (D)   Additional conditions for granting of a variance. As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the City Building Department Commissioner may require
the utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions
that may or may not be expressly contained within this subchapter but which
carry out the purposes of this subchapter.
   (E)   Right to appeal. Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement,
decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the City
Building Department Commissioner under the provisions of this subchapter shall
have the right to appeal to the City Council, or such other board or commission
as it may designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing
to the City Clerk within 30 days after the date of such order, requirement,
decision or determination. The City Council shall commence its consideration of
the appeal at the Council’s next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least
seven days after the filing of the appeal. The City Council shall timely decide
the appeal.
(Prior Code, § 164.21) (Ord. 07-103, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 163.22 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall take effect ten days after its passage, approval and
publication in pamphlet form.
(Prior Code, § 164.22) (Ord. 07-103, passed 10-9-2007)
§ 163.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violated any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to
comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in
accordance with the penalty provisions of this code. There may be times when
the city will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because
the utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this
subchapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of
undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the
city’s costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying,
relocating or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other
administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related
cost apportionment of the city. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that
does not pay the costs apportioned to it.
      (2)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as limiting any
additional or further remedies that the city may have for enforcement of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 164.99) (Ord. 07-103, passed 10-9-2007)
CHAPTER 164: VACANT PROPERTIES; PRIORITY LIEN PROCEDURES
Section
General Provisions
   
164.01   Findings
   
164.02   Title
   
164.03   Scope
   
164.04   Other ordinances
   
164.05   Definitions
   
164.06   Determination
   
164.07   Inspection fees
   
164.08   Appeal of determination
   
164.09   Enforcement
   
164.10   Certification
   
164.11   Boarding of buildings
   
164.12   Notice to City Council
Rules and Regulations
   
164.25   Obligation to register
   
164.26   Registration requirements
   
164.27   Inspection
   
164.28   Insurance
   
164.29   Vacant building plan
   
164.30   Security guard service
Plan Approval
   
164.45   Review of building plan
   
164.46   Standards for plan approval
   
164.47   Authority to modify plan
   
164.48   Appeal
   
164.49   Failure to comply with vacant building plan
Property Maintenance
   
164.60   Nuisance abatement
   
164.61   Charges for nuisance abatement
   
164.62   Traditional lien procedure
   
164.63   Property lien procedure
 
   
164.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 164.01 FINDINGS.
   (A)   This chapter is intended as, and is in the exercise of certain powers
and functions pertaining to the government and affairs of the city.
   (B)   Buildings that are indefinitely vacant or in a state of disrepair or
boarded are public nuisances in that they contribute to the decrease in value
of surrounding properties, precipitate disinvestment by neighboring owners,
provide a location for criminal activity, undermine the aesthetic character of
the neighborhood and city, and have other undesirable effects.
   (C)   Vacant buildings, especially those which remain boarded for more than
three months, are unsightly and diminish neighboring-property values and
neighbors’ sense of well-being and are a public nuisance.
   (D)   Allowing certain buildings to remain indefinitely vacant even in the
absence of code violations or boarding is detrimental to the public health,
safety and welfare; unreasonably interferes with the reasonable and lawful use
and enjoyment of other premises within the neighborhood; may pose an
extraordinary danger to police officers or firefighters entering the premises
in time of emergency; and detracts from the appearance and good order of the
neighborhood; all of which are especially associated with such buildings which
have been vacant for over two years.
   (E)   Registration of vacant properties and implementation of a maintenance
plan will discourage property owners from allowing their properties to remain
indefinitely vacant or in a state of disrepair and will thereby provide a basis
for the return of vacant properties to the housing stock.
   (F)   The city has the authority to regulate the maintenance of properties
and buildings within the city in order to protect the public health, safety and
welfare of its citizens.
   (G)   The definition, prohibition and abatement of public nuisances pertain
to the government and affairs of the city.
   (H)   The city has statutory power to define, prohibit and abate public
nuisances pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-60-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code.
   (I)   The City Council adopts the “broken window” concept among the rational
for this chapter. The “broken window” concept is that one broken window, left
unrepaired, leads to more broken windows as it gives the appearance that no one
cares or protects the property; that the building becomes increasingly more
deteriorated, and that the deterioration may have a ripple effect.
   (I)   The abatement of nuisances caused by vacant buildings, repair and
rehabilitation of vacant properties and their subsequent occupancy is in the
best interests of the citizens of the city.
   (J)   An ordinance providing for the declaration of certain boarded and/or
vacant buildings as a public nuisance and providing for their abatement is a
means for the city to use in maintaining sanitation and health standards,
preventing crime and avoiding fire, health, and safety hazards and minimizing
or eliminating the effect such buildings have on the personal and economic
well-being of the neighborhood.
   (K)   Various state statutes authorize the city to provide for the removal
of certain nuisances from private properties within the city, including cutting
and removal of neglected weeds, grass, trees and bushes, 65 ILCS 5/11-20-7,
pest control activities, 65 ILCS 5/11-20-8, removal of infected trees, 65 ILCS
5/11-20-12, removal of garbage, debris and graffiti, 65 ILCS 5/11-13, and
removal, securing and enclosing abandoned residential properties, 65 ILCS 5/11-
20-15.1.
   (L)   The city incurs costs in abating these nuisances by performing
property maintenance activities on these properties.
   (M)   Section 11-20-15 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/11-20-15,
authorizes municipalities to record traditional liens against a property for
these nuisance abatement and property maintenance costs.
   (N)   The Illinois General Assembly recently adopted 65 ILCS 5/11-20-15.1,
effective 3-1-2010, authorizing municipalities to record “priority liens”
against abandoned residential properties for costs incurred in certain property
maintenance activities that would be senior to all other liens with the
exception of tax liens.
   (O)   The corporate authorities of the city deem it to be in the interest of
the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city to set forth
specific registration requirements for vacant buildings, as well as a procedure
for liens regarding property maintenance activities.
(Prior Code, § 165.01) (Ord. 11-141, passed 8-23-2011)
§ 164.02 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the “Blue Island Vacant
Property and Priority Lien Ordinance” of the City of Blue Island, Illinois.
(Prior Code, § 165.02) (Ord. 11-141, passed 8-23-2011)
§ 164.03 SCOPE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety
and welfare by enactment which:
      (1)   Establishes a program for identification, registration and
regulation of buildings that are or become vacant on and after the effective
date of this chapter;
      (2)   Determines the responsibilities of owners of vacant buildings; and
      (3)   Provides for administration, enforcement of property regulations,
including prevention and abatement of public nuisances, and imposition of
penalties.
   (B)   This chapter shall be construed liberally to affect its purposes.
(Prior Code, § 165.03) (Ord. 11-141, passed 8-23-2011)
§ 164.04 OTHER ORDINANCES.
   This chapter shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other
applicable ordinances, codes, legislation and regulations prescribing standards
other than those provided herein, and in the event of conflict, the most
restrictive shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 165.04) (Ord. 11-141, passed 8-23-2011)
§ 164.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARDED BUILDING. A building which has had, in a manner intended to be
temporary or permanent, any or all openings, which openings are windows or
doors which were present for the purpose of light, ventilation or egress, some
material whether opaque, solid or transparent, affixed to such openings, from
the interior or exterior of the building, for the purpose of securing or
preventing access or damage to the building or its components.
   BUILDING. Any industrial, commercial, single-family residential structure or
multi-family residential structure intended for supporting or sheltering any
occupancy.
   DANGEROUS OR UNSAFE BUILDING. All buildings or structures that are found to
pose a danger to the life, health, property or safety of the public by not
providing minimum safeguards to protect or warn the public in the event of a
fire, or because such structure contains unsafe equipment, or is so damaged,
decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty or incomplete
construction or unstable, that partial or complete collapse or systems failures
are possible; or any building or structure defined as a “public nuisance” in
Ordinance 2494 as now existing or hereafter amended.
   BUILDING COMMISSIONER. The Director of the City of Blue Island Building
Department or his or her designee.
   OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm, partnership, association, limited
liability company, corporation or other entity having a legal or equitable
interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state,
county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having
control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such
person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if
ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
   PERSON. Any individual, trustee, firm, corporation, partnership, limited
liability company, association or any other legal entity.
   PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, including any structure thereon.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. Includes the following:
      (1)   The physical condition, or uses of any building, structure or
premises regarded as a public nuisance at common law, under the Illinois
Compiled Statutes or under any applicable ordinance for the city;
      (2)   Any physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises,
structure, building or appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to
children, including, but not limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements,
excavations and unsafe fences or structures;
      (3)   Any building which has unsanitary sewerage or plumbing facilities;
      (4)   Any building designated by the Building Commissioner as unsafe for
human habitation or use;
      (5)   Any building which is manifestly capable of being a fire hazard, or
manifestly unsafe or insecure so as to endanger life, limb or property;
      (6)   Any building or premises which is unsanitary, or which is littered
with rubbish or garbage, or which has an uncontrolled growth of weeds;
      (7)   Any building that is dangerous, in a state of dilapidation,
deterioration or decay; faulty construction; unsecure; vacant and the doors,
windows, or other openings are boarded up or secured by any means other than
conventional methods used in the design of the building or permitted for new
construction of similar type; damaged by fire to the extent as not to provide
shelter, in danger of collapse or failure; and dangerous to anyone on or near
the premises; or
      (8)   Any building or structure defined as a “dangerous building”
hereinabove.
   UNOCCUPIED BUILDING.
      (1)   A building or portion thereof which lacks the habitual presence of
human beings who have a legal right to be on the premises, including buildings
ordered vacated by the Building Commissioner pursuant to authority granted to
him or her by applicable ordinances and/or state statutes.
      (2)   In determining whether a building is UNOCCUPIED, the Building
Commissioner may consider these factors, among others:
         (a)   Substantially all lawful residential or business activity at the
building has ceased;
         (b)   The percentage of the overall square footage of occupied to
unoccupied space or the overall number of occupied and unoccupied units shall
be considered;
         (c)   The building is substantially devoid of contents. The condition
and value of fixtures or personal property in the building are relevant to this
determination;
         (d)   The building lacks utility services (i.e., water, sewer,
electric or natural gas);
         (e)   The building is the subject of a foreclosure action;
         (f)   The building is not actively for sale as part of a contractual
agreement to sell the building, the building lacks “for sale”, “for rent” or
similar signage; and
         (g)   The presence or recurrence of uncorrected code violations.
   VACANT BUILDING.
      (1)   Any building or portion of a building which is an unoccupied
building and is:
         (a)   Unsecured;
         (b)   Secured by boarding or other similar means;
         (c)   A dangerous building;
         (d)   Condemned by the Building Commissioner pursuant to applicable
provisions of this chapter;
         (e)   Has multiple code violations;
         (f)   Has been, or the premises upon which it is located has been, the
site of unlawful activity within the previous six months;
         (g)   Condemned by the Building Commissioner;
         (h)   Unlawfully occupied;
         (i)   Unoccupied for over 180 days and during which time the Building
Commissioner has issued an order to correct public nuisance conditions and the
order has not been implemented for at least 60 days;
         (j)   Unoccupied for over one year; or
         (k)   An “abandoned residential property”, as defined in 65 ILCS 5/11-
20-15.1 as a residential dwelling unit that has been unoccupied by any lawful
occupant or occupants for at least 90 days and for which, after such 90-day
period, the city has made good faith efforts to contact the legal owner or
owners of the property or, if known, the agent of the owner, and no contact has
been made.
      (2)   But not including: unoccupied buildings for which a permit has been
issued and is undergoing construction, renovation or rehabilitation and which
are in compliance with all applicable ordinances, codes, legislation and
regulations, and for which construction, renovation or rehabilitation is
proceeding diligently to completion.
(Prior Code, § 165.05) (Ord. 11-141, passed 8-23-2011)
§ 164.06 DETERMINATION.
   (A)   Within 60 days after the effective date of this chapter, the Building
Commissioner shall evaluate all buildings in the city he or she believes to be
unoccupied on the effective date of this chapter and make a determination for
each as to whether the building is a vacant building. The Building Commissioner
may determine that a vacant building is not to be regulated under this chapter
for a stated period if, upon consideration of reliable evidence, he or she
determines that regulation of the building under this chapter would not serve
the public health, welfare and safety and makes written findings in support of
his or her decision. For buildings, the Building Commissioner determines to be
vacant buildings, he or she shall, within seven days of making that
determination, send notice of the written determination with the factual
findings to the last taxpayer of record listed on the most recent county tax
records. Said notice of determination shall be sent certified mail, return
receipt requested. Failure of delivery shall not excuse a person from complying
with this chapter. Any person making such service shall execute an affidavit
attesting to the facts of service. The Building Commissioner shall maintain a
record of such mailing for each notice of determination sent.
   (B)   The notice of determination shall set a tentative date and time for
the code compliance inspection of the interior of the vacant building to
determine the extent of compliance with city property, Building Codes, Health,
Fire, Water and Sewer Codes. After receipt of the notice of determination, if
the owner does not appeal the determination, the owner shall either confirm the
tentative date for the inspection or shall schedule a new date and time for
same. If the owner fails to confirm the tentative date and time for the
inspection or refuses to schedule or permit the inspection, it shall be the
responsibility of the city to obtain an administrative search warrant to
accomplish the inspection. The owner shall pay the inspection fees specified in
§
164.07 of this chapter to the city within 30 days of receipt of the bill for
same.
   (C)   The notice of determination shall contain a statement of the
obligations of the owner of a building determined to be a vacant building, a
copy of the registration form the owner is required to file pursuant to §§
164.25 through
164.30 of this chapter and a notice of the owner’s right to appeal the
determination.
(Prior Code, § 165.06) (Ord. 11-141, passed 8-23-2011)
§ 164.07 INSPECTION FEES.
   (A)   For each initial vacant building inspection, there shall be a $500
fee. No unused inspections or re-inspections may be accumulated, banked,
transferred to another unit or building, bought, sold or transferred at the
time of sale.
   (B)   The fee for each additional re-inspection for correction of cited
violations shall be:
      (1)   Seventy-five dollars per dwelling unit with remaining uncorrected
violations;
      (2)   Seventy-five dollars per residential common exterior or public area
with remaining uncorrected violations;
      (3)   Seventy-five dollars per street address exterior or public area
with remaining uncorrected violations; and
      (4)   Seventy-five dollars per non-residential building with remaining
uncorrected violations.
   (C)   Additional inspection and re-inspection fees may be charged when the
city has scheduled the inspection and provided notice and the responsible party
does not provide the required access as required in this chapter.
   (D)   Any unpaid fees shall be a lien upon the premises.
(Prior Code, § 165.07) (Ord. 11-141, passed 8-23-2011)
§ 164.08 APPEAL OF DETERMINATION.
   (A)   An owner of a building determined to be a vacant building as provided
for in this chapter may appeal that determination to the Community Development
Committee. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the
Community Development Committee within 15 days of the date of mailing of the
notice of determination. The filing of an appeal stays the owner’s obligation
to register his or her building as required by §§
164.25 through
164.30 of this chapter. The appeal shall contain a complete statement of the
reasons the owner disputes the determination, shall set forth specific facts in
support thereof, and shall include all evidence the owner relies upon to
support the appeal. The Community Development Committee shall decide the appeal
on the basis of facts presented by the owner in his or her written appeal and
the Building Department’s written determination.
   (B)   The burden is upon the owner to present sufficient evidence to
persuade the Community Development Committee that it is more likely than not
that the subject building is not a “vacant building” within the meaning of this
chapter.
   (C)   The Community Development Committee shall convene a special meeting
within seven days from the date of notice of owners appeal. The Community
Development Committee must send written notice of its decision to owner. The
Community Development Committee may, but is not required to, seek additional
information from the owner. The Community Development Committee, upon written
notice thereof to the owner, take no more than ten additional days to decide
the appeal if the Committee determines that such additional time is required
for consideration of the appeal.
(Prior Code, § 165.08) (Ord. 11-141, passed 8-23-2011)
§ 164.09 ENFORCEMENT.
   The registration of a vacant building shall not preclude action by the city
to demolish or to take other action against the building pursuant to other
provisions of this chapter, the Illinois Municipal Code or other applicable
legislation, including the action authorized in §§
164.60 through
164.63 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 165.09) (Ord. 11-141, passed 8-23-2011)
§ 164.10 CERTIFICATION.
   A certificate of compliance for vacant buildings must be issued by the city
and payment in full of all fees imposed pursuant to this chapter are required
prior to any occupancy of a vacant building.
(Prior Code, § 165.10) (Ord. 11-141, passed 8-23-2011)
§ 164.11 BOARDING OF BUILDINGS.
   It is the policy of the city that boarding is a temporary solution to
prevent unauthorized entry into a vacant building and that boarded buildings
are a public nuisance. A vacant building may not remain boarded longer than
three months unless an extension of that time is part of a plan approved by the
Building Commissioner. A vacant building which is unboarded and code compliant
and for which boarding is determined by the Building Commissioner on the basis
of police reports, citizen complaints and other information of other type
considered reliable by reasonable persons, to not require boarding to prevent
unauthorized entry may not remain vacant for more than two years without an
approved plan for occupancy, sale, demolition or other disposition of the
building.
(Prior Code, § 165.11) (Ord. 11-141, passed 8-23-2011)
§ 164.12 NOTICE TO CITY COUNCIL.
   Once every six months, the Building Commissioner or his or her designee
shall send notice to the City Council a list of all vacant buildings which have
become known during the preceding six months, as well as a list of all
previously declared buildings which are no longer vacant. The notice shall
include a summary of fees and fines assessed and collected, the compliance and
non-compliance rate of property owners, and other pertinent information in
order for the City Council to make sound decisions regarding future affairs.
Said reports will also be provided to the Police Department, Fire Department
and Community Development Department.
(Prior Code, § 165.12) (Ord. 11-141, passed 8-23-2011)
RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ 164.25 OBLIGATION TO REGISTER.
   The owner of a building who knows, or from all the facts and circumstances
should know, that his or her building is or has become a vacant building within
the meaning of this chapter after the effective date of this chapter or the
owner of a building, which the Building Commissioner determines at any time to
be a vacant building, or the owner of a building whose appeal from the Building
Commissioner’s determination has been denied by the Community Development
Committee shall take the actions provided for below within 15 days after either
the date of the Building Commissioner’s notice of determination or occurrence
of the facts which would cause a reasonable person to believe that the building
is a vacant building, or denial of the appeal, whichever is applicable.
(Prior Code, § 165.25) (Ord. 11-141, passed 8-23-2011)
§ 164.26 REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   General requirements. Vacant properties within the city shall be
subject to the following registration requirements.
      (1)   Register the building with the Building Department on a form
provided and pay the designated semi-annual non-prorated vacant building
registration fee. The form shall include, as a minimum, the name, street
address and telephone number of the owner; the case name and number of any
litigation pending concerning or affecting the building, including bankruptcy
cases; and the name, street address and telephone number of all persons with
any legal interest in the building or the premises. The form shall require the
owner to identify a natural person at least 21 years of age who maintains a
permanent address in the county to accept 24-hour service on behalf of the
owner with respect to any notices the Building Commissioner sends pursuant to
this chapter or service of process in any proceeding commenced to enforce any
provision of this chapter, and file with the city on the registration form, the
name, address, telephone number of said person. A street address is required. A
post office box is not an acceptable address.
      (2)   Renew the vacant building registration on April 1 and October 1 of
each year for the remainder of the time the building remains vacant and pay the
required designated semi-annual fee.
      (3)   Require the owner to indicate his or her “acceptance of notice by
posting” consenting to service of notices sent or required to be sent, pursuant
to this chapter, by posting on the building if the owner fails to renew the
registration.
      (4)   File an amended registration within 15 days of any change in the
information contained in the annual registration. A new registration is
required for any change in ownership whatsoever.
      (5)   Registration does not exonerate the owner from compliance with all
applicable codes and ordinances, nor does it preclude any of the actions the
city is authorized to take pursuant to this chapter or elsewhere in the
municipal code.
   (B)   Semi-annual fees.
      (1)   The semi-annual registration fees shall be: $400 for single-family
residential property; $450 for multi-family residential or commercial
properties; $500 for industrial properties.
      (2)   The owner shall be charged an additional fee on the subsequent
renewal periods in which any vacant property is in violation of any provision
of the city code. Such fee shall be $100 for single-family residential
properties; $200 for multi- family residential or commercial properties; and
$300 for industrial properties.
      (3)   Owners of single-family residences shall be exempt from the
additional fee if the owner demonstrates, to the satisfaction of the Building
Department, that at the time of renewal the building is in full compliance with
city codes.
      (4)   For the purposes of this section, the determination of whether a
property is classified as single-family residence, multi-family residence,
commercial or industrial may be based upon the property zoning designation or
the use and occupancy of the property. Such determination shall be at the
discretion of the Building Department and be based upon the applicable city
codes.
      (5)   Upon payment of the semi-annual fee, there shall be no additional
inspection fee related to the registration.
(Prior Code, § 165.26) (Ord. 11-141, passed 8-23-2011; Ord. 2016-004, passed 2-
23-2016)
§ 164.27 INSPECTION.
   Allow for a code-compliance inspection of the interior of the vacant
building and the owner shall pay the initial $500 inspection fee therefore
within 30 days of the inspection. Such inspection will determine the extent of
compliance with the city’s Property Maintenance, Building, Health, Fire, Water
and Sewer Codes. The city shall send the inspection report to the owner within
30 days. Periodic reinspections shall take place, as necessary, until code
compliance is achieved. Timely code compliance is required.
(Prior Code, § 165.27) (Ord. 11-141, passed 8-23-2011)
§ 164.28 INSURANCE.
   Obtain liability insurance and maintain such insurance for as long as the
building is vacant, and file evidence of such insurance with the Building
Commissioner or his or her designee, as follows: $500,000 for a vacant
residential building of one to three units; $750,000 for a vacant residential
building of four to 11 units; $1,000,000 for a vacant residential building of
12 to 48 units; $2,000,000 for a vacant residential building of more than 48
units; and $2,000,000 for a vacant manufacturing, industrial, storage or non-
residential commercial building.
(Prior Code, § 165.28) (Ord. 11-141, passed 8-23-2011)
§ 164.29 VACANT BUILDING PLAN.
   (A)   At the time a building is registered as required herein, the owner
shall submit a vacant building plan. The Building Commissioner or his or her
designee may prescribe a form for the plan. If the owner fails to submit the
plan as provided for by this chapter, the Building Commissioner or his or her
designee may determine the plan.
   (B)   The plan shall contain the following as a minimum:
      (1)   A plan of action to repair any doors, windows or other openings
which are boarded up or otherwise secured or covered by any means other than
conventional methods used in the design of the building or permitted for new
construction or similar type. The proposed repair shall result in openings
being secured by conventional methods used in the design of the building or by
methods permitted for new construction of similar type with board removed.
Boarding shall be accomplished with materials and methods described by the
Building Commissioner or his or her designee. The owner shall maintain the
building in an enclosed and secure state until the building is reoccupied or
made available for immediate occupancy. If the owner demonstrates that securing
of the building will provide adequate protection to the public, the Building
Commissioner may waive the requirement of an enclosure;
      (2)   For buildings and/or premises which are determined as being or
containing public nuisances, as defined in §
164.05 of this chapter, then the vacant building/premises plan shall contain a
plan of action to remedy such public nuisance(s);
      (3)   A time schedule identifying a date of commencement of repair and
date of completion of repair for each improperly secured opening and nuisance
identified;
      (4)   When the owner proposes to demolish the vacant building, then the
owner shall submit a plan and time schedule for such demolition;
      (5)   A plan of action to maintain the building or premises, thereof in
conformance with this chapter;
      (6)   A plan of action, with a time schedule, identifying the date the
building will be habitable and occupied or offered for occupancy or sale. The
time schedule shall include date(s) of commencement and completion of all
actions required to achieve habitability. No plan which fails to provide for
compliance with this chapter or, which will not, as determined by the Building
Commissioner or his or her designee, achieve such compliance, within three
months, in the case of a vacant boarded building, and two years, in the case of
a vacant, unboarded and code-compliant building will be approved; except that,
the Building Commissioner may approve an extension of the time during which the
building will be unoccupied beyond two years to a date certain but then only
based upon clear and documented evidence of good cause shown by the owner as
determined;
      (7)   The owner shall conduct, at a minimum, bi-weekly inspections of all
premises upon which unoccupied or vacant buildings are located and the
exteriors shall at all times be maintained in compliance with this chapter;
      (8)   Exterior lighting shall be maintained according to standards
established by the city; and
      (9)   All ground floor windows facing street frontage in the Commercial
District, including, but not limited to, all display windows in unoccupied
buildings or vacant buildings shall be kept in a well maintained and clean
condition and shall be covered on the interior side in a professionally
finished manner with an opaque window covering material manufactured for that
purpose and approved by the Building Commissioner, or in the case of display
windows, such windows shall be kept in a well maintained and clean condition
and the display area shall be enclosed with a professionally finished backdrop,
floor, side walls and ceiling all of which shall be kept in a well maintained
and clean condition and shall be well lighted from 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
each day. Photographs, paintings and other works of art or other tasteful forms
of decoration may be professionally displayed in these properly enclosed clear
glass display windows. If opaque window covering material is used, a one inch
by one inch clear glass opening through which the interior space is clearly
visible shall be maintained at standing eye level along one edge of one such
window.
(Prior Code, § 165.29) (Ord. 11-141, passed 8-23-2011)
§ 164.30 SECURITY GUARD SERVICE.
   On written notice, the owner shall provide bonded, licensed and insured
security guard service at the building from 3:00 p.m. through 8:00 a.m. daily.
Such service shall remain in place until the Building Commissioner or his or
her designee gives written notice that the service is no longer required. Such
service shall be required when the Building Commissioner or his or her designee
makes a written determination that the vacant building constitutes a fire
hazard, is otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, involves
illegal or improper use, occupancy or maintenance, under such conditions that
securing the building is insufficient to prevent the actual or threatened harm.
(Prior Code, § 165.30) (Ord. 11-141, passed 8-23-2011)
PLAN APPROVAL
§ 164.45 REVIEW OF BUILDING PLAN.
   (A)   The Building Commissioner shall review the proposed vacant building
plan in accordance with the standards below.
   (B)   The Building Commissioner shall send notice to the owner of the vacant
building of his or her determination.
(Prior Code, § 165.45) (Ord. 11-141, passed 8-23-2011)
§ 164.46 STANDARDS FOR PLAN APPROVAL.
   In considering the appropriateness of a vacant building plan, the Building
Commissioner shall include the following in his or her consideration and shall
make written findings as to each:
   (A)   The purposes of this chapter and intent of the city to minimize the
time a building is boarded or otherwise vacant;
   (B)   The effect of the building and the proposed plan on adjoining
property;
   (C)   The length of time the building has been vacant;
   (D)   The presence of any public nuisances on the premises; and
   (E)   The likelihood that the plan or portion(s) thereof will prevent or
ameliorate the condition it is designed to address.
(Prior Code, § 165.46) (Ord. 11-141, passed 8-23-2011)
§ 164.47 AUTHORITY TO MODIFY PLAN.
   The Building Commissioner shall, upon notice to the vacant building owner,
have the right to modify the vacant building plan by modifying the dates of
performance, the proposed methods of action, or by imposing additional
requirements consistent with this chapter he or she deems necessary to protect
the public health, safety or welfare.
(Prior Code, § 165.47) (Ord. 11-141, passed 8-23-2011)
§ 164.48 APPEAL.
   (A)   (1)   An owner may appeal any modification of a vacant building plan
instituted by the Building Commissioner to the Community Development Committee.
      (2)   Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the
Community Development Committee within 15 days of the date of mailing of the
notice of determination. The filing of an appeal stays the owner’s obligation
to commence implementation of the vacant building plan. The appeal shall
contain a complete statement of the reasons the owner disputes the Building
Commissioner’s modification, shall set forth specific facts in support thereof
and shall include all evidence the owner relies upon to support the appeal.
      (3)   The Community Development Committee shall convene a special meeting
within seven days from the date of notice of owner’s appeal. The Community
Development Committee shall decide the appeal on the basis of facts presented
by the Owner in his or her written appeal and the Building Commissioner’s
written determination.
   (B)   The burden is upon the owner to present sufficient evidence to
persuade the Community Development Committee that the modification is not
required by the ordinance or is arbitrary.
   (C)   (1)   The Community Development Committee shall send written notice of
its determination to the owner within ten days of his or her receipt of the
appeal.
      (2)   The Community Development Committee may, but is not required to,
seek additional information from the owner. The Community Development Committee
may, upon written notice thereof to the owner, take no more than ten additional
days to decide the appeal if the committee determines that such additional time
is required for consideration of the appeal.
(Prior Code, § 165.48) (Ord. 11-141, passed 8-23-2011)
§ 164.49 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH VACANT BUILDING PLAN.
   Failure to have an approved plan within 30 days of filing the registration
form or failure to comply with the approved plan shall constitute a violation
of this chapter subjecting the owner of the building to penalties as provided
in this chapter and to any remedies the city may avail itself of as provided
for herein and elsewhere in the municipal code, including, but not limited to,
an action to compel correction of property maintenance violations.
(Prior Code, § 165.49) (Ord. 11-141, passed 8-23-2011)
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 164.60 NUISANCE ABATEMENT.
   The city is authorized to perform or provide for property maintenance
activities to abate a nuisance caused by a vacant building, including the
following:
   (A)   Cutting and removal of neglected weeds, grass, trees and bushes as
authorized by Ord. 2494 and 65 ILCS 5/11-20-7;
   (B)   Pest control activities, as authorized by 65 ILCS 5/11-20-8;
   (C)   Removal of infected trees as authorized by Ord. 2494 and 65 ILCS 5/11-
20-12;
   (D)   Removal of garbage, debris and graffiti as authorized by Ord. 2494 and
65 ILCS 5/11-20-13; and
   (E)   Removal, securing and enclosing abandoned residential properties, as
authorized by Ord. 2494 and 65 ILCS 5/11-31-1.01.
(Prior Code, § 165.60) (Ord. 11-141, passed 8-23-2011)
§ 164.61 CHARGES FOR NUISANCE ABATEMENT.
   The city shall have the authority to collect from the owner the costs
incurred in performing the property maintenance activities to abate the
nuisances described in this chapter. The city shall send a bill for the cost to
the owner, his or her agent, legal representative, or occupant in legal
possession or control of the premises.
(Prior Code, § 165.61) (Ord. 11-141, passed 8-23-2011)
§ 164.62 TRADITIONAL LIEN PROCEDURE.
   (A)   If a bill sent pursuant to §
164.61 of this chapter is not paid in full within 30 days of the date of the
bill, the city shall have the authority to file and record a lien against the
property, pursuant to § 11-20-15 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/11-
20-15. If, for any one property, the city engaged in any nuisance abatement
activity described in §
164.60 of this chapter on more than one occasion during the course of one year,
the city may combine any or all of the costs of those activities into a single
notice of lien.
   (B)   The lien must be filed in accordance with the lien procedure
established by the specific code provision of which the property is alleged to
be in violation or, if no such procedure exists, then the following procedure
shall apply.
      (1)   Notice of lien.
         (a)   The city or the person performing the service by authority of
the city, in its, his or her own name, may file a notice of lien in the office
of the Recorder of Deeds in the county in which the real estate is located. The
notice of lien shall be filed within one year after the cost and expense is
incurred. If, for any one property, the city engaged in any nuisance abatement
activity described in §
164.61 of this chapter on more than one occasion during the course of one year,
then the city may combine any or all of the costs of those activities into a
single notice of lien.
         (b)   The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting
forth:
            1.   A description of the real estate that sufficiently describes
the parcel;
            2.   The amount of the cost and expense incurred or payable for the
activities; and
            3.   The date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by
the city or someone working on behalf of the city.
         (c)   After recording, the notice of lien shall be sent by certified
mail to the property owner, his or her agent or legal representative or
occupant in legal possession or control of the premises and, if different, to
the person who received the tax bill for the preceding year.
      (2)   Release of lien. Upon payment of the cost after the notice of lien
has been filed as provided herein, the lien shall be released by the city or
person in whose name the lien has been filed, and the release shall be recorded
of record in the same manner as recording the notice of lien.
      (3)   Foreclosure of lien. Subsequent to the filing of the above-
described lien, the city may cause to be filed a complaint for foreclosure of
such lien, or upon becoming a defendant in a pending lawsuit affecting the
premises or real estate, by answer to the complaint or in the nature of an
intervening petition or cross-complaint the city may proceed in its corporate
name to foreclose such lien. An action to foreclose a lien under this
subchapter must be commenced within two years after the date of filing notice
of lien. The property subject to a lien arising under this subchapter shall be
sold for non-payment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale shall be
applied to pay the monies owing the city.
(Prior Code, § 165.62) (Ord. 11-141, passed 8-23-2011)
§ 164.63 PROPERTY LIEN PROCEDURE.
   (A)   General. The priority lien procedure described in this section shall
apply only to costs incurred for activities performed on abandoned residential
properties, as defined in 65 ILCS 5/11-20-15.1 and is an alternative to the
traditional lien authorized by §
164.62 of this chapter. If a bill sent pursuant to §
164.61 of this chapter is not paid in full within 60 days of the date of the
bill, the city shall have the authority to file and record a priority lien
against the property.
   (B)   Notice of lien.
      (1)   The city or the person performing the service by authority of the
city, in its, his or her own name, may file a notice of lien in the office of
the Recorder of Deeds in the county in which the real estate is located. The
notice of lien shall be filed within one year after the cost and expense is
incurred. If, for any one property, the city engaged in any nuisance abatement
activity described in §
164.61 of this chapter on more than one occasion during the course of one year,
then the city may combine any or all of the costs of those activities into a
single notice of lien.
      (2)   The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting
forth:
         (a)   A description of the real estate that sufficiently describes the
parcel;
         (b)   The amount of the cost and expense incurred or payable for the
activities;
         (c)   The date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by the
city or someone working on behalf of the city; and
         (d)   A statement that the lien has been filed pursuant to one or more
of the property maintenance activities described in §
164.60 of this chapter and authorized by 65 ILCS 5/11-20-7(d), 65 ILCS 5/11-20-
8(d), 65 ILCS 5/11-20-12(d), 65 ILCS 5/11-20-13(e), 65 ILCS 5/11-31-1.01, as
applicable.
      (3)   After recording, the notice of lien shall be sent by certified mail
to the owner, his or her agent or legal representative or occupant in legal
possession or control of the premises and, if different, to the person who
received the tax bill for the preceding year.
      (4)   The city may not file a lien if the lender has provided notice to
the city that the lender has performed, or will perform, remedial actions;
provided, however, that, the remedial actions must be performed or initiated in
good faith within 30 days of the lender’s notice to the city.
   (C)   Recordkeeping. To enforce a lien pursuant to this section, the city
must maintain contemporaneous records that include, at a minimum:
      (1)   A dated statement of a finding by the city that the property has
become abandoned residential property;
      (2)   The date when the property was first observed to be unoccupied by
any lawful occupant;
      (3)   A description of the actions taken by the city to contact the legal
owner of the property, or if known, any agent of the owner;
      (4)   A statement that no contacts were made with the legal owner or, if
known, any agent of the owner;
      (5)   A dated certification by a city official of the necessity and
specific nature of the work performed;
      (6)   A copy of the agreement with the person or company performing the
work and the rates and estimated cost of the work, if applicable;
      (7)   Detailed invoices and payment vouchers for the work; and
      (8)   A statement whether the work was competitively bid and, if so, a
copy of all proposals submitted by the bidders.
   (D)   Release of lien. Upon payment of the cost after the notice of lien has
been filed as provided herein, the lien shall be released by the city or person
in whose name the lien has been filed, and the release shall be recorded of
record in the same manner as recording the notice of lien.
   (E)   Enforcement of lien. Subsequent to the filing of the above-described
lien, the city may cause to be filed a complaint for foreclosure of such lien,
or upon becoming a defendant in a pending lawsuit affecting the premises or
real estate, by answer to the complaint or in the nature of an intervening
petition or cross-complaint, the city may proceed in its corporate name to
foreclose such lien. An action to foreclose a lien under this section must be
commenced within two years after the date of filing notice of lien. The
property subject to a lien arising under this subchapter shall be sold for non-
payment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied to pay the
monies owing the city.
(Prior Code, § 165.63) (Ord. 11-141, passed 8-23-2011)
§ 164.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation found to have violated any provision
of this chapter shall be subject to a minimum fine of $100 per day per
violation to a maximum of $750 per day per violation, in addition to any other
legal or equitable remedies available to the city. Such other remedies include,
but are not limited to, injunctive relief, application to a court of competent
jurisdiction for a receiver, demolition or condemnation, contracting for the
repair or purchase of the premises, or foreclosure of any lien the city may
have thereon.
   (B)   A separate and distinct offense shall be committed each day on which
such person or persons shall violate the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   The city may enforce this chapter in its administrative adjudication
system or through the circuit court.
   (D)   Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the city from immediately
condemning as provided for in the Illinois Municipal Code or taking other
immediate action upon a determination that the building is a public nuisance or
poses an imminent danger to the occupants of the building, or the public,
health, safety and welfare.
(Prior Code, § 165.99) (Ord. 11-141, passed 8-23-2011)
CHAPTER 165: ZONING CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
165.001   Purpose
   
165.002   Rules of construction
   
165.003   Definitions
   
165.004   Interpretation
   
165.005   Separability
   
165.006   Scope
   
165.007   Uptown-Transit Oriented Development (U-TOD) District adopted by
reference
Zoning District Regulations
   
165.020   Establishment of districts
   
165.021   Zoning map to show boundaries
   
165.022   Interpretation of district boundaries
   
165.023   Schedule of use controls
   
165.024   Building line setback from alleys in all districts
   
165.025   Regulations for specific uses
   
165.026   Number of buildings on zoning lot
   
165.027   Accessory buildings, structures and uses
   
165.028   Bulk regulations
   
165.029   Parking and loading facilities
   
165.030   Existing special uses
   
165.031   Home occupations
   
165.032   Dwellings containing 12 units or more
   
165.033   Planned development
   
165.034   Yard regulations
   
165.035   Use dispersal standards
Non-Conforming Buildings, Structures and Uses
   
165.045   Purpose
   
165.046   Authority to continue non-conforming buildings, structures and uses
   
165.047   Exempted buildings, structures and uses
   
165.048   Building not in conformance with district regulations; continuance of
   
165.049   Non-conforming use of building which is designed for use permissible
in district
   
165.050   Non-conforming use of land
Performance Standards Applicable to All Districts
   
165.065   Permitted uses
   
165.066   Special uses
   
165.067   Performance standards
Administration and Enforcement
   
165.080   Various officials to enforce
   
165.081   Building Official
   
165.082   Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals
   
165.083   Zoning certificates
   
165.084   Occupancy certificates
   
165.085   Procedure for variances, special uses and the like
   
165.086   Variations
   
165.087   Appeals
   
165.088   Amendment of chapter
   
165.089   Special use permits
   
165.090   Fees
Signs
   
165.105   Purpose
   
165.106   Applicability
   
165.107   Relationship to other ordinances
   
165.108   Substitution of messages
   
165.109   Exemptions
   
165.110   Prohibited signs
   
165.111   Determination of visibility
   
165.112   Measurement, construction and design standards
   
165.113   Establishment of Sign Overlay Districts
   
165.114   Signs allowed without a sign permit
   
165.115   Signs in Residential Districts
   
165.116   Specific nonresidential uses
   
165.117   Signs in Commercial Districts
   
165.118   Reserved
   
165.119   Signs in Industrial Districts
   
165.120   Billboards (advertising signs, off- premises signs)
   
165.121   Temporary signs
   
165.122   Sign permits
   
165.123   Master sign plan
   
165.124   Historic signs
   
165.125   Obsolete signs
   
165.126   Unsafe signs
   
165.127   Non-conforming signs
   
165.128   Sign maintenance
   
165.129   Sign variations
   
165.130   Enforcement
   
165.131   Permit fees
 
   
165.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 165.001 PURPOSE.
   The purposes of this zoning code are as follows:
   (A)   To promote and protect the public health, safety, morals, comfort,
convenience and the general welfare of the people;
   (B)   To zone all properties in such a manner as to reflect their best use
and to conserve and enhance their value;
   (C)   To check existing congestion and to prevent future congestion by
limiting the development of land to a degree consistent with the capacity of
the city to furnish adequate public services;
   (D)   To prevent overcrowding of land with buildings and thereby ensure
maximum living and working conditions and prevent blight and slums;
   (E)   To protect residential, business and industrial areas alike from
harmful encroachment by incompatible uses and to ensure that land allocated to
a class of uses shall not be usurped by other inappropriate uses;
   (F)   To fix reasonable zoning standards to which buildings or structures
shall conform;
   (G)   To prevent such additions to, and alterations or remodeling of,
existing buildings or structures as would not comply with restrictions and
limitations imposed hereinafter;
   (H)   To ensure high standards of lights, air and open space in areas where
people live and work;
   (I)   To relieve street congestion through adequate requirements for off-
street parking and loading facilities;
   (J)   To foster a more rational pattern of relationships between
residential, business and industrial areas for the mutual benefit of all;
   (K)   To isolate or control the location of unavoidable nuisance-producing
uses;
   (L)   To provide protection against fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other
hazards, in the interest of the public health, safety, comfort and the general
welfare;
   (M)   To define the powers and duties of the administrative officers and
bodies, as provided hereinafter;
   (N)   To prescribe penalties for the violations of the provisions of this
chapter; and
   (O)   To classify, regulate, and restrict the use of property on the basis
of family relationship, which family relationship may be defined as one or more
persons each related to the other by blood, marriage, or adoption and
maintaining a common household.
(Prior Code, § 166.001) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 165.002 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   In the construction of this chapter, the rules and definitions contained in
this section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly
indicates otherwise.
   (A)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words
used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the
singular.
   (B)   The word SHALL is mandatory and not discretionary.
   (C)   The word MAY is permissive.
   (D)   The word LOT shall include the words PIECE and PARCEL; the word
BUILDING includes all other structure of every kind regardless of similarity to
buildings; and the phrase USED FOR shall include the phrases ARRANGED FOR,
DESIGNED FOR, INTENDED FOR, MAINTAINED FOR and OCCUPIED FOR.
(Prior Code, § 166.002) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 165.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABUTTING. Having a common boundary or edge; touching.
   ACCESS EASEMENT. An easement recorded for the purpose of providing vehicle,
bicycle, and pedestrian access from a public street to a parcel across
intervening property under separate ownership from the parcel being provided
access.
   ACCESSIBLE. Accessible means approachable and useable by people with
disabilities and in conformance with the Americans with Disabilities Act.
   ACCESSORY. A use or structure that is secondary or incidental to a primary
use or structure.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. Accessory building shall include, but is not limited to,
the following: a children’s playhouse; a garage, carport, shed or building for
storage incidental to a permitted use; storage of goods used in or produced by
manufacturing activities on the same zoning lot with such activities, unless
such storage is excluded by the district regulations; the production,
processing, cleaning, servicing, altering, testing, repair or storage of
merchandise normally incidental to a retail service of a business use if
conducted by the same ownership as the principal use; private guest house
(without kitchen facilities) or rooms for guests within an accessory building;
provided such facilities are used for the occasional housing of guests of the
occupants of the principal building and not for permanent occupancy by others
as housekeeping units, whether or not gratuitous; off-street motor vehicle
parking areas and loading facilities; and signs as permitted and regulated in
each district.
   ACCESSORY PARKING FACILITY. A parking facility that provides space for a
specific use or uses to comply with minimum off-street parking requirements. It
also includes non-required parking that may serve occupants of or visitors to a
particular use exclusively, rather than the public at-large.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure of secondary importance or function on a
site. In general, the primary use of the site is not carried on in an accessory
structure. Accessory structures are detached from the primary structure.
Examples of accessory structures include but are not limited to: garages,
decks, fences, arbors, gazebos, heat pumps, and other structures. See also
PRIMARY STRUCTURE.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use or activity that is a subordinate part of a primary use
and that is clearly incidental to a primary use on a site.
   ADDRESS. A number assigned to a housing unit, business establishment, or
other structure for purposes of mail delivery, emergency services, and so
forth.
   ADULT BOOK STORE. An establishment having a substantial or significant
portion of its stock in trade; books, magazines and other periodicals which are
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas”, or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the
sale or display of such material.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET. A public or private establishment which is
licensed to serve food and/or alcoholic beverages, and which features topless
dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators
or similar entertainers.
   ADULT MINI MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An enclosed building with a capacity for
less than 50 persons used for presenting materials distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” for observation
by patrons therein.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. An enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or
more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas” for observation by patrons therein.
   ADULT SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Less than completely and opaquely covered
human genitals, pubic region, buttock and female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; also, human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
   ADULT SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Human genitals in a state of sexual
stimulation or arousal; acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or
sodomy; or fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breast.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT. An adult-use cannabis cultivation
center, adult-use cannabis craft grower, adult-use cannabis processing
organization, adult-use cannabis infuser organization, adult-use cannabis
dispensing organization or an adult-use cannabis transporting organization.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER OR CRAFT GROWER. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to cultivate, dry, cure and package cannabis and perform other
necessary activities to make cannabis available for sale at an adult-use
cannabis dispensing organization or use at an adult-use processing
organization, and as further defined in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act,
being 410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq., as it may be amended from time-to-time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER OR CULTIVATION CENTER. A facility
operated by an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois
Department of Agriculture to cultivate, process, transport and perform other
necessary activities to provide cannabis and cannabis-infused products to
licensed adult-use cannabis business establishments, and as further defined in
the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, being 410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq., as it may
be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION OR DISPENSING ORGANIZATION. A
facility operated by an organization or business that is licensed by the
Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire
cannabis from licensed adult-use cannabis business establishments for the
purpose of selling or dispensing cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis
seeds, paraphernalia or related supplies to purchasers or to qualified
registered medical cannabis patients and caregivers, and as further defined in
the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, being 410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq., as it may
be amended from time to time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION OR INFUSER. A facility operated by
an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product, and as further
defined in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, being 410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq.,
as it may be amended from time to time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR. A facility operated
by an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or compounds to produce
cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis product, and as further defined in
the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, being 410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq., as it may
be amended from time-to- time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER. An organization
or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
transport cannabis on behalf of an adult-use cannabis business establishment or
a community college licensed under the Community College Cannabis Vocational
Training Pilot Program, and as further defined in the Cannabis Regulation and
Tax Act, being 410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq., as it may be amended from time-to-
time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADVERSE IMPACT. Negative results or outcomes caused by a given land use or
activity that can be measured (e.g., noise, air pollution, vibration, dust,
property values, etc.).
   ALLEY.  A right-of-way that provides vehicle access to a lot or common
parking area. Generally, alleys provide secondary vehicle access; however,
where vehicle access from the street is not allowed, not possible, or not
desirable the alley may provide primary vehicle access.
   ANIMAL HOSPITAL. A building that is used for the care, observation or
treatment of domestic animals.
   ANTENNA. Any structure designed for transmitting signals to a receiver or
receiving station or for receiving television, radio, data, communication, or
other signals from other antennas, satellites, or other services.
   APPLICANT. A person who applies for a building or zoning permit. An
applicant may be a property owner or a representative of the owner, such as a
builder, developer, optional purchaser, consultant, or architect.
   ARCADE. An arched or covered passageway; often along building fronts or
between streets.
   ARCHITECTURAL COMPOSITION. The scale, height, mass, proportion, color, form,
style, detail, treatment, texture, construction material, and roof design of a
project or building.
   ART GALLERY. Premises used principally for the sale, display, and exhibition
of fine arts and craft products. An art gallery may include accessory
production or instruction in the production of arts and crafts using paint,
clay, fabric or other medium, but does not involve the use of electrical tools
or processes.
   ARTISAN WORKSHOP. A use primarily involving the limited on-site production
of goods by hand manufacturing, which involves only the use of hand tools or
domestic mechanical equipment. Typical production includes: custom furniture,
ceramic studios, glass blowing, candle making, custom jewelry, stained and
leaded glass, woodworking, custom textile manufacturing and crafts production.
   ARTIST LIVE/WORK SPACE. A dwelling unit in which up to 50% of the floor area
is used for the production, showing, and sale of art.
   AS-BUILT PLAN. An engineering plan prepared after the completion of a
construction project, by the engineer of record, in such a manner as to
accurately identify and depict the location of all on-site improvements, which
includes but is not limited to all structures, parking facilities, detention/
retention areas, curbs, gutters, and sidewalks.
   ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY (NURSING HOME). A residence for the care of
children, the elderly, infirm, incurable or convalescent of any age in which
more than three persons are provided with food, lodging and medical care, but
not including hospitals, clinics or group homes.
   ATTACHED STRUCTURE. Any structure that is attached to another structure by a
common wall, roof, or by structural connections that allow pedestrian access to
both structures. For example, decks or stairways are attached structures when
they are connected to another structure. A garage may be attached to another
structure by sharing a wall or by a breezeway.
   AUCTION HOUSE. A building used for the public sale of goods, wares,
merchandise, or equipment to the highest bidder. An auction house shall not
include the sale of vehicles.
   AUTOMOBILE-DEPENDENT DEVELOPMENT. Primary or accessory uses servicing motor
vehicles, or patrons in motor vehicles, such as motor vehicle repair, gas
station, car wash, auto and truck sales, drive-up windows, kiosks, and similar
uses.
   AWNING. An architectural projection that provides weather protection,
identity, or decoration and is wholly supported by the building to which it is
attached. A structure of canvas, canvas-like or other materials extended over a
window or door or over a patio, deck, and the like as a protection from the sun
or rain.
   BANQUET HALL. A building or portion thereof, the principal use of which is
for events which are hosted for one-time, special or occasional events. Typical
examples of such one-time, special or occasional events include: banquets,
luncheons, receptions, weddings, birthdays, retirement, anniversaries and
similar celebrations and commemorations; fashion and other artistic
demonstrations; educational seminars, classes and conferences. Such a use may
or may not include: (1) kitchen facilities for the preparation of catering of
food; and (2) the provision of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption,
but only for patrons attending any such scheduled events and provided any
licenses required by the city have been obtained in advance. [Ophelia’s
Banquets]
   BED AND BREAKFAST. An owner-occupied, detached house or an owner-occupied
dwelling unit within a multi-unit residential building that does not exceed
four stories in height and contains no more than 11 sleeping rooms or an owner-
occupied condominium, townhouse or cooperative in which 11 or fewer sleeping
rooms are available for rent on for hire for transient occupancy by registered
guests. For purposes of this definition, the term BED AND BREAKFAST does not
include single-room occupancy buildings. If the bed and breakfast is a detached
house located on a lot that includes a principal house and an accessory
building that was being used for residential purposes the accessory building
that will be considered to be part of the establishment.
   BIO SWALE. A gently sloped landscaped swale generally designed to retain and
temporarily store a specific quantity of stormwater runoff, which is planted
with native vegetation to enhance infiltration, filtration, and pollutant
removal from surface runoff water.
   BLIGHT. Unsightly condition including the accumulation of debris, litter,
rubbish, or rubble; fences characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling,
cracking, peeling, or rusting; landscaping that is dead, characterized by
uncontrolled growth or lack of maintenance, or damaged; and any other similar
conditions of disrepair and deterioration regardless of the condition of other
properties in the neighborhood.
   BUILDING. Any structure that is permanently affixed to the land and built
for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or
movable property of any kind.
   BUILDING COVERAGE (LOT COVERAGE). The amount of a lot covered by buildings.
   BUILDING FOOTPRINT. The outline of a building, as measured around its
foundation, or building coverage, whichever is greater.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The person who enforces the building ordinances and
regulations for the city, and other ordinances and regulations as assigned.
   BUILDING PERMIT. An official document or certification that is issued by the
building official and which authorizes the construction, alteration,
enlargement, conversion, reconstruction, remodeling, erection, demolition,
moving, or repair of a building or structure.
   BULK. The size and mutual relationships of a building or structure and the
location of same with respect to: size and height of the building; location of
exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines, streets, or other
buildings; gross floor area of the building in relation to the lot area; all
open space allocated to the building. The total volume of a structure.
   BUSINESS LICENSE. A certificate issued by the city authorizing the holder to
conduct specified business activity within the city.
   CANOPY. A permanent roofed structure that may be freestanding or partially
attached to a building for the purpose of providing shelter to patrons on foot
and/or in motor vehicles. In the context of outdoor lighting, a canopy most
commonly means a structure built above gas station pump islands to protect
customers from the elements and to mount lighting fixtures to illuminate the
pump area.
   CARGO CONTAINER STORAGE. An industrial use where standardized reusable
vessels are stored that are specifically designed for the packing, shipping,
movement or transportation of freight, articles, goods or commodities and that
is designed for mounting on or movement by a rail car or truck trailer.
   CAR WASH. A property used for the washing and cleaning of passenger
vehicles, recreational vehicles, or other light duty equipment.
   CARPORT. A stationary structure consisting of a roof, its supports, not more
than one wall or storage cabinets substituting for a wall, used to shelter
motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, or boats.
   CATERING SERVICE. An establishment in which the principal use is the
preparation of food and meals on the premises, and where such food and meals
are delivered to another location for consumption.
   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A certificate of occupancy or a certificate of
inspection issued by the City of Blue Island at the completion of a building
permit or change of occupancy.
   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION. Any entity which: (1) has been certified as a not-
for-profit organization under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue code;
and (2) has religious, charitable, or eleemosynary functions or is a religious
or charitable organization. As used in this definition, a charitable
organization is an organization which exclusively, and in a manner consistent
with existing laws and for the benefit of an indefinite number of persons,
freely and voluntarily ministers to the physical, mental, or spiritual needs of
persons, and which thereby lessens the burdens of government.
   CITY. The City of Blue Island, Illinois.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of Blue Island, Illinois.
   CLEAR VISION TRIANGLE. The area created by drawing an imaginary line between
points 30 feet back from where the curb lines of the intersection.
   CLUB OR LODGE.A private, not-for-profit association, corporation, or other
entity consisting of persons who are bona fide paying members and which owns,
leases or uses a building or portion thereof, the use of such premises being
restricted primarily to members and their guests.
   COFFEE SHOP. An informal restaurant primarily offering coffee, tea, and
other beverages, and where light refreshments and limited menu meals may also
be sold. A café can be considered a coffee house.
   COMMUNITY GARDEN. A private or public facility for the cultivation of
fruits, flowers, vegetables, or ornamental plants by more than one person or
family.
   COMMUNITY HOME. A single dwelling unit that complies with the regulations of
the zoning district in which it is located, and which is occupied on a
permanent basis by a group of not more than eight unrelated persons with
service-dependent or developmentally disabled people living in a family-like
environment who are undergoing treatment or rehabilitation and constitute a
single housekeeping unit in which residents share responsibilities, meals and
recreation; and also meeting the requirements set forth in §
165.025(F).
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. A compilation of policy statements, goals and
objectives, standards, maps, and statistical data for the physical, social, and
economic development, both public and private, of the community.
   CONDOMINIUM. Ownership of a single unit in a multi-unit structure that
includes common areas and facilities.
   CONSERVATION EASEMENT. An easement that protects identified conservation
values of the land, such as wetlands, woodlands, significant trees or grooves,
floodplains, wildlife habitat, and similar resources.
   CONSIGNMENT STORE. A retail establishment engaged in selling used
merchandise, such as clothing, furniture, books, shoes, or household
appliances, on consignment, or a retail establishment engaged in selling
donated used merchandise that is operated by a person or organization.
Merchandise is brought to the establishment and processed by marking, cleaning,
sorting, and storing as a major part of the principal use. Such stores do not
include those selling vehicles, auto parts, scrap, or waste.
   CONTAINER STORAGE, CARGO. Any building, structure, premises, enclosure or
other place where four or more freight containers are stacked, housed, stored,
kept for hire, sheltered or parked for any purpose other than repair or
repainting, or where rent or compensation is paid to any owner, manager or
lessee to stack, house, store, keep, shelter or park freight containers on any
property.
   CONTRACTOR, OFFICE. A room or group of rooms used for conducting business
affairs that does not use any exterior storage area.
   CONTRACTOR, YARD. An open piece of land and/or building used primarily for
the storage of equipment, vehicles, machinery (new or used), building
materials, paints, pipe, or electrical components used by the owner or occupant
of the premises in the conduct of any building trades or building craft.
   CONVENIENCE STORE. An establishment offering for sale a limited line of
groceries and household items intended for the convenience of the neighborhood.
A food market can be considered a convenience store. A CONVENIENCE STORE does
not include any retail establishment that derives more than 20% of its gross
revenue from the sale of loose tobacco and cigars, cigarettes, pipes,
electronic cigarettes (i.e. e-cigs, vapes, vape pens, dab pens, tanks, mods,
pod-mods, and electronic nicotine delivery systems – ENDS), electronic hookahs,
and other smoking devices for burning and/or heating tobacco and related
accessories, or in which the sale of other products is merely incidental.
   CORNER LOT. A lot that has frontage on more than one intersecting street.
   CURB CUT. A driveway opening delineated by a concrete apron along a street.
   DAYCARE CENTER, ADULT. An individual, agency, or organization which
regularly provides adult or senior companion services and care on a regular
basis for less than 24 hours per day for one or more seniors. Services may
include, but are not limited to providing companionship in social interactions,
peer counseling, fostering client contact with family and friends, assisting
clients in applying for public services, addressing unmet needs with community
leaders, healthcare professionals and other care providers, health monitoring,
medication supervision, personal care and recreational/educational/therapeutic
activities. An adult day care center shall comply with all applicable state and
federal laws, and be registered, if required, with the Illinois Department of
Aging or other applicable state agency.
   DAYCARE CENTER, CHILDREN. A facility operated for the purpose of providing
care, protection and guidance to ten or more individuals during only part of a
24-hour day. This term includes nursery schools, preschools, day care centers
for individuals, and other similar uses but excludes public and private
educational facilities or any facility offering care to individuals for a full
24-hour period.
   DAYCARE, HOME. A dwelling which receives more than four but no more than
eight children for less than 24 hours per day. The maximum of eight children
received shall be reduced in number by the family's natural or adopted children
and all other persons under the age of 14 residing in the home. This does not
include an operation which receives only children from a single family. The use
must be licensed by or registered with the Illinois Department of Children and
Family Services in accordance with the Child Care Act of 1969. (Illinois
Standard)
   DEDICATION. A transfer of private property to public ownership upon a
written acceptance.
   DEED RESTRICTION. A restriction on the use of a zoning lot or parcel of land
that is set forth in the deed, and recorded with the county register of deeds.
It is binding on subsequent owners, and it is also known as a restrictive
covenant.
   DELICATESSEN. An establishment where food is sold for the consumption off-
premises. This use excludes grocery stores or supermarkets.
   DEMOLITION WASTE. Materials found in demolished buildings, roads, and other
structures including but not limited to concrete, drywall, asphalt, wood,
masonry, composition roofing, roofing, siding, structural metal, wire, and
insulation.
   DETENTION AREA. An area that is designed to capture specific quantities of
stormwater and to gradually release the stormwater at a sufficiently slow rate
to avert flooding.
   DEVELOPMENT. All improvements on a site, including buildings, other
structures, parking and loading areas, landscaping, paved or graveled areas,
and areas devoted to exterior display, storage, or activities. Development
includes improved open areas such as plazas and walkways, but does not include
natural geologic forms or undisturbed land.
   DEVELOPMENT EXACTION. A fee or a contribution of cash or property required
of a developer as a condition of receiving development approval, most often
associated with subdivision regulations. Similar to impact fees.
   DISABLED PERSON. For the purposes of this zoning chapter, a disabled person
is a person who has a condition of physical or mental disability which
substantially limits one or more major life activities as stated in Section 504
of the Federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and state law.
   DISCONTINUED USE. A use that physically left the land it was on, a permitted
use that ceased, or a use terminated at the end of a lease or contract.
   DISPLAY SURFACE. The area made available by the sign structure or building
surface for the purpose of displaying the advertising message. This includes a
single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of wording,
representation, emblem or any figure of similar character together with any
background materials, color or area defined by a border or frame, any of which
forms an integral part of the display or serves to differentiate such display
form the structure to which it is affixed.
   DOGGY DAYCARE CENTER. A facility providing such services as canine day care
for all or part of a day, obedience classes, training, grooming, or behavioral
counseling, provided that overnight boarding is not permitted.
   DONATION AND COLLECTION DROP BOX. A receptacle provided for general public
to drop-off recyclable paper, cans, glass and plastics as well as charitable
donations such as clothing, shoes, books, and toys.
   DRAINAGE WAY. An open linear depression, whether constructed or natural,
that functions for the collection and drainage of surface water. It may be
permanently or temporarily inundated.
   DRIVE-THROUGH ESTABLISHMENT. A business establishment so developed that its
retail or service character is dependent on providing a driveway approach or
parking spaces for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons while in the motor
vehicle rather than within a building or structure.
   DWELLING, ATTACHED. A dwelling that is joined to another dwelling at one or
more sides by a party wall or walls.
   DWELLING DETACHED. A dwelling that is entirely surrounded by open space on
the same building lot.
   DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.
   DWELLING, UPSTAIRS ONLY. A single-family dwelling unit located entirely
above a non-residential use on the ground floor of a building. Only one such
dwelling unit may be established per lot.
   EASEMENT. A grant of rights by a property owner that allows others to use
the owner's land for a specific purpose, such as access, or to locate
utilities. Recorded and on record in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of
Cook County, Illinois.
   ENTERTAINMENT, INDOOR COMMERCIAL. A predominant spectator use conducted
within an enclosed building. Typically, such uses include motion picture
theaters, live performances, and concert or music halls.
   ENTERTAINMENT, OUTDOOR COMMERCIAL. A predominant spectator use conducted in
open, partially enclosed, or screened facilities. Typically, such uses include
sports arenas, motor racing facilities, and outdoor amusement parks.
   EQUIPMENT, HEAVY. A movable or transportable vehicle or other apparatus
commonly used in commercial, industrial, or construction enterprises, such as
but not limited to trucks, trailers, bulldozers, cranes, backhoes, rollers,
loaders, lifts, having a gross weight of 2.5 tons or more.
   EQUIPMENT, RENTAL. The temporary leasing of tools, materials, or
construction equipment, excluding equipment used for excavation, grading, or
similar tasks or processes.
   EQUIPMENT RENTAL AND SALES ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment engaged in the
sale or rental of tools, trucks, tractors, construction equipment, agricultural
implements, and similar industrial equipment, and the rental of mobile homes.
Included in this use type is the incidental storage, maintenance, and servicing
of such equipment.
   EXTERIOR DISPLAY. Exterior display includes the outdoor display of products,
vehicles, equipment, and machinery for sale or lease. Examples of uses that
often have exterior display are car and boat sales and leasing, and plant
nurseries.
   FAMILY.  An individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage or
adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit; or a group of not more
than four persons not related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together
as a single housekeeping unit.
   FARMER'S MARKET. An occasional or periodic market held in an open area or in
a structure where groups of individual sellers offer for sale to the public
such items as fresh produce, seasonal fruits, fresh flowers, arts and crafts
items, and food and beverages (but not to include second-hand goods) dispensed
from booths located on-site.
   FENCE. A structure, solid or otherwise, which is a barrier and used as a
boundary or means of protection, confinement, or concealment.
      (1)   FENCE, CHAIN-LINK. An open mesh fence made entirely of wire woven
in squares of approximately 1.5 inches with vertical supports not less than 1.5
inches in diameter spaced not less than six feet, and not more than eight feet,
apart.
      (2)   FENCE, DECORATIVE. A continuous permanent or temporary structure
designed primarily for aesthetic appeal, and not intended or designed as a
method of prohibiting entry to a property.
      (3)   FENCE, HEIGHT. The vertical distance from the lowest adjoining
grade the top most portion of the fence.
      (4)   FENCE, LINE. A fence of non-solid construction, no less or more
than six feet in height, whose purpose it is to delineate property lines or
boundaries.
      (5)   FENCE, LIVING. A hedge of vegetation used as a screening device or
a fence with vegetation growing to it or on it which at the time of maturity
would prevent an "open" effect and would block the normal line of sight.
      (6)   FENCE, PRIVACY. A solid fence erected or constructed to prevent
views across the fence line.
      (7)   FENCE, PROTECTIVE. A substantially built fence (including any gates
in said fence) not less than five feet in height, above grade, which may be
required as an enclosure for an "attractive" nuisance or other potential hazard
to children (e.g., a swimming pool).
      (8)   FENCE, SECTION. A portion or panel of fence construction, normally
consisting of pickets, planks, or metal fabric attached to horizontal rails,
and which is attached or constructed, in more or less regular sequential
intervals, to supporting vertical posts; in determining what constitutes a
fence section, the normal guideline shall be sequential sections of fence which
are eight feet in length.
      (9)   FENCE, SOLID. A fence, including solid entrance and exit gates,
that effectively conceals from viewers in or on adjoining properties, streets,
alleys, or public ways, materials stored and operations conducted behind it.
   FILL. Sand, gravel, earth, or other materials of any composition whatsoever
placed or deposited by humans. Neither commercial or residential vehicles can
be parked on fill in Blue Island.
   FIRE LANE. Unobstructed area or driveway meeting Uniform Fire Code
requirements; typically, may not be used for parking or loading area.
   FLEA MARKET. An occasional or periodic market held in an open area or
structure where goods are offered for sale to the general public by individual
sellers from an open, semi-open, or temporary-covered structure.
   FLOOD-HAZARD AREA. Land that is in the 100-year floodplain as currently
defined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
   FLOODWAY. The active flowing channel during a flood, as designated on flood
maps for the city; the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated
height.
   FOOD PROCESSING ESTABLISHMENT. A manufacturing establishment producing or
processing foods for human consumption and certain related products. Includes:
(1) bakery products, sugar and confectionery products (except facilities that
produce goods only for on-site sales with no wider distribution; (2) dairy
products processing; (3) fats and oil products (not including rendering
plants); (4) fruit and vegetable canning, preserving, and related processing;
(5) grain mill products and by-products; (6) meat, poultry, and seafood
canning, curing, and byproduct processing (not including facilities that also
slaughter animals); and (7) miscellaneous food preparation from raw products,
including catering services that are independent from food stores or
restaurants.
   FOOT CANDLE (FC). A unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points
of which are one foot from a uniform point source of one standard candle. One-
foot candle (1 fc) is equivalent to one lumen evenly distributed over one
square foot of surface area at a distance of one foot. Foot candle measurements
can be taken with a hand-held light meter.
   FREIGHT TERMINAL, TRUCK. A building or area in which freight is collected
and/or stored for in intrastate or interstate shipment.
   FRONT SETBACK. The setback required between a building and the front
property line of the lot on which the building is located, extending along the
full length of the front property line between the side property lines.
   FRONTAGE. The dimension of a property line abutting a public or private
street.
   FUNERAL HOME. An establishment used for undertaking services such as
preparing human dead for burial or cremation, display of the deceased and
performing human funeral services.
   GARAGE. An accessory building or an accessory portion of the principal
building, including a carport, which is intended for and used for storing of
the private passenger vehicles of the occupants and in which no business,
service or industry connected directly or indirectly with automotive vehicles
is conducted.
   GAS STATION, FULL SERVICE (SERVICE BAY). A facility limited to retail sales
to the public of gasoline, motor oil, lubricants, motor fuels, travel aides,
and minor automobile accessories. In addition, such a facility may provide
minor vehicle servicing, minor repairs, and maintenance, but not reconditioning
of motor vehicles, collision services such as body, frame, or fender
straightening and repair, or overall painting of automobiles.
   GAS STATION, LIMITED SERVICE. A facility limited to retail sales to the
public of gasoline, motor oil, lubricants, motor fuels, travel aides, and minor
automobile accessories.
   GAS STATION MINIMART. A facility associated with the sale of gasoline
products that also offers for sale prepackaged food items and tangible consumer
goods, primarily for self-service by the consumer. Hot beverages, fountain-type
beverages, and pastries may be included in the food items offered for sale, but
food items that are prepared or individually proportioned on the premises shall
be prohibited.
   GROCERY STORE. A retail establishment primarily selling prepackaged and
perishable food as well as other convenience and household goods.
   GUEST HOUSE (ACCESSORY). An attached or detached building that provides
living quarters for guests and: (1) contains no kitchen or cooking facility;
(2) is clearly subordinate and incidental to the principal residence on the
same building site; and (3) is not rented or leased, whether compensation be
direct or indirect.
   HARDWARE STORE. A retail store where items such as plumbing, heating, and
electrical supplies, sporting goods, and paints are sold.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Any substance that, because of its quantity,
concentration, or physical or chemical characteristics, poses a significant
present or potential hazard to human health and safety or to the environment if
released into the workplace or the environment. The term includes but is not
limited to hazardous substances and hazardous wastes. Solid waste or a
combination of solid wastes that, because of quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, may: (1) cause or
significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or increase in serious
irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or (2) pose a substantial
present or potential hazard when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of, or otherwise managed.
   HEALTH CLUB. An establishment, which may include saunas and steam baths,
offering or providing facilities for, and instruction in, general health,
physical fitness and controlled exercises such as weight lifting, calisthenics
and aerobic/slim nastic dancing.
   HISTORIC LANDMARK. Historic landmark designations may include buildings, a
portion of a building, sites, trees, statues, signs, or other objects or spaces
that the city or the Keeper of the National Register of Historic Places has
designated or listed for their special historic, cultural, archaeological, or
architectural merit.
   HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation, profession, activity or use that is clearly
a customary, secondary, and incidental use of a residential dwelling unit which
does not alter the exterior of the property or affect the residential character
of the neighborhood.
   HOME OFFICE. Residences of clergymen, architects, landscape architects,
professional engineers, registered land surveyors, lawyers, real estate agents,
artists, teachers, authors, musicians, or persons in other recognized
professions used to conduct their professions where the office use is
incidental to the residential use of the premises.
   HOSPITAL. An institution, place, building, buildings on a campus, or agency,
public or private, whether organized for profit or not, devoted primarily to
the maintenance and operation of facilities for the diagnosis and treatment or
care of two or more unrelated persons admitted for overnight stay or longer in
order to obtain medical, including obstetric, psychiatric and nursing, care of
illness, disease, injury, infirmity, or deformity. (State of Illinois
Definition) A hospital shall not include "Medical/Dental Clinics."
   HOTEL. A building containing lodging rooms, a general kitchen and dining
room, a common entrance lobby, halls and stairway, and where lodging rooms do
not have a doorway opening directly to the outdoors, except for emergencies,
and where more than 50% of the lodging rooms are for rent, with or without
meals, to transient guests for a continuous period of more than eight hours and
less than 30 days.
   HOUSEHOLD. One or more persons related by blood, marriage, civil union,
legal adoption or guardianship, plus not more than five additional persons, who
live together in one dwelling unit; or one or more handicapped persons as
defined in the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, plus not more than five
additional persons, who live together in one dwelling unit.
   IMPACT FEE. A fee charged by local governments to developers as a total or
partial reimbursement for the cost of providing additional facilities or
services needed as a result of new development (e.g., wider roads, new sewers,
etc.).
   IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE. A proportion of a building lot occupied by surfaces
that do not allow for stormwater filtration, such as a principal structure (a
house), an ancillary structure (a detached garage), a shed, a chicken coop, a
paved walkway, a paved driveway, a paved parking pad or lot, and a swimming
pool (either above ground or in ground pool), expressed as a percentage of
total lot area. Basically, an impermeable surface does not allow for the
absorption of water into the ground.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. A surface consisting of asphalt, concrete, roofing
material, brick, paving block, plastic, or other similar material which does
not readily absorb water.
   INCOMPATIBLE USE. A use or service which is incapable of direct association
with certain other uses because it is contradictory, incongruous, or
discordant.
   JEWELRY STORE. A store that sells new merchandise primarily and some used
merchandise from estate sales or reconstitute precious metals they purchase
into jewelry forms that are sold at retail on the premises.
   JUNK. Any scrap, waste, worn out, discarded material, or debris collected or
stored for destruction, disposal, or some other use.
   JUNKYARD. A tract of land, including any accessory structure thereon, that
is used for buying, selling, storing, baling, packing, disassembling, or
handling waste or scrap materials. Such scrap materials include vehicles,
machinery, and equipment not in operable condition, and metals, glass, paper,
plastics, rags, and rubber tires. A lot on which three or more inoperable
vehicles are stored shall be deemed a junkyard. A junkyard includes an
automobile wrecking yard. The city does not allow junkyards.
   KENNEL. Any location where five or more dogs or cats aged six months or
older are boarded or bred. The sale of these animals may be a part of the
kennel use. Establishments where animals are offered for sale as the primary
use, such as pet stores, are not classified as kennels.
   LABORATORY, RESEARCH. A facility for scientific laboratory research in
technology-intensive fields. Examples include biotechnology, pharmaceuticals,
genetics, plastics, polymers, resins, coatings, fibers, fabrics, films, heat
transfer, and radiation research facilities.
   LAND SURVEY. A survey map of registered land designed to simplify a
complicated metes and bounds description by designating the same as a tract or
tracts of a registered land survey number.
   LANDSCAPE PLAN. A plan associated with a subdivision, land development, or
parking facility plan indicating the placement of landscape materials,
including specifications, species, quantities, and method of installation.
   LAND USE. A use of land that may result in an earth change, including but
not limited to subdivision, residential, commercial, industrial, recreational,
agricultural practices, or other development, private and public highway, road,
and stream construction, and drainage construction.
   LAND USE DISTRICT. As used in this zoning chapter, a land use district is
the same as a zoning district.
   LIGHT TRESPASS. Light that falls on neighboring properties or produces glare
or distraction for observers away from the area for which the light is
intended.
   LIVE/WORK SPACE. Buildings or spaces within buildings that are used jointly
for artisan, commercial and residential purposes where the residential use of
the space is secondary or accessory to the primary use as a place of work.
   LIVING AREA. The habitable floor area of a residential structure conforming
to applicable building codes; typically, does not include garage area, and
attic and basement areas with substandard ceiling height or substandard egress.
   LOADING AREA. The area available for the maneuvering and standing of
vehicles engaged in delivering and loading goods, freight, or other articles.
   LODGE. A hall or meeting place of a local branch or the members composing
such a branch of a fraternal order or society, such as the Masons, Knights of
Columbus, Moose, American Legion and other similar organizations. It shall be
permissible to serve food and meals on such premises; providing, adequate
dining room space and kitchen facilities are available. The sale of alcoholic
beverages to members and their guests shall be allowed provided it is secondary
and incidental to the promotion of some other common objective by the
organization; and, further provided that, such sale of alcoholic beverages is
in compliance with all applicable federal, state and county laws.
   LOT. A lot is a legally defined piece of land other than a tract that is the
result of a subdivision.
   LOT COVERAGE. A portion of a lot that is occupied by buildings or
structures, including accessory buildings or structures, expressed as a
percentage of total lot area.
   LOT LINE (PROPERTY LINE). The property lines along the edge of a lot or
site.
   LOT OF RECORD. A plot of land that was not created through an approved
subdivision or partition; that was created and recorded before the earliest
date on which the City of Blue Island had a duly adopted zoning ordinance that
governed the subdivision and partition of land within the city; and for which
the deed, or other instrument dividing the land, is recorded at the Office of
the Recorder of Deeds of Cook County, Illinois.
   LUMBER YARD. An area used for the storage, distribution, and sale of
finished or rough-cut lumber and lumber products, but not including the
manufacture or fabrication of lumber, lumber products, or firewood.
   LUMEN. The unit of measurement used to quantify the amount of light produced
by a lamp or emitted from a fixture (as distinct from "watt" which is a
measurement of the electrical power).
   MACHINE SHOP. A shop where lathes, presses, grinders, shapers, and other
wood- and metal-working machines are used such as blacksmith, tinsmith,
welding, and sheet metal shops; plumbing, heating, and electrical repair shops;
and overhaul shops.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A mobile home constructed in accordance with federal
manufactured housing construction and safety standards (HUD code) in effect
after June 15, 1976.
   MANUFACTURING. The mechanical or chemical transformation of materials into
new products, including the assembling of component parts, the manufacturing of
products, and the blending of materials, such as lubricating oils, plastics,
resins, or liquors.
   MANUFACTURING, HEAVY. An establishment engaged in manufacturing, assembly,
fabrication, packaging or other industrial processing of products primarily
from extracted or raw materials or the bulk storage and handling of such
products and materials, or an industrial establishment having potential to
produce noise, dust, glare, odors or vibration beyond its property line. This
term includes but is not limited to: (a) processing and packaging of alcohol
beverages; (b) chemical manufacturing; (c) stonework or concrete product
manufacturing; (d) fabrication of metal products; (e) manufacturing of
agricultural, construction, or mining machinery; (f) motor vehicle
manufacturing; (g) lumber milling; (h) ship or boat construction; and (i)
permanent concrete/batch plant.
   MANUFACTURING, LIGHT. An establishment engaged in the indoor manufacturing,
assembly, fabrication, packaging or other industrial processing of finished
parts or products, primarily from previously prepared materials, or the indoor
provision of industrial services, where there are few external effects across
property lines. This term includes but is not limited to a business engaged in
the processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, or packaging of food,
textile, leather, wood, paper, chemical, plastic, or metal products, but does
not include basic industrial processing from raw materials.
   MARINA. Facility located on a body of water that provides for the storage
(wet and dry), launching, and mooring of pleasure boats together with one or
more accessory retail and service uses, such as marine equipment sales,
showers, private clubs and restaurants.
   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment having a fixed place of business
where any person, firm, association, or corporation engages in or carries on or
permitted to be engaged in or carried on the activity of massage, defined as
any method of pressure on or friction against or stroking, kneading, rubbing,
tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating of the external soft parts of the
body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus
or appliance with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol,
liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments, or other
similar preparations commonly used in this practice by a certified massage
therapist.
   MEDICAL/DENTAL CLINICS. This use includes establishments offering the
provision of care, such as examination and treatment services, by physicians,
dentists, ophthalmologists, psychologists, and physical or occupational
therapists, exclusively on an out-patient basis. Such services would include x-
rays, on-site testing laboratories, rehabilitation therapy facilities,
emergency treatment, diagnostic services, and related services to outpatients.
MEDICAL/DENTAL CLINICS do not include HOSPITALS.
   MICROBREWERY/BREWPUB. An establishment which manufactures up to 5,000
barrels of fermented malt beverages per year on premises for either consumption
on premises, or off premises in hand-capped or sealed containers in quantities
up to one-half barrel or 15-1/2 gallons sold directly to the consumer. May
include food sales.
   MITIGATION. To avoid, rectify, repair, or compensate for negative impacts
that result from other actions. For example, improvements to a street may be
required to mitigate for transportation impacts resulting from development.
   MIXED USE. A development site has a combination of one or more types of
residential uses, commercial uses (e.g., office, retail, or services), civic,
or industrial uses.
   MORTUARY. An establishment providing services such as preparing the human
dead for burial and arranging and managing funerals, and may include limited
caretaker facilities. This classification excludes cemeteries, crematoriums,
and columbariums.
   MOTEL. A building containing lodging rooms having adjoining individual
bathrooms and where the lodging rooms are not entered from a common entrance
lobby and where more than 50% of the lodging rooms are for rent to transient
guests for a period of less than 30 days.
   MOTOR HOME. Motor home includes motorized vehicles designed for human
occupancy on an intermittent basis. A camper is considered a motor home when it
is on the back of a pickup or truck. Motor homes are regulated as trucks unless
the regulations specifically indicate otherwise.
   MOTOR VEHICLES. Vehicles that have their own motive power and that are used
for the transportation of people or goods on streets. Motor vehicle includes
motorcycles, passenger vehicles, trucks, and recreational vehicles, except all-
terrain vehicles, off-road vehicles, snow mobiles, and similar vehicles are not
allowed on streets. Every vehicle which is propelled otherwise than by muscle
power, including, but not limited to, motorcycles, automobiles, trucks, truck-
trailers, trailers, semi-trailers, buses and mobile homes.
   MOTOR VEHICLE, ABANDONED. A vehicle shall be presumed abandoned under any of
the following circumstances: (1) the vehicle is physically inoperable and/or is
missing parts so that it is not maintained for driving; and (2) the vehicle
does not bear any or all of the following: (a) a valid registration plate; or
(b) a current certificate of inspection.
   MOTOR VEHICLE, INOPERABLE. A motorized vehicle incapable of immediately
being driven and not properly licensed or inspected for safety in accordance
with state law.
   MOTOR VEHICLE, SALES AND RENTAL. Retail establishments that sell or lease
new or used automobiles, trucks, vans, recreational vehicles, trailers, boats
or motorcycles or other similar motorized transportation vehicles. An
automobile dealership may maintain an inventory of the vehicles for sale or
lease on-site. Support uses may also exist upon the same site, such as
maintenance, repair, and service areas and indoor parts storage areas.
   MOTOR VEHICLE, SERVICE AND REPAIR. Includes, but shall not be limited to,
establishments involved in engine rebuilding or major reconditioning of worn or
damaged motor vehicles, towing and collision service, including body, frame or
fender straightening or repair, and painting of motor vehicles. This use also
includes establishments where gasoline and/or fuel oil are sold and where oil,
grease, batteries, tires and automobile accessories may be supplied and
dispensed at retail and/or where the following services may be rendered in
fully enclosed bays: sale and servicing of spark plugs, batteries, and
distributors and distributor parts, tire servicing and repair, but not
recapping, replacement or adjustments of mufflers, tail pipes, water hose, fan
belts, brake fluid, grease retainers and wheel bearings, radiator cleaning and
flushing; provision of water, antifreeze and the like, washing, polishing,
detailing, and sale of washing and polishing materials, greasing and
lubrication.
   MOVIE THEATER. A specialized theater for showing movies or motion pictures.
The primary structural difference between a theater and a movie theater is the
projection screen. However, many movie theaters can easily be adapted for stage
performances and many stages have folding screens for movie projections.
Although screen shapes are mostly rectangular, they come in a variety of
shapes. Also, some special-purpose multimedia movie theaters use multiple
screens, one on each wall face, or the entire ceiling surface, which are
sometimes curved or geodesic in shape.
   NONCONFORMANCE. A condition that occurs when, on the effective date of
adoption of this code or a previous ordinance or on the effective date of an
ordinance text amendment or rezoning, an existing lot, structure, building,
sign, development, or use of an existing lot or structure does not conform to
one or more of the regulations currently applicable to the district in which
the lot, structure, building, sign, development, or use is located.
   NONCONFORMING USE. A use that was allowed by right when established or a use
that obtained a required land use approval when established, but that
subsequently, due to a change in the zone or zoning regulations, the use or the
amount of floor area of the use is now prohibited in the zone.
   NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION. A nonprofit organization shall include but not be
limited to a not-for-profit organization, corporation, community chest, fund,
or foundation organized and operated exclusively for religious, cultural,
charitable, scientific, recreational, literary, agricultural, or educational
purposes, or to foster amateur competition in a sport formally recognized by
the National Collegiate Athletic Association, and an organization exempt from
taxation under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue code of 1986 organized
or incorporated in this state or another state or having a principal place of
business in this state or in another state.
   NURSING HOME. A home licensed by the state of Illinois for the aged or
chronically or incurably ill persons in which five or more such persons not of
the immediate family are provided with food and shelter or care for
compensation, but not including hospitals, clinics, or similar institutions
devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of the sick or injured.
   OFFICE. Any room, studio, clinic, suite or building wherein the primary use
is the conduct of a business such as accounting, correspondence, research,
editing, administration or analysis; or the conduct of a business by salesmen,
sales representatives or manufacturer's representatives; or the conduct of a
business by professionals such as engineers, architects, land surveyors,
artists, musicians, lawyers, accountants, real estate brokers, insurance
agents, certified massage therapists, dentists or physicians, urban planners
and landscape architects. Office shall not involve manufacturing, fabrication,
production, processing, assembling, cleaning, testing, repair or storage of
materials, goods and products; or the sale and/or delivery of any materials,
goods or products which are physically located on the premises. An office shall
not be deemed to include a veterinary clinic.
   OFF-STREET PARKING. All off-street areas designed, used, required or
intended to be used for the parking of motor vehicles.
   ON-STREET PARKING. Parking in the street right-of-way, typically in parking
lanes or bays. Parking may be "parallel" or "angled" in relation to the edge of
the right-of-way or curb.
   OPEN SPACE. A portion of a building lot that is devoted to landscaping,
lawn, and other similar permeable uses such as a rain garden or a natural
retention swale. An open space shall not include a street, a driveway, a
parking pad or lot, a sidewalk, a walkway, a plaza, a terrace, a patio, a
swimming pool (either above ground or in ground pool), or other similar
impervious or semi-impervious building surfaces.
   OUTDOOR SALES AREA. An area of designated size used for the display of
merchandise or tangible property normally vended within the contiguous business
or organization. Multiple items may be displayed on a rack but shall not be
stacked upon each other.
   OUTDOOR STORAGE. Outdoor storage is characterized by the keeping of any item
outside of an enclosed building or structure and that is not accessible to the
general public. This includes but is not limited to garden supplies, building
supplies, plants, materials stored in crates, boxes, or shipping containers;
lumber yards; pipe; and other similar uses.
   OLDE WESTERN AVENUE HISTORIC PRESERVATION DISTRICT. The area surrounding
Olde Western Avenue that has been designated as a Historic Preservation
District.
   OWNER (PROPERTY OWNER). The owner of the title to real property or the
contract purchaser of real property of record, as shown on the latest
assessment records in the Office of the County Assessor. Owner also includes a
deed holder or contract purchaser whose name does not appear in the latest
assessment records, but who presents to the city a copy of a deed or contract
of sale showing date, book, and page of recording.
   OWNERSHIP. An ownership is one or more contiguous lots that are owned by the
same person, partnership, association, or corporation. Ownership also includes
lots that are in common ownership but are separated by a right-of-way.
   PARCEL. A legally defined area of land created through a partition.
   PARKING. Adequate off-street parking facilities in accordance with the
parking standards and specifications set forth in the City Code of Ordinances
shall be provided to serve the accessory use. Such parking shall be considered
part of the accessory use and shall be in addition to off-street parking spaces
or loading spaces required other permitted uses on the site.
   PARKING AREA. A parking area is all the area devoted to the standing,
maneuvering, and circulation of motor vehicles. Parking areas do not include
driveways or areas devoted exclusively to non-passenger loading.
   PARKING GARAGE. A structure designed to accommodate vehicular parking spaces
that are fully or partially enclosed or located on the deck surface of a
building. This definition includes parking garages, deck parking, and
underground or under-building parking areas.
   PARKING LOT, OFF-STREET. Public or private open areas other than a street or
public right-of-way, used for the temporary storage (parking) of operable
passenger automobiles and commercial vehicles, and available either for
compensation, for free, or as an accommodation for clients, employees,
visitors, guests, residents or customers.
   PARKING SPACE. A space designed to provide standing area for a motor
vehicle.
   PAVED AREA. A hard-surfaced area or an area covered with a perforated hard
surface (such as porous concrete or pavers) that is able to withstand vehicular
traffic or other heavy-impact uses. Graveled areas are not paved areas.
   PAWN SHOP. An establishment that engages, in whole or in part, in the
business of loaning money on the security of pledges of personal property, or
deposits or conditional sales of personal property, or the purchase or sale of
personal property.
   PERSONAL SERVICES. Establishments for the provision of personal services
directly to the consumer at the site of the business or which receives from/
returns to the customer goods that have been treated or processed at another
location. This use shall include, but shall not be limited to, barber shops,
beauty parlors, domestic pet grooming, interior design studios, laundry and dry
cleaning establishments (plant off-premises), commercial package or mailing
services (distribution off-site), photography studios and/or processing, self-
service laundries, shoe repair shops, tanning or toning salons, tailoring
shops, and travel agencies. This use does not include restaurants or retail
establishments.
   PET SHOP. A retail shop primarily involved in the sale of domestic animals,
such as dogs, cats, fish, birds, and reptiles, excluding exotic animals and
farm animals such as horses, goats, sheep, and poultry.
   PHOTOMETRIC PLAN. A technical test report that indicates light distribution
and performance of a light fixture. A photometric plan may include candlepower
distribution data, cutoff classification, foot candle chart, etc., some of
which are generally available directly from the manufacturer, and which may
have been produced by an independent laboratory.
   PLACES OF WORSHIP. A church, synagogue, temple, mosque, or other such place
of religious worship, including any accessory use of the structure, such as a
child care center or dwelling.
   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT. A parcel of land or contiguous parcels of land
controlled by a single landowner or by a group of landowners in common
agreement as to control designed to be maintained and operated as a single
entity, the environment of which is compatible with adjacent parcels and the
intent of the zoning district or districts in which it is located, and the
development of which is controlled by a planned development plan, approved by
the City Council, and which has certain facilities in common, such as yards and
open spaces, recreation areas, garages and parking areas.
   PLANT NURSERY. Full-service retail sales establishment that sells plants and
related goods that were purchased wholesale from off site. Related goods can
include but are not limited to packaged fertilizer, seeds, mulch, topsoil,
planters, and gardening tools. Such goods must be stored inside of a solid or
screened structure.
   PLAT. Diagrams, drawings and other writing containing all the descriptions,
locations, dedications, provisions, and information concerning a land division.
This term includes the state law definitions of PARTITION PLAT and SUBDIVISION
PLAT.
   PORTE-COCHERE. A porch or cover, under which a vehicle may be driven
temporarily to protect the occupants when alighting. A porte-cochere shall not
be construed to be a CARPORT.
   PRESCHOOL (NURSERY SCHOOL). Childcare, with or without educational services,
for children no older than five years of age.
   PRIMARY STRUCTURE. A structure or combination of structures of chief
importance or function on a site. In general, the primary use of the site is
carried out in a primary structure.
   PRIMARY USE. An activity or combination of activities of chief importance on
the site. One of the main purposes for which the land or structures are
intended, designed, or ordinarily used. A site may have more than one primary
use, if a planned development is developed and executed.
   PROPERTY LINE ADJUSTMENT. The relocation of a single common property line
between two abutting properties.
   PUBLIC ACCESS EASEMENT. An easement granted to the public for all the
purposes for which a public sidewalk may be used, including but not limited to,
pedestrian and bicycle travel.
   PUBLIC AREA. The right-of-way of any area owned by the State of Illinois,
Cook County, or the city, which is used for a highway, street, or road
purposes, the right-of-way of any area dedicated for highway, street or road
purposes, or any automobile parking area owned by or subject to a lease
agreement with the city.
   RAILROAD FREIGHT TERMINAL. A heavy rail facility for freight pick-up or
distribution; may include intermodal distribution facilities for truck or
shipping transport.
   RAILROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY (ROW). A strip of land with tracks and auxiliary
facilities for track operations, but not including freight depots or stations,
loading platforms, train sheds, warehouses, car or locomotive shops, or car
yards.
   RAILROAD USE. An occupation or use of land, buildings, and structures for
purposes directly connected with rail transportation of articles, goods, and
passengers, including such facilities as tracks, sidings, signal devices and
structures, shops and yards for maintenance and storage of rail machinery,
loading platforms, and passenger and freight terminals, but excluding freight
terminals and yards, and similar facilities, which are maintained and operated
by the owning railroad or by a lessee for the purposes auxiliary to rail
transportation, or by a lessee for the purposes auxiliary to rail
transportation; provided, however, that the operation of such facilities as a
hobby or as part of an amusement business shall not be considered a railroad
use.
   RAIL YARD. An area of land, a portion of which is covered by a system of
tracks, that provides for the making up of trains by one or more railroads or
private industry concerns. Necessary functions of a rail yard include but are
not limited to the classifying, switching, storing, assembling, distributing,
consolidating, moving, repairing, weighing, or transferring of cars, trains,
engines, locomotives, and rolling stock.
   RAIN GARDEN. A shallow depression typically planted with native perennial
plants and strategically located to collect, infiltrate, and filter a small
quantity of runoff water.
   REAR LOT LINE. A lot line that is opposite a front lot line.
   REAR SETBACK. The setback required between a building and the rear property
line of the lot on which the building is located, extending along the full
length of the rear property line between the side property lines.
   RECREATION, COMMERCIAL INDOOR. A commercial recreational land use conducted
entirely within a building, including arcade, arena, art gallery and studio,
art center, assembly hall, athletic and health clubs, auditorium, bowling
alley, club or lounge, community center, conference center, exhibit hall,
gymnasium, library, movie theater, museum, performance theater, pool or
billiard hall, skating rink, swimming pool, and tennis court.
   RECREATION, COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR. A commercial recreational land use conducted
outside of a building, characterized by potentially moderate impacts on
traffic, the natural environment, and the surrounding neighborhood, including
athletic fields; miniature golf; skateboard park; swimming, bathing, wading and
other therapeutic facilities; tennis, handball, basketball courts; batting
cages, and a trampoline facility.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle with or without motive power that is
designed for sport or recreational use or that is designed for human occupancy
on an intermittent basis. This includes vacation trailers, off-road vehicles,
and fifth-wheel trailers.
   RECYCLE MATERIAL. Solid waste that can be processed and returned to the
economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or products. RECYCLABLE
MATERIAL includes, but is not limited to: newspaper; corrugated cardboard;
aluminum; yard debris; office paper; glass; tin and steel cans; metal; motor
oil; plastic; antifreeze; wood; and food waste.
   RECYCLING CENTER. A building, or enclosed area, used for the collection and
processing of recyclable materials. Processing means the preparation of
material for shipment, or an end user's specifications, by such means as
baling, briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical
sorting, shredding, cleaning, and remanufacturing. Processing facilities
include storage and loading areas located entirely on the processing center
site.
   REPAIR SERVICE. An establishment primarily engaged in the provision of
repair services to individuals and households, rather than businesses, but
excluding automotive and equipment repair use types. Typical uses include
appliance repair shops, shoe repair, watch or jewelry repair shops, or repair
of musical instruments.
   RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT FACILITY. A use engaged in research and
development, testing, assembly, repair, and manufacturing in the following
industries: biotechnology, pharmaceuticals, medical instrumentation and
supplies, communications and information technology, electronics and
instrumentation, and computer hardware and software. Office, warehousing,
wholesaling, and distribution of the finished products produced at the site are
allowed as part of this use.
   RESIDENCE. A place where a person resides; particularly a house.
   RESIDENTIAL FACILITY (GROUP CARE). A residence for six to 15 physically or
mentally disabled persons, and for staff persons. The facility may provide
residential care alone, or in conjunction with training or treatment. This
definition includes the state definition of RESIDENTIAL FACILITY.
   RESIDENTIAL HOME (GROUP HOME). A residence for five or fewer persons with a
physical or mentally disability, and for staff persons. The residence may
provide residential care alone, or in conjunction with training or treatment.
This definition includes the state definition of RESIDENTIAL HOME.
   RESIDENTIAL TRAILER. A mobile home that was not constructed in accordance
with federal manufactured housing construction and safety standards (HUD code),
in effect after June 15, 1976.
   RESTAURANT. A commercial establishment where food and beverages are
prepared, served, and consumed primarily within the principal building, and
where food sales constitute more than 80% of the gross sales receipts for food
and beverages.
      (1)   RESTAURANT, CARRY-OUT. An establishment where food is usually
ordered by telephone and prepared on the premises for consumption off the
premises, with no seating or other area provided on the premises for
consumption. This establishment may deliver food to the customer, or the
customer may pick up the food personally.
      (2)   RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN. An establishment deriving more than 50% of
gross revenue from the sale of food and drink not including alcoholic
beverages, and which functions as a retail outlet where food or beverages are
sold and delivered to patrons in parked motor vehicles.
      (3)   RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD. A restaurant whose design or principal
method of operation includes four or more of the following characteristics: (1)
45% or more of the floor area is devoted to food preparation, employee work
space, and customer service area; (2) a permanent menu board is provided from
which to select and order food; (3) if a chain or franchised restaurant,
standardized floor plans are used over several locations; (4) customers pay for
food before consuming it; (5) a self-service condiment bar is provided; (6)
trash receptacles are provided for self-service bussing; (7) furnishing plan
indicates hard-finished, stationary seating arrangements; and (8) most main
course food items are prepackaged rather than made to order.
      (4)   RESTAURANT, FINE. An establishment where food and drink are
prepared and served. Customer turnover rates are typically one hour or longer.
Such establishments serve dinner but generally do not serve breakfast and may
or may not serve lunch or brunch.
      (5)   RESTAURANT, SIT DOWN. An establishment maintained, operated, and/or
advertised or held out to the public as a place where food and beverage are
served to the public on demand from a menu during stated business hours, served
in and on reusable containers and dinnerware, to be consumed on the premises
primarily inside the building at tables, booths, or counters, with chairs,
benches, or stools. This use may include incidental delivery service using no
more than two delivery vehicles
   REVERSE CORNER LOT. A corner lot on which the rear lot line abuts the side
of an adjacent lot.
   REVIEW BODY. The person or group who is assigned to make decisions on
administrative reviews, whether initially or on appeal. Review body includes
the Building Official, the Building and Zoning Department, the Zoning
Administrator, the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals (PZBA), the Historic
Preservation Commission (HPC), and the City Council.
   RIPARIAN AREAS. Lands adjacent to rivers, streams, lakes, ponds, and other
water bodies. They are transitional between aquatic and upland zones, and as
such, contain elements of both aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems.
   SCHOOL, BOARDING. An elementary, junior high or high school that provides
lodging for students on the same property.
   SCHOOL, TRADE OR BUSINESS. Institutions engaged in part-time, specialized
instructional areas, such as, but not limited to, driving, trade or vocational,
and does not provide lodging for students or faculty.
   SCHOOLS. Public, private, or parochial institutions primarily engaged in
academic instruction for all or part of grades kindergarten through twelfth (K
through 12), which does not provide lodging for students and may include
accessory athletic fields, recreational facilities and child care centers for
children over the age of three.
   SENIOR HOUSING. A multi-family dwelling the occupancy of which is limited to
persons who are 55 years of age or older (or if two persons occupy a unit, at
least one shall be 55 years or older). This definition does not include nursing
homes, congregate care facilities or assisted living facilities.
   SETBACK. The minimum distance required between a specified object, such as a
building, and another point, measured from lot lines to a specified object.
Typically, a setback refers to the minimum distance (yard dimension) from a
building to a specified property line.
   SETBACK AREA, FRONT. The minimum horizontal distance between the front lot
line and the fascia board or parapet of the front wall of a building, excluding
open steps and stoops.
   SETBACK AREA, INTERIOR. The minimum horizontal distance between the interior
side lot line and the fascia board or parapet of the side wall of a building,
excluding open steps and stoops.
   SETBACK AREA, REAR. The minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot
line and the fascia board or parapet of the rear wall of a building, excluding
open steps and stoops.
   SHARED DRIVEWAY. When land uses on two or more lots or parcels share one
driveway. An easement or tract (owned in common) must be created and recorded
for this purpose.
   SHARED PARKING. Required parking facilities for two or more uses,
structures, or lots or parcels, which are satisfied jointly with the same
facilities.
   SHOPPING CENTER. A group of stores planned and designed for the site on
which it is built, functioning as a unit, with off-street parking, landscaped
areas, and pedestrian malls or plazas provided on the property as an integral
part of the unit.
   SHORT TERM RENTAL UNIT. All or part of a residential building or dwelling
unit being leased, rented, offered for rent, hired out, licensed, or otherwise
let as an accessory use or occupancy to a person or persons other than the
owner of the subject property or family member of the owner thereof for a
period or term that is less than 30 consecutive days. The term shall also
include a dwelling unit or accessory building, or part thereof, used for
overnight accommodation that is available for rent by transient guests for a
period or term that is less than 30 consecutive days.
   SIDE LOT LINE. A lot line that connects front and rear lot lines.
   SIGHT DISTANCE. The unobstructed viewing distance measured from one object
or location to another object or location, usually required the purpose of
traffic safety.
   SIGN. An object, including at structure, movable object, with illuminated or
non-illuminated writing (including one or more letters, words or numerals),
pictorial representation (including illustration, color, or decoration), emblem
(including a device, symbol, or trademark); flag (including banner, streamer,
or pennant); or any other figure or similar, which: is attached to, directly or
indirectly, a structure or any part thereof, painted on, or in any other manner
represented on a building or other outdoor structure; is used to announce,
direct attention to, or advertise a product, service place, activity, person,
institution, business or solicitation; is visible from outside a building; is
in view of the general public, a public right-of-way or private property under
different ownership than the property on which the sign is located; are
portable signs such as those on wheeled devices or sandwich boards.
   The following are not considered signs: (a) notices legally placed on public
property and removed on a daily basis; or (b) letters individually painted on
or attached to a face of a building that merely identify the owner, occupant,
or name of the establishment and address for postal purposes.
      (1)   SIGN, ADDRESS IDENTIFICATION. A sign containing the address and
name of the occupant or business establishment.
      (2)   SIGN, ADVERTISING DEVICE. Any advertising sign, billboard, or
poster panel which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or
entertainment not exclusively related to the premises where such sign is
located or to which it is affixed; but does not include those advertising
signs, billboards, or poster panels which direct attention to the business on
the premises or to a brand name of a product or commodity with which the
business is specifically identified and which is sold on the premises.
      (3)   SIGN AREA. The area of the largest single face of the sign within a
perimeter which forms the outside shape including any frame that forms an
integral part of the display, but excluding the necessary supports or uprights
on which the sign may be placed. See this code for measurement of sign area.
      (4)   SIGN, ATTENTION GETTING DEVICE. A device or person wearing or
carrying a sign, costume, or similar device for the purpose of or having the
effect of attracting attention, promotion or advertising and not otherwise
prohibited by this chapter.
      (5)   SIGN, ANIMATED. The movement or the optical illusion of movement of
any part of the sign structure, design, or pictorial segment, including the
movement of any illumination or the flashing or varying of light intensity; the
automatic changing of all or any part of the facing of a sign.
      (6)   SIGN, BALLOON. Any sign that is any lighter-than-air or gas-filled
balloon attached by means of a rope or tether to a definite or fixed location.
A display designed to inflate or move by use of a fan or blower is also
considered a balloon sign. Balloons used as temporary attention-getting devices
in conjunction with another sign which are no more than 18 inches in diameter,
are not considered balloon signs.
      (7)   SIGN BAND. The flat, horizontal area on the facade usually located
immediately above the storefront and below the second story window sill where
signs were historically attached. A sign band may also include the horizontal
area above a tenants' entrance, architecturally designed to accommodate
signage.
      (8)   SIGN, BANNER. A temporary sign constructed of cloth, paper, plastic
or other material upon which copy is written and supported either between poles
or fastened to buildings or other structures.
      (9)   SIGN, BARBER POLE. A pole painted in spiral stripes used as a sign
by a barber shop or hairdresser for advertisement.
      (10)   SIGN, BILLBOARD. A sign which directs attention to a commercial
enterprise, including but not limited to a business, product or commodity
conducted, sold or offered elsewhere (off-site) than upon the same premises
where such sign is displayed. This includes but is not necessarily limited to
signs that are referred as "billboards," "off-premise signs." or "outdoor
advertising signs."
      (11)   SIGN, BLADE. A type of projecting sign mounted on a building
facade or storefront pole or attached to a surface perpendicular to the sign's
surface and to the normal flow of traffic.
      (12)   SIGN, BULLETIN BOARD. A sign which accommodates manually
changeable copy which displays information on activities and events on the
premises.
      (13)   SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY. A sign containing letters, numerals, or
other graphics, which are not permanently affixed to a structure and/or set for
permanent display and are intended to be alterable through manual means.
Changeable copy signs do not include time, date and/or temperature signs and
electronic signs (LED).
      (14)   SIGN, CLEAR SIGHT AREA. A triangle with one point at the
intersection of the intersecting streets' centerlines, and the other two points
located on each street's 100 feet away from the intersection of said
centerlines.
      (15)   SIGN, CONSTRUCTION. An on-site temporary sign identifying the
owners, builder, developers, design consultants or contractors of a project
under construction.
      (16)   SIGN, DEVELOPMENT PROJECT. An on-site temporary sign identifying
the location of a development project to be built or under construction.
      (17)   SIGN, DIRECTIONAL. An on-site permanent or temporary sign designed
to guide vehicular or pedestrian traffic that does not promote or advertise a
business, property or product.
      (18)   SIGN, DIRECTORY. A sign listing the names and locations of
occupants or activities conducted within a building or group of buildings that
does not otherwise promote or advertise a business, property or product.
      (19)   SIGN, ELECTRONIC. Signs whose alphabetic, pictographic or symbolic
informational content can be changed or altered on a fixed display screen
composed of electrically illuminated segments. For the purposes of this code,
electronic signs within ground or wall signs are regulated as one of the two
following types:
         (a)   ELECTRONIC DISPLAY SCREEN. A sign, or portion of a sign, that
displays an electronic image or video, which may or may not include text. This
definition includes television screens, plasma screens, digital screens, flat
screens, LED screens, video boards and holographic displays.
         (b)   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN. Any sign, or portion of a sign, that
uses changing lights to form a sign message or messages in text form wherein
the sequence of messages and the rate of change is electronically programmed
and can be modified by electronic processes. TIME AND TEMPERATURE DEVICES are
not considered electronic message signs.
      (20)   SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE BOARD (LED). Any sign that uses changing
lights to form a sign message or messages wherein the sequence of messages and
the rate of change are electronically programmed and can be modified by an
electronic process. Automobile service station sign displaying current price of
gasoline or other fuels may not be classified as electronic message board.
Electronically message boards are considered changeable copy signs, not
flashing signs.
      (21)   SIGN, EXTERIOR ILLUMINATED. Any sign, any part of which, is
illuminated from an exterior artificial light source mounted on the sign,
another structure or the ground.
      (22)   SIGN, FACE. The visible sign proper including all characters and
symbols, excluding essential structural elements which are not an integral part
of the display.
      (23)   SIGN FLASHING. Any illuminated sign where each artificial light
unit is not maintained in a stationary condition, or where all light units are
not constant in intensity and color at all times when such sign is illuminated.
For the purpose of this zoning chapter, any revolving illuminated sign will be
considered a flashing sign. However, the messages or images on an electronic
sign may not imitate flashing signs
      (24)   SIGN, FREE STANDING. Any sign not affixed to a building including,
but not limited to a ground-mounted sign, detached sign, pole sign, pier signs,
or monument sign.
      (25)   SIGN, GHOST. A painted wall sign that remains from an earlier time
or advertises the use of a building that provides evidence of the history of
the use of the building or activities of the community. A GHOST SIGN is not
considered an off-premise sign.
      (26)   SIGN, GOVERNMENTAL. A sign installed by a governmental entity or
by a private individual or business as require by federal, state or local laws.
      (27)   SIGN, GROUND. A sign supported by one or more uprights, pylons,
poles, braces or foundation elements in or upon the ground and not attached to
a building, other structure or foundation on the ground.
      (28)   SIGN, HANDWRITTEN. Temporary window signs composed of pictures,
symbols or lettering on paper or other temporary material. Professionally
painted temporary signs are not considered to be handwritten.
      (29)   SIGN, HANGING. Any sign hanging entirely beneath a canopy or
marquee.
      (30)   SIGN, IDENTIFICATION. Any sign which functions to identify an
institution, occupant, apartment, residence, school or church, and not
advertising any product or service.
      (31)   SIGN, ILLUMINATED. A sign illuminated with artificial light by any
means, whether internal or external.
      (32)   SIGN, INFLATABLE. Any object enlarged or inflated, which floats,
is tethered in the air, or is located on the ground or a building. The city
does not allow for this type of signage.
      (33)   SIGN, INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign illuminated by a light
source, either incandescent, fluorescent, neon or other light that is enclosed
by the sign panel or within the sign.
      (34)   SIGN, ITEM OF INFORMATION. A word, phrase, logo, abbreviation,
number or numbers, symbol, or geometric shape. The name of the business, even
if multiple words, will be considered one item of information.
      (35)   SIGN, MARQUEE. Any sign that is part of or attached to a marquee.
      (36)   SIGN, MEMORIAL. A noncommercial sign erected in remembrance of any
historic occasion or occurrence of significance to the general public.
      (37)   SIGN, MENU BOARD. A device which functions to list items for sale
at a drive-thru restaurant.
      (38)   SIGN, MONUMENT. Any sign, other than a pole sign, placed upon or
supported by the ground independently of any other structure. Ground monument
signs are typically mounted on a masonry base. As distinguished from a ground
pole sign, the sign base of any monument sign must be a minimum of 75% or more
of the width of the sign face that is to be situated upon the base. A sign base
less than 75% of the width of the sign face is considered a ground pole sign.
      (39)   SIGN, MOVING. Any sign or part thereof that moves or gives the
visual impression of any motion, including visible mechanical movement of any
kinds, such as wind-activated signs. Clocks are not considered signs with
moving parts.
      (40)   SIGN, NONCOMMERCIAL MESSAGE. A message that does not direct
attention to a business or to a service or commodity for sale, and is typically
of a political, religious, or ideological nature.
      (41)   SIGN, NONCONFORMING. Any sign which is not allowed under the
provision of this zoning chapter, but which, when first constructed, may have
been legally allowed by the city.
      (42)   SIGN, OBSCENE. A sign which is found to meet the three established
criteria of obscenity: (a) prurient in nature; (b) completely devoid of
scientific, political, educational or social value; and (c) a violation of
local community standards.
      (43)   SIGN, OBSOLETE. A sign which no longer correctly directs or
exhorts any person, advertises a business, lessor, owner, product, activity
conducted or available on the premises where the sign is displayed.
      (44)   SIGN, OFF-PREMISES. Any sign which directs attention to a
business, service, product or entertainment not sold or offered or only
incidentally sold or offered on the premises on which the sign is located.
      (45)   SIGN, OFF-PREMISE (SEE BILLBOARD). A sign which advertises any
business, product, person, event or service not conducted, sold, manufactured
or located on the premises where the sign is located.
      (46)   SIGN, ON-PREMISE. A sign which directs attention to a business or
profession or to a commodity, service, or entertainment that is sold, offered,
or manufactured upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is
affixed.
      (47)   SIGN, PENNANT FLAGS. Any geometric shaped cloth, fabric or other
lightweight material normally fastened to a stringer, which is secured or
tethered so as to allow movement of the sign.
      (48)   SIGN, PERMANENT. A sign attached to a structure or the ground
which is made of materials intended for long-term use.
      (49)   SIGN, PERMANENT. A sign designed to be used for 30 days or more.
Permanent signs require a sign permit as set forth in this zoning chapter.
      (50)   SIGN, POLE. A sign erected and maintained on one or more
freestanding mast(s) or pole(s) and not attached to any building, but not
including a ground monument sign.
      (51)   SIGN, POLITICAL. A sign pertaining to an election to any public
office, any ballot measure, or containing any social, ideological or religious
information of a non-commercial nature. These signs primarily include, but are
not limited to: signs that are placed upon the ground, such as "sandwich"
signs; signs attached to wood or metal frames designed to be self-supporting
and movable; paper, cardboard or canvas signs wrapped around or fastened to
support poles; and signs having mobility by virtue of wheels, whether wheels
are attached or not when said sign is on display.
      (52)   SIGN, PORTABLE. A sign which is mounted or designed to be mounted
on a self-propelled or towed vehicle, and shall include, but not be limited to,
mobile advertising signs attached to a trailer or other vehicle. The city does
not allow for this type of signage.
      (53)   SIGN, PROJECTING. A sign which extends out from a building face or
wall so that the sign face is perpendicular or at an angle to the building face
or wall.
      (54)   SIGN, PUBLIC. A sign of a non-commercial nature such as legal
notices, identification, informational or direction signs erected or required
by a governmental body or authorized for a public purpose by any law, ordinance
or statute.
      (55)   SIGN, REAL ESTATE. An on-site sign advertising the availability
for sale or rental of the property on which it is placed.
      (56)   SIGN, ROOF. A sign erected, constructed, or maintained upon, or
which projects above a roof or top of a wall, wall tower or turret of any
building with the principal support on the roof structure. The city does not
allow for this type of signage.
      (57)   SIGN, SIDEWALK. A temporary advertising device also known as an A-
frame or sandwich board sign, ordinarily in the shape of an "A," or some
variation thereof, located on the ground, not permanently attached and easily
movable, and usually two-sided.
      (58)   SIGN STRUCTURE. Any structure or material which supports, has
supported or is capable of supporting or helping maintain a sign in a
stationary position, including decorative covers.
      (59)   SIGN, TEMPORARY. A display, informational sign, banner, or other
device constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, wood, or other temporary material,
with or without a structural frame, and intended for a limited period of
display, including decorative displays for holidays or public demonstrations. A
sign that is intended for use for only a limited period of time and not
intended or designed for permanent display.
      (60)   SIGN, TEMPORARY. Any sign or attention-attracting device for use
for an event that is to be in existence for less than 30 days. Temporary signs
require a temporary permit.
      (61)   SIGN, TEMPORARY WINDOW. A temporary sign attached to or placed
upon a window or door of a building intended for viewing from the exterior of
such a building and not intended or designed for permanent display.
      (62)   SIGN, TIME AND TEMPERATURE DEVICE. A mechanism integrated into a
sign that displays the time and/or temperature, but does not display any
commercial advertising or identification.
      (63)   SIGN, VEHICLE. Any advertising or business sign attached to a
motor vehicle that is parked and placed in position for the purpose of
displaying the same to the public. The city does not allow for this type of
signage.
      (64)   SIGN, WALL. A sign attached to, posted on, painted upon, placed
against, or supported by the exterior surface of any building.
      (65)   SIGN, WIND-BLOWN. A fluttering, spinning, windblown or inflatable
device, including pennants, streamers and propeller discs. The city does not
allow for this type of signage.
      (66)   SIGN, WINDOW. A sign located on, in behind a window for the
purposes of being seen from the outside of the premises. Any sign within 12
inches of a window or the glass surface of a door, and is visible from the
public street.
   SINGLE-FAMILY HOUSE. A detached dwelling unit located on its own lot.
   SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY (SRO). A structure that provides living units that
have separate sleeping areas and some combination of shared bath or toilet
facilities. The structure may or may not have separate or shared cooking
facilities for the residents. SRO includes structures commonly called
residential hotels and rooming houses.
   SITE FRONTAGE. The part of a site that abuts a street.
   SMALL BOX STORE. A retail sales use with a floor area less than 12,000
square feet that offers for sale a combination and variety of convenience
shopping goods and consumer shopping goods. Small box store may not be located
less than one mile from another small box store. This definition shall not
include gas station minimart, grocery store, consignment store, convenience
store, hardware store, or pharmacy.
   SOBER HOUSE. A dwelling unit occupied by more than four persons in recovery
from chemical dependency and considered handicapped under the Federal Fair
Housing Act Amendments of 1988 that provides a non-institutional residential
environment in which the residents willingly subject themselves to rules and
conditions intended to encourage and sustain their recovery. The residents of a
sober house are similar to a family unit, and share kitchen and bathroom
facilities and other common areas of the unit. Sober houses are financially
self-supporting. This definition does not include facilities that receive
operating revenue from governmental sources. Sober houses do not provide on-
site supportive services to residents, including the following: mental health
services; clinical rehabilitation services; social services; medical, dental,
nutritional and other health care services; financial management services;
legal services; vocational services; and other similar supportive services.
   SOLID WASTE. All putrescible and non-putrescible refuse in solid or
semisolid form, including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, junk vehicles,
ashes or incinerator residue, street refuse, dead animals, demolition waste,
construction waste, solid or semisolid commercial and industrial waste. The
term does not include hazardous waste managed pursuant to NRS 459.400 to NRS
459.600, inclusive.
   SPECIAL USE. A use that has unique characteristics inherent to its operation
that may be allowed in a zoning district following administrative review and
approval.
   STORMWATER DETENTION OR RETENTION FACILITY. A facility designed to improve
the quality and manage the quantity of stormwater runoff. Stormwater facilities
include vegetated swales and sand filters, wet or dry ponds, marshes,
infiltration facilities, and structural storm sewer devices. Stormwater
facilities do not include conveyance systems that are meant only for conveying
the stormwater from one place to another and do not affect the quality or
quantity of the stormwater.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM. A stormwater facility (e.g., conveyance,
detention/retention, treatment system or outfall).
   STREET. A right-of-way that is intended for motor vehicle, pedestrian or
bicycle travel or for motor vehicle, bicycle or pedestrian access to abutting
property. For the purposes of this zoning chapter, street does not include
alleys, rail rights-of-way that do not also allow for motor vehicle access, or
freeways and their on-ramps.
   STRUCTURE. Any object constructed in or on the ground. Structure includes
buildings, decks, fences, towers, flag poles, signs, and other similar objects.
Structure does not include paved areas or vegetative landscaping materials.
   SUBDIVISION. The process of dividing land to create parcels or lots.
   SWALE. A type of storm water facility. Usually a broad, shallow depression
with plants that filter and process contaminants.
   TATTOO PARLOR/BODY-PIERCING STUDIO. An establishment whose principal
business activity, either in terms of operation or as held out to the public,
is the practice of one or more of the following: (1) placing of designs,
letters, figures, symbols, or other marks upon or under the skin of any person,
using ink or other substances that result in the permanent coloration of the
skin by means of the use of needles or other instruments designed to contact or
puncture the skin; (2) creation of an opening in the body of a person for the
purpose of inserting jewelry or other decoration.
   TAVERN/BAR (WINE BAR). Business establishments engaged primarily in the
retail sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages to public patrons for
consumption on the establishment's premises, and that includes beer bars,
parlors, lounges, cabarets and nightclubs. TAVERNS/BARS may also include
accessory sale of prepared food.
   THEATER. A building or structure used for the purpose of conducting live
dramatic, comedic or musical performances, the showing of motion pictures or
similar recorded media, or other live performing arts.
   THRIFT STORE. An establishment primarily engaged in the sale of used
clothing, household goods, furniture, or appliances. This classification does
not include antique shops.
   TOBACCO/VAPE STORE. A retail establishment located in a stand-alone building
that derives more than 20% of its gross revenue from the sale of loose tobacco
and cigars, cigarettes, pipes, electronic cigarettes (i.e., e-cigs, vapes, vape
pens, dab pens, dab rigs, tanks, mods, mod-pods, and electronic nicotine
delivery systems - ENDS), electronic hookahs, or other smoking devices for
burning and/or heating tobacco and related smoking accessories, or in which the
sale of other products is merely incidental. Smoking is prohibited inside the
business without specific permission from the City Administrator. A TOBACCO/
VAPE STORE does not include ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS.
   TOW SERVICE. The removing of a motor vehicle by towing, carrying, hauling,
or pushing from public or private property when such vehicle has been ordered
to be impounded to a public or private impound lot. This shall not include an
automotive service use that has a tow truck and repairs vehicles on-site.
   TOW YARD. An outdoor storage facility for the temporary storage of towed
vehicles.
   TOWNHOUSE. A one-family dwelling unit, with a private entrance, which is
part of a structure whose dwelling units are attached horizontally in a linear
arrangement, and having a totally exposed front and rear wall to be used for
access, light, and ventilation.
   TRANSITIONAL RESIDENCE. A temporary residential living arrangement for
persons who are receiving therapy or counseling for purposes such as, but not
limited to, the following: (1) to help recuperate from the effects of drugs or
alcohol addiction; (2) to help re-enter society while housed under supervision
and the constraints of alternatives to imprisonment including, but not limited
to, pre-release, work-release and probationary programs; or (3) to help with
family or school adjustment problems that require specialized attention and
care in order to achieve personal independence; and also meeting the
requirements set forth in § 165.025(E).
   TRANSIT-ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT (TOD). A form of development that maximizes
investment in transit infrastructure by concentrating the most intense types of
development around transit stations and along transit lines; development in
such areas is designed to make transit use as convenient as possible.
   TRAVEL TRAILER. A structure or self-propelled vehicle equipped with wheels
for street or highway use; intended for human occupancy; equipped with
plumbing, sink or toilets; used for vacation and recreational purposes; and not
used as a residence.
   TRUCK TERMINAL. A building, structure or place where trucks or transports
are rented, leased, kept for hire or stand or park for remuneration, or from
which trucks or transports, stored or parked on the property, are dispatched
for hire as common carriers or where goods are stored temporarily for further
shipment. A truck terminal property shall be constructed with concrete or
asphalt surfaces, and shall also contain proper drainage, landscaping,
lighting, circulation and fencing.
   UNATTENDED DONATION COLLECTION BOXES (UDCBS). Unattended donation collection
boxes (UDCBs) or other similar structures are prohibited in all zoning
districts unless the boxes are accessory to the principal use of the premises.
To qualify as an allowed accessory use, the UDCB must be owned and maintained
by the owner or lessor of the principal use.
   USE. The purpose for which land or a structure is designed, arranged,
intended, occupied, or maintained.
   USE, PERMITTED. A use permitted in a district without the need for special
administrative review and approval, upon satisfaction of the standards and
requirements of this chapter.
   USE, SPECIAL USE. A use that meets the intent and purpose of the zoning
district, but requires the review and approval of the appropriate Planning and
the Zoning Board of Appeals in order to ensure that any adverse impacts on
adjacent uses, structures, or public services and facilities that may be
generated by the use can be, and are, mitigated.
   UTILITIES, MINOR. An infrastructure facility that is necessary to support
development within the immediate vicinity and that involves only minor
structures. This definition includes electrical distribution lines less than 35
kilovolts, water and sewer lines, storm drainage facilities, telephone and
cable television lines, and other similar facilities.
   UTILITIES, MAJOR. A large-scale facility supporting infrastructure across a
wide area, including electrical substations, water reservoirs, water wells,
water and wastewater treatment plants, and similar public utilities facilities.
   UTILITY TRAILER. A vehicle designed to be pulled by a motor vehicle which is
used to carry property, trash, or special equipment and that is 16 feet or less
in length. Boat trailers are included as utility trailers. Utility trailers
that are longer than 16 feet are considered industrial vehicles and are
regulated as heavy trucks.
   VALET PARKING. Parking of vehicles by an attendant provided by the
establishment for which the parking is provided.
   VARIATION. Authorization granted by the city to allow development that
deviates from the specific regulations of this zoning code.
   VEHICLE AREA. All of the areas on a site where vehicles may circulate or
park including parking areas, driveways, drive-through lanes, and loading
areas. See also, DRIVEWAY and PARKING AREA.
   VACATE STREET. To abandon a subdivision or street right-of-way. For example,
vacation of a public right-of-way that is not needed or cannot be used for a
street or other public purpose. Vacation of a plat typically returns the
property to the adjoining owners and restores it to an undivided condition and
ownership.
   VARIANCE. An administrative or quasi-judicial decision to lessen or
otherwise modify the requirements of this zoning chapter.
   WAREHOUSE/DISTRIBUTION. This use includes structures, or parts thereof, or
area used principally for the storage or distribution of goods and merchandise
to retailers, non-residential users, or to other wholesalers. This use shall
not include TRUCK TERMINALS/REPAIR or MANUFACTURING as defined herein.
   WAREHOUSING, WHOLESALING AND FREIGHT DISTRIBUTION. Storage, wholesale sales
and distribution of materials and equipment. Typical uses include storage
warehouses, moving and storage firms, trucking or cartage operations, truck
staging or storage areas, wholesale sales of materials and equipment to parties
other than the general public.
   WHOLESALES SALES. The sale of goods, merchandise and commodities in gross,
primarily for purposes of resale.
   WHOLESALE TRADE ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment for the sale of merchandise
in gross for resale, and any establishment for the sale of merchandise
principally to institutional, commercial, contractors and industrial users, but
not including retail sales to the general public except as a subordinate
ancillary activity and any display area accessible to the general public shall
be limited to the lesser of either 10% of the gross floor area of the
establishment or 1,000 square feet. For the purpose of this chapter, a
warehouse shall not be deemed a wholesale trade establishment.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION ANTENNA. A structure used to transmit and/or
receive communication, data, or other similar signals in order to facilitate
the use of wireless devices. WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA does not
include ANTENNA or SATELLITE DISH.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY. A structure used to protect the
equipment that processes communication, data, or other similar signals in order
to facilitate the use of wireless devices.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION TOWER. A structure designed and constructed to
support one or more WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS and all devices
attached to it. WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS are typically freestanding
and may be of either lattice or monopole construction.
   WRECKING YARD. Any place where damaged, inoperable, or obsolete machinery
such as cars, trucks and trailers, or parts thereof, are stored, bought, sold,
accumulated, exchanged, disassembled, or handled.
   YARD. An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines,
unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground
upward, except as otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard for the
purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard, or
the depth of the rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot
line and the main building shall be used.
   ZONE. A specifically delineated area or district within which uniform
development standards govern the use, placement, spacing, and size of land and
buildings.
   ZONING. A police power measure in a community that is divided into districts
within which permitted and special uses are established as are regulations
governing lot size, building bulk, placement, and other development standards.
   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The person who is responsible for the interpretation
of the city's land-use codes and regulations and the promotion of zoning
information.
   ZONING CERTIFICATE. A document signed by the Zoning Administrator, as
required by this zoning code, which acknowledges that a use, structure,
building, or lot either complies with or is legally nonconforming to the
provisions of this zoning code or is an authorized variance or modification
therefrom.
   ZONING DISTRICT. A ZONING DISTRICT is an area or areas within the limits of
the city for which the regulations and requirements governing use, lot, and
bulk of buildings and premises are uniform.
(Prior Code, § 166.003) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971; Ord. 98-196, passed 2-24-
1998; Ord. 99-256, passed 5-25-1999; Ord. 05-536, passed 2-8-2005; Ord. 2014-
040, passed 7-8-2014; Ord. 2015-029, passed 9-22-2015; Ord. 2020-010, passed 2-
25-2020; Ord. 2021-019, passed 6-22-2021; Ord. 2021-043, passed 9-14-2021; Ord.
2021-062, passed 12-14-2021; Ord. 2022-062, passed 10-25-2022; Ord. 2024-001,
passed 1-23-2024; Ord. 2025-036, passed 6-24-2025)
§ 165.004 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public health, safety, morals and welfare.
   (B)   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter upon the
use of land or buildings, or upon the bulk of buildings, are either more
restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other
provision of this chapter, or of any other law, ordinance, resolution, rules or
regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive (or which
impose higher standards or requirements) shall govern.
   (C)   This chapter is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any
other private agreement, provided that where the regulations of this chapter
are more restrictive (or impose higher standards or requirements) than such
easements, covenants or other private agreements, the requirements of this
chapter shall govern.
   (D)   No building, structure or use which was not lawfully existing at the
same time as the adoption of this chapter shall become or be made lawful solely
by reason of the adoption of this chapter and, to the extent that, and in any
other manner than, said unlawful building, structure or use is in conflict with
the requirements of this chapter, said building structure, or use remains
unlawful hereunder and shall not be considered a non-conforming use.
   (E)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to be a consent,
license or permit to use any property, or to locate, construct, or maintain any
building, structure or facility or to carry on any trade, industry, occupation
or activity.
   (F)   The provisions of this chapter are cumulative and additional
limitations upon all other laws and ordinances heretofore passed or which may
be passed hereafter governing any subject matter in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 166.004) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 165.005 SEPARABILITY.
   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Mayor and the City Council
that the several provisions of this chapter are separable in accordance with
the following.
   (A)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of
this chapter to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provisions
of this chapter not specifically included in said judgment.
   (B)   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the
application of any provision of this chapter to a particular property, building
or other structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of said
provision to any other property, building or structure not specifically
included in said judgment.
(Prior Code, § 166.005) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 165.006 SCOPE.
   (A)   All buildings erected hereafter, all uses of land or buildings
established hereafter, all structural alterations or relocations of existing
buildings occurring hereafter, and all enlargements of or additions to existing
uses occurring hereafter shall be subject to all regulations of this chapter
which are applicable to the zoning districts in which such buildings, uses or
land shall be located.
   (B)   (1)   However, where a building permit for a building or structure has
been issued in accordance with the law prior to the effective date of this
chapter, and provided construction is begun within six months of such effective
date and diligently prosecuted to completion, said building or structure may be
complete in accordance with the approved plans on the basis of which the
building permit has been issued.
      (2)   Further, upon completion, the building occupied under a certificate
of occupancy for the use for which originally designated, subject thereafter to
the provisions of §§
165.045 through
165.050 of this chapter.
   (C)   Where a special use permit or a permit for variance pursuant to this
chapter has been issued, such permit shall become null and void unless work
thereon is substantially underway within one year from the effective date of
this chapter.
   (D)   A special use permit shall be deemed to authorize only one particular
special use and shall expire if the special use shall cease for more than one
year for any reason.
   (E)   No access driveway or drive shall be located in any residential
district to provide access uses other than those permitted in such residential
district, except where a special use permit has been granted as hereinafter
provided.
(Prior Code, § 166.006) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 165.007 UPTOWN-TRANSIT ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT (U-TOD) DISTRICT ADOPTED BY
REFERENCE.
   The Uptown-Transit Oriented Development (U-TOD) is adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as if set out in full.
(Prior Code, § 166.007) (Ord. 12-185, passed 6-12-2012; Ord. 2020-010, passed
2-25-2020; Ord. 2021-019, passed 6-22-2021; Ord. 2021-043, passed 9-14-2021;
Ord. 2021-062, passed 12-14-2021)
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 165.020 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.
   In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of this chapter, the city
is hereby divided into the following districts.
   (A)   Residential districts.
      (1)   R-1 Single-Family Residential; and
      (2)   R-2 Two- and Three-Family Residential.
   (B)   Commercial districts.
      (1)   C-1 Central Area Commercial; and
      (2)   C-2 Highway Commercial.
   (C)   Industrial districts.
      (1)   I-1 Limited Industry; and
      (2)   I-2 General Industry.
   (D)   Land conservation district. L-C Land Conservation.
(Prior Code, § 166.020) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 165.021 ZONING MAP TO SHOW BOUNDARIES.
   The city is hereby divided into the districts listed in §
165.020 of this chapter and the boundaries of such zones are shown upon the
zoning map on file in the office of the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 166.021) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 165.022 INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of zones as shown on the
zoning map, the following rules shall apply.
   (A)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of
streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
   (B)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines
shall be construed as following such lot lines.
   (C)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be
construed as following city limits.
   (D)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of
streams, rivers, canals or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow
such centerlines. The centerline shall be construed as being midway between the
shore lines.
(Prior Code, § 166.022) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 165.023 SCHEDULE OF USE CONTROLS.
   (A)   Global use table.  
      (1)   No person shall use land or a building or structure or erect,
construct, reconstruct, move or structurally alter a building, structure or
part thereof, except in conformance with the following schedule of use
controls.
      (2)   The use table below establishes the land uses allowed in each
zoning district. Each use is given one of the following designations for each
zoning district.
         (a)   Permitted Use (“P”). A “P” indicates that a use is allowed by
right within the designated district provided that it meets all applicable use
standards.
         (b)   Special Use (“S”). An “S” indicates that a use requires the
approval of a special use permit in order to be allowed within the designated
district, provided that it meets all applicable use standards.
         (c)   No designation. The absence of a letter (a blank space) or the
absence of the use from the table indicates that a use is not allowed within
the designated district.
      (3)   Land uses that are designated as “permitted uses” or “special uses”
may have use standards that must be met, as established in §
165.025.
Use Group               R-1,        C-1,                                        UTOD,
                        Single-     Central    C-2,       I-1,       I-2,       Uptown
Use Category            Family      Area       Highway    Limited    General    Transit
   Specific Use Type Residential Commercial Commercial Industrial Industrial Oriented
Use Group                                                  R-1,        C-1,                                        UTOD,
                                                           Single-     Central    C-2,       I-1,       I-2,       Uptown
Use Category                                               Family      Area       Highway    Limited    General    Transit
   Specific Use Type                                    Residential Commercial Commercial Industrial Industrial Oriented

RESIDENTIAL                                                R-1         C-1        C-2        I-1        I-2        UTOD
Household Living                                                                                               
   Dwelling, Single Family                              P           P                                        P (Zone
                                                                                                                   B only)
   Dwelling, Two Family                                 S           S                                        P
   Dwelling, Three Family                               S           S                                        S
   Dwelling, Upstairs Only                                                   S                              P
   Multi-Family Dwelling                                                                                    
   Townhouse                                                       S                                        S
   Artist Live/Work Space                               S           P                                        P
   Guest House (accessory)                              S                                                   S
Group Residential                                                                                              
   Assisted Living Facility, Congregate Care, Nursing HoSe          S                                        S
   Community Home                                       S           S                                        S
   Convent, Parsonage, Rectory                          S           S                                        S
   Dormitory, Fraternity House, Sorority House          S           S                                        S
   Senior Housing                                       S           S                                        S
   Transitional Residence, Sober House                  S           S                                        S
   Planned Development (Residential)                    S           S                                        S
PUBLIC/SEMIPUBLIC                                                                                              
Bus Turnaround                                             S           P          P          P          P          S
Club, Lodge or Fraternal Organization                                 P                                        P
Community Center                                                      S          S                              S
Cultural Institution                                                                                           
   Library                                              S           P          P                              P
   Museum                                               S           P          P                              P
Daycare Use                                                                                                    
   Daycare, Adult                                                  S          S                              S
   Daycare, Children                                               S          S                              S
   Daycare, Home                                        S           S                                         
Educational Institution                                                                                        
   College of University                                           P                                        P
   Nursery School (public)                              P           P                                        P
   Schools, Elementary or Secondary (public)            P           P                                        P
   Schools, Special Education (public)                  S           P                                        P
   Schools, Trade or Technical                                     P          P          S          S          P
Fallout Shelter                                            P           P          P          P          P          P
Funeral and Interment Service                                                                                  
   Funeral Home, Mortuary                                                    S                              S
   Cremation Services (inside a funeral home)                                                              S
Hospital                                                                                                      S
Municipal Recreation Center                                S           S          P                              P
Park and Playground                                        P           P          P          P          P          P
Places of Worship, Religious Assembly                      S           S                                        S
Public Safety Service                                                                                          
   Police Station                                       P           P          P          P          P          P
   Fire Station                                         P           P          P          P          P          P
Public Utilities                                                                                               
   Minor                                                S           P          P          P          P          P
   Major                                                           S          S          S          S          S
Railroad Passenger Station                                            S          S          S          S          S
Recreational Building and Facility                                                                             
   Aquatic Center                                                  S          P          S                    S
   Athletic Field                                                  P          P          S                    S
   Dog Park                                                        S          P                              S
   Golf Course                                                                         S          S           
   Pathways and Trails                                             P          P          S          S          P
   Skate Park                                                      P          P                              P
   Sport Court                                                     S          S          S          S          S
Telephone Utility                                                                                              
   Microwave Relay Tower                                S           S          S          S          S          S
   Transmission Equipment and Building                  S           S          S          S          S          S
Water Pumping Station                                      S           P          P          P          P          P
Water Reservoir                                            S           S          S          S          P           
Wireless Communication Facilities                                                                              
   Co-located Facility (existing)                                  P          P          P          P          P
   Freestanding Tower (new)                                        S          S          S          S          S
COMMERCIAL                                                                                                     
Adult Business                                                                  S          S          S           
Adult-Use Cannabis Business                                                                                    
   Cannabis Craft Grower                                                               S          S           
   Cannabis Cultivation Center                                                         S          S           
   Cannabis Dispensing Organization (UTOD - Zone A)*               S          S                              S
   Cannabis Infuser Organization                                                       S          S           
   Cannabis Processing Organization                                                    S          S           
   Cannabis Transporting Organization                                                  S          S           
Animal Service                                                                                                 
   Dog Grooming                                         S           P          P          P                    P
   Sales and Animal Grooming                                       P          P          P                    P
   Shelter, Kennel, Doggy Daycare                                  S          S          P                    S
   Veterinary Clinic, Animal Hospital                              P          P          P                    P
Art Studio or Gallery (may include artisanal)              S           P          P          P                    P
Auction House                                                         P          P                              P
Business Support Service                                                                                       
   Employment Office, Career Office, Recruiter Office              P          P                              P
   General (i.e. blueprinting, printing, photostatting,            P          P                              P
copy)
Drive-Through Facility                                                                                         
   Bank or Financial Institution                                   S          P                              S
   Eating or Drinking Establishment                                S          P                              S
   Pharmacy                                                        S          P                              S
Eating and Drinking Establishment (Food Services)                                                              
   Bakery                                                          P          P                              P
   Banquet Hall, Conference Center, Training Facility                        S                              S
   Butcher Shop, Fish Store                                        P          P                              P
   Café, Coffee Shop (no video gaming)                 S           P          P                              P
   Cafeteria                                                       P          P                              P
   Candy Store, Nuts Store                                         P          P                              P
   Carry Out (no drive-thru), Restaurant                           P          P                              P
   Caterer, Catering Service                                       P          P                              P
   Delicatessen, Sandwich Shop, Bagel Shop              S           P          P                              P
   Doughnut Shop                                        S           P          P                              P
   Fast-food (no drive-thru)                                       P          P                              P
   Ice Cream Store, Soft Serve, Gelato, Milk Shakes     S           P          P                              P
   Microbrewery with Tap Room/Sampling                             S          P          P                    P
   Restaurant (full service with seating)               S           P          P                              P
   Shared Kitchen                                                  P          P          P                    P
   Tavern, Bar or Wine Bar                                         S          S                              S
Entertainment, Recreation and Sport                                                                            
   Amusement Arcade, Pinball, Pool Tables                          P          P          S                    P
   Health Club, Health Spa, Gym                                    P          P          S                    S
   Marina                                               S                                                       S
   Recreation, Commercial Indoor                                    S          S          S                     S
   Recreation, Commercial Outdoor                                              S          S                     S
   Swim School (private)                                                       P          P
   Theater (movies, live performances)                             S          P          S                    S
Financial Service (no drive-through service)                                                                   
   Bank, Savings Bank, Savings & Loans, Credit Union               P          P                              P
   Check Cashing, Payday or Title Loan Shop                        S          S                              S
   Currency Exchange                                               P          P                              P
   Insurance Companies (i.e. State Farm, All State)                S          S                              S
   Pawn Shop                                                       P          P                              P
Gaming Facility (Café)                                               S          S                              S
General Laundry Service (Consumer)                                                                             
   Dry Cleaning Drop-Off or Pick-Up (no onsite plant)              P          P          P                    P
   Coin Operated Laundromat                                        P          P          P                    P
Home Occupation                                            P           S                                        P
Jewelry Sales and Repair                                              P          P                              P
Lodging/Accommodation                                                                                          
   Short-Term Rental Units                              S           S                                        S
   Bed and Breakfast                                    S           P                                        S
   Hotel                                                           S          S          S                    S
   Motel                                                                     S          S                     
Motor Vehicle Use                                                                                              
   Car Wash                                                                  S          S                     
   Gas Station                                                               S          S                     
   Heavy Equipment Sales and Rental                                          S          P          P           
   Light Equipment Sales and Rental                                          P          P                     
   Motorcycle, Scooters, ATVs, Sales and Service                             P          P                     
   Motor Vehicle Parts Store (i.e. AutoZone, O’Reilly)                     P          S                     
   Motor Vehicle Repair Shop**                          S                     S          S          S           
   Motor Vehicle Sales and Service, Car Rental                               S          S          S           
   Truck Rental, Semi (may include U-Haul)                                   S          S          S           
Office Use                                                                                                     
   Administrative, Professional or General                         P          P                              P
   Accounting                                           S           P          P                              P
   Architecture, Engineering, Interior Design           S           P          P                              P
   Government                                                      P          P                              P
   Legal                                                S           P          P                              P
   Medical/Dental Clinics                                          P          P                              P
   Optometrist                                                     P          P                              P
   Osteopath, Relieve Pain, Musculoskeletal                        P          P                              P
   Real Estate, Sales, Rental, Leasing                             P          P                              P
Parking, Non Accessory                                                S          S          S          S          S
Personal Service                                                                                               
   Barber Shop                                          S           P          P                              P
   Carpet, Rug, Upholstery Cleaning                                P          P          P                    P
   Chiropractor, Physical Therapy                                  P          P                              P
   Engraving, Including Textile Engraving                          P          P          P                    P
   Exterminator (inside storage only)                              P          P                              P
   Exterminator (outside storage)                                            P          P                     
   Hair Salon (i.e., beauty shop or beauty parlor)      S           P          P                              P
   Nail Salon, Pedicure                                            P          P                              P
   Massage Establishment                                           S          S                              S
   Palmistry Services, Fortune Teller, Astrologer       S           P          P                              P
   Photographer, Camera Repair Shop                                P          P                              P
   Shoe Repair                                                     P          P                              P
   Sign Company, Sales and Service                                           P          P                     
   Slenderizing Salon (i.e., weight loss)                          P          P                              P
   Tailor, Dressmaking (no textile manufacturing)       S           P          P                              P
   Tattoo Parlor, Tattoo Studio, Body Piercing                     S          S                              S
   Travel Agent                                                    P          P                              P
   Watch Repair (may include clockwork)                            P          P                              P
Retail Sales Establishment                                                                                     
   Apparel Store                                                   P          P                              P
   Appliances                                                                P          P                     
   Bedding, Mattress Store                                                   P          P                     
   Bicycle Store, Sales and Service                                P          P                              P
   Bridal Shop                                                     P          P                              P
   Book Store, New or Used (may contain a small café)             P          P                              P
   Camera, Photographic Supplies                                   P          P                              P
   China and Glassware                                             P          P                              P
   Comic Book Store (i.e., comics, toys, posters)                  P          P                              P
   Consignment Store, Used Merchandise Store                       P          P                              P
   Convenience Store, General Store, Food Store         S           S          S                              S
   Cosmetics                                                       P          P                              P
   Costume Shop (i.e., costumes, jewelry, accessories)             P          P                              P
   Curtain and Drapes                                              P          P                              P
   Electrical Supplies (sales within building)                     P          P          P                    P
   Fabrics Store                                                   P          P                              P
   Flower Shop                                                     P          P                              P
   Furniture Store                                                 P          P          P                    P
   Grocery Store, Mini-Market                           S           S          S                              S
   Hardware Store, Local                                           P          P                              P
   Hobby and Sporting Store (i.e., camping, fishing and            P          P                              P
hiking)
   Imports (i.e., rugs, lamps, furniture)                          P          P                              P
   Interior Decorator                                              P          P                              P
   Lamps, Lighting Structures                                      P          P                              P
   Liquor Store (i.e., package goods)                                        S                              S
   Locksmith, Sales and Service                                    P          P                              P
   Luggage and Leather Goods                                       P          P                              P
   Music and Records                                               P          P                              P
   Paint and Wallpaper                                             P          P                              P
   Radio, TV Store, Computer Store                                 P          P                              P
   Pharmacy, Drug Store (no drive-thru)                                      P                              P
   Sewing Machines                                                 P          P                              P
   Small Box Store                                                 S          S                              S
   Supermarket                                                               P                              P
   Tobacco/Vape Store (stand-alone building)                       S          S                              S
   Toy Store, Collector Toy Store                                  P          P                              P
Planned Development (Commercial)                                      S          S                              S
INDUSTRIAL                                                                                                     
Baking Plant                                                                              P          P           
Contractor’s Service                                                                                         
   Office (no outdoor storage yard)                                P          P          P          P           
   Yard (includes office and outdoor storage)                                P          P          P           
Equipment, Sales and Rental                                                               P          P           
Food Processing Establishment                                                             P          P           
Junkyard or Auto Recycling                                                                S          S           
Lumber Yard                                                                               P          P           
Machine Shop, Welding Operation                                                           P          P           
Manufacturing, Production and Industrial Service                                                               
   Artisanal                                                       S                    P          P          S
   Heavy                                                                               P          P           
   Light                                                                               P          P           
Microbrewery, Micro Distillery                                                  S          P          P          S
Mobile Home Sales and Parks                                                                                    
Pallet Company (manufacturing, recycling and sales)                                       S          S           
Railroad Switching Yard                                                         S          P          P           
Recycling Facility (no vehicles or construction debris)                                                        
   Collection Center (paper, cardboard, glass, metal,                                  P          P           
plastic)
   Processing Facility (paper, cardboard, glass, metal,                                S          P           
plastic)
Research and Development Facility                                                         P          P           
Storage, Wholesaling and Freight Distribution                                                                  
   Industrial Outdoor Storage                                                          S          S           
   Freight, Terminal, Truck-Related                                                    P          P           
   Ship Terminal or Docking Facility                                                   P          P           
   Wholesale and Distribution Facility, Indoor and Outdo                               P          P           
Truck Parking                                                                             S          S           
Truck Terminal                                                                            S          S           
Warehouse, Residential (storage facility)                  S           S          P          P          P           
Warehouse, Commercial                                                                     P          P           
Planned Development (Industrial)                                                          S          S           
OTHER USES                                                                                                     
Accessory Use and Structures                               P           P          P          P          P          P
Temporary Use                                                                                                  
   Farmer’s Market                                               P          P          S                    P
   Flea Market                                                     S          S          S                    S
   Temporary Real Estate Sales Office (less than six               P          P                              P
months)
   Temporary Concrete Batch Plant                                                      P          P           
Agricultural Use                                                                                               
   Community Garden (back yard, city lot)               P           P          P          P          P          P
   Plant Nursery or Greenhouse                                               P          P          P          P
* Dispensaries are allowed on Western Avenue, Olde Western                                                     
Avenue, Ashland Avenue, 119th Street and 127th Street.
** Motor vehicle repair shops in the R-1 District are
allowed only on corner lots on Vermont Street east of                                                          
Honore Street
Any land uses no listed above are prohibited, including,
but not limited to: boarding house, composting facility,
construction materials yard, farm-related business,
hazardous waste facility, party lounge or room, power                                                          
plant, non- recyclable waste facility, sand and gravel
pit, sewage facility, shooting gallery or range, and tow
truck yard.
 
   (B)   Schedule of bulk and coverage controls.
Schedule of Bulk Controls
 District R-1 C-1 C-2 I-1 I-2 L-C
Schedule of Bulk Controls
            District         R-1     C-1      C-2      I-1      I-2      L-C
Minimum lot Lot area (sq.    4,312.5 3,125    6,250    10,000   40,000   80,000
dimensions  ft.)
            Lot area per
           dwelling unit    43,12.5 —      —      —      —      80,000
            (sq. ft.)
           Lot width (feet) 37.5    25       50       80       200      200
           Lot depth (feet) 115     125      125      125      125      200
Maximum     Height (feet)    35      No limit No limit No limit No limit 35
Minimum lot Front yard       25 [1]  —      —      25e      25e      50
dimensions  (feet)1
            Side yard
           (percentage of   10      —      —      N/A      N/A      N/A
            width)2
            Side yard (each
           side yard,       N/A     N/A      N/A      —d     —d     —d
            feet)b
           Rear yard (feet) 35      —a     —a     —d     —d     —d
Maximum     Lot coverage     40      90c      70c      60       60       10
            (percentage)
            Impervious
Maximumf    coverage         60      N/A      90       85       85       N/A
            (percentage)f
[1]   Or average of setback distances of the block, but not less than 15 feet
a   Deleted by Ord. 2396, passed 4-11-1978
b   Amended by Ord. 2396, passed 4-11-1978
c   Amended by Ord. 2397, passed 4-11-1978
d   Deleted by Ord. 2397, passed 4-11-1978
e   Amended by Ord. 2404, passed 10-9-1979
f   Amended by Ord. 2019, passed 6-22-2021
1   § 165.034(C), Front Yards for Corner Lots: A front yard of the required
depth shall be provided on one of the two frontages and a second front yard
shall be provided on the other frontage, provided that in any R-Zone the second
front yard need be only 50% of the required depth for front yards in that zone
2   § 165.034(D) Minimum Side Yard Width: Where a side yard to a principal
building is provided, although not required by this chapter, it shall not be
less than six feet in width unless it abuts a street or alley
 
(Prior Code, § 166.023) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971; Ord. 93-215, passed 4-13-
1993; Ord. 96-383, passed 3-26-1996; Ord. 99-256, passed 5-25-1999; Ord. 04-
476, passed 3-9-2004; Ord. 12-185, passed 6-12-2012; Ord. 2015-029, passed 9-
22-2015; Ord. 2020-010, passed 2-25-2020; Ord. 2021-019, passed 6-22-2021; Ord.
2021-043, passed 9-14-2021; Ord. 2021-062, passed 12-14-2021; Ord. 2022-049,
passed 10-11-2022; Ord. 2022- 062, passed 10-25-2022; Ord. 2024-001, passed 1-
23-2024; Ord. 2025-017, passed 4-22-2025; Ord. 2025-022, passed 5-27-2025; Ord.
2025-025, passed 5-27-2025; Ord. 2025-034, passed 6-24-2025; Ord. 2025-036,
passed 6-24-2025; Ord. 2025-070, passed 11-25-2025; Ord. 2025-077, passed 12-
16-2025)
§ 165.024 BUILDING LINE SETBACK FROM ALLEYS IN ALL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   No building shall be erected, moved or altered on any lot in any
district when such lot borders on an alley so as to place any wall thereof
nearer to the line of such alley than the setback lines hereinafter prescribed.
      (1)   Where the alley is 14 feet or less in width, the building line
setback shall be five feet from the line of such alley.
      (2)   Where the alley is more than 14 feet, but not more than 15 feet, in
width, the building line setback shall be four feet from the line of such
alley.
      (3)   Where the alley is more than 15 feet, but not more than 16 feet, in
width, the building line setback shall be three feet from the line of such
alley.
      (4)   Where the alley is more than 16 feet, but not more than 18 feet, in
width, the building line setback shall be two feet from the line of such alley.
      (5)   Where the alley is more than 18 feet in width, the building line
setback shall be one foot from the line of such alley.
   (B)   Further, no fence or other structure shall be placed between the line
of such alley and the building line setback established above.
(Prior Code, § 166.024) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 165.025 REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC USES.
   (A)   Utility or governmental installations. The provisions of this chapter
shall not be exercised so as to impose regulations or require permits in any
district with respect to poles, towers, wires, cables, conduits, vaults,
pipelines, laterals or any other similar distributing equipment of a public
utility, or any other installation which is under the jurisdiction of city,
state or federal regulations.
   (B)   Fences or the like. Fences, walls, hedges or shrubbery may be erected,
placed, maintained or grown only in accordance with regulations set forth in
the Building Code.
   (C)   Mobile homes and tents.
      (1)   A mobile home shall not be permitted as an accessory building or
structure.
      (2)   A mobile home shall not be occupied for dwelling or lodging uses,
except in an approved mobile home park, and a mobile home shall not be parked
or otherwise stored in the open on a lot in any district, except a lot used for
mobile home manufacturing, sales or retail or repair establishments in such
districts where such uses are permitted by this chapter.
      (3)   A mobile home may be used as a temporary office or shelter
incidental to construction on or development of the premises on which such
mobile home is located, only during the time construction or development is
actively underway.
      (4)   No tent shall be erected, used or maintained for living quarters.
   (D)   Fallout shelters.
      (1)   Fallout shelters shall be used for the purposes as defined, and
shall be used for no other use.
      (2)   Fallout shelters are a permissive use in any district. They shall
be located within any new or principal building or structure, attached to any
new or existing building or structure with direct access from such building or
structure, be wholly underground, or be at such other places as may be
prescribed by city, state or federal laws or regulations.
   (E)   Transitional residence. The transitional residence shall be licensed
as required by the appropriate state agency or agencies and may be occupied by
paid professional support staff provided by a sponsoring agency. To enable its
residents to achieve normalization and integration into the community,
transitional residences and community homes must be separated by no less than
1,500 feet in every direction to avoid clustering.
   (F)   Community home. The community home shall be licensed as required by
the appropriate State of Illinois agency or agencies and may be occupied by
paid professional support staff provided by a sponsoring agency. To enable its
residents to achieve normalization and integration into the community,
community homes must be separated by no less than 1,500 feet in every direction
to avoid clustering.
   (G)   Adult-use cannabis business establishments.
      (1)   Purpose and applicability. It is the intent and purpose of this
division (G) to provide regulations regarding adult-use cannabis business
establishments within the city, including cultivation, processing and
dispensing of adult-use cannabis occurring within the corporate limits of the
city. Such facilities shall comply with all regulations provided in the
Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (the “Act”), being 410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq., as
it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder,
and the regulations provided below. In the event that the Act is amended, the
more restrictive of the state or local regulations shall apply.
      (2)   Limitation on number of adult-use cannabis business establishments.
Four adult-use cannabis dispensing organizations shall be allowed within the
city at any given time; in addition to the four adult-use cannabis dispensing
organizations allowed under this division (G), only four other non-dispensing
adult-use cannabis business establishments shall be allowed within the city at
any given time.
      (3)   Adult-use cannabis craft grower. In those zoning districts in which
an adult-use cannabis craft grower may be located, the proposed facility must
comply with the following.
         (a)   The facility may not be located in an area zoned for residential
use.
         (b)   The facility may not be located within 1,500 feet of the
property line of a preexisting adult-use cannabis business establishment.
         (c)   The facility may not conduct any sales or distribution of
cannabis other than as authorized by the Act.
         (d)   For purposes of determining required parking, adult-use cannabis
craft grower shall be classified as a “Manufacturing” use per § 165.029(G)(5)
(“Number of Parking Spaces Required”).
         (e)   The petitioner shall file an affidavit with the city affirming
compliance with this division (G) and all other requirements of the city code
and Act.
         (f)   The site design shall incorporate adequate security measures,
such as interior and exterior lighting, surveillance cameras and/or fencing.
Said security measures shall be determined based on the specific
characteristics of the adult-use cannabis craft grower and of the floor plan
for the adult-use cannabis craft grower and the site on which it is located,
consistent with the requirements of the Act.
         (g)   Adult-use cannabis craft growers shall require approval of a
special use in the city’s industrial districts, and shall be processed in
accordance with §
165.089 (Special Use Permits) of this chapter and this section.
      (4)   Adult-use cannabis cultivation center. In those zoning districts in
which an adult-use cannabis cultivation center may be located, the proposed
facility must comply with the following.
         (a)   The facility may not be located within 1,500 feet of the
property line of a preexisting adult-use cannabis business establishment.
         (b)   The facility may not conduct any sales or distribution of
cannabis other than as authorized by the Act.
         (c)   For purposes of determining required parking, adult-use cannabis
cultivation centers shall be classified as a “Manufacturing” use per §
165.029(G)(5) (“Number of Parking Spaces Required”).
         (d)   The petitioner shall file an affidavit with the city affirming
compliance with this division (G) and all other requirements of the city code
and Act.
         (e)   The site design shall incorporate adequate security measures,
such as interior and exterior lighting, surveillance cameras and/or fencing.
Said security measures shall be determined based on the specific
characteristics of the adult-use cultivation center and of the floor plan for
an adult-use cannabis cultivation center and the site on which it is located,
consistent with the requirements of the Act.
         (f)   Adult-use cannabis cultivation centers shall require approval of
a special use in the city’s industrial districts, and shall be processed in
accordance with §
165.089 (Special Use Permits) of this chapter and this section.
      (5)   Adult-use cannabis dispensing organization. In those zoning
districts in which an adult-use cannabis dispensing organization may be
located, the proposed facility must comply with the following.
         (a)   Only four adult-use cannabis dispensing organizations shall be
allowed within the city at any given time.
         (b)   An adult-use cannabis dispensing organization shall not be
located within 300 feet of the property line of a pre-existing place of
worship, public or private nursery school, preschool, primary or secondary
school, day care center, day care home, residential care home, or substance
abuse treatment center. Learning centers and vocational/trade centers shall not
be classified as a public or private school for purposes of this section.
         (c)   The facility may not be located in a dwelling unit.
         (d)   The facility may not be located within 1,500 feet of the
property line of a preexisting adult-use cannabis business establishment.
         (e)   Facility shall not exceed 5,000 square feet in size. At least
75% of the floor area of any facility occupied by an adult-use cannabis
dispensing organization shall be devoted to the activities of the adult-use
cannabis dispensing organization as authorized by the Act, and no adult-use
cannabis dispensing organization shall sell food for consumption on the
premises other than as
may be authorized in the applicable special use ordinance.
         (f)   The facility may not conduct any sales or distribution of
cannabis other than as authorized by the Act.
         (g)   The facility may not permit on-site consumption of cannabis.
         (h)   For purposes of determining required parking, said facilities
shall be classified as a “Retail Store” use per §
165.029(G)(5) (“Number of Parking Spaces Required”) and shall have the
requisite number of on-site parking spaces for retail stores under §
165.029(G)(5).
         (i)   No operator, employee or agent of an adult-use cannabis
dispensing organization shall operate, be open for business or permit any
person not an employee of the adult-use cannabis dispensing organization to
remain on the premises between 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. Central Standard Time
or daylight saving time, whichever is in effect.
         (j)   The petitioner shall file an affidavit with the city affirming
compliance with this division (G) and all other requirements of the city code
and Act.
         (k)   The site design shall incorporate adequate security measures,
such as interior and exterior lighting, surveillance cameras and/or fencing.
Said security measures shall be determined based on the specific
characteristics of the adult-use cannabis dispensing organization and of the
floor plan for an adult-use cannabis dispensing organization and the site on
which it is located, consistent with the requirements of the Act.
         (l)   Adult-use cannabis dispensing organizations shall require
approval of a special use in the city’s commercial and industrial districts,
and shall be processed in accordance with § 165.089 (Special Use Permits) of
this chapter and this section. In determining compliance with § 165.089, the
following components of the adult-use cannabis dispensing organizations shall
be evaluated based on the entirety of the circumstances affecting the
particular property in the context of the existing and intended future use of
the properties:
            1.   Impact of the proposed facility on existing or planned uses
located within the vicinity of the subject property;
            2.   Proposed structure in which the facility will be located,
including cotenancy (if in a multi-tenant building), total square footage,
security installations/security plan and building code compliance;
            3.   Hours of operation and anticipated number of customers/
employees;
            4.   Anticipated parking demand based on §
165.029 of this chapter and available private parking supply;
            5.   Anticipated traffic generation in the context of adjacent
roadway capacity and access to such roadways;
            6.   Site design, including access points and internal site
circulation;
            7.   Proposed signage plan;
            8.   Compliance with all requirements provided in §
165.025(E), as applicable;
            9.   Facilities located in the C-1, C-2 and U-TOD Districts shall
only be located on lots adjacent to Western Avenue, Old Western Avenue, Ashland
Avenue, 119th Street and 127th Street; and
            10.   Other criteria determined to be necessary to assess
compliance with § 165.089 (Special Use Permits) of this chapter.
      (6)   Adult-use cannabis infuser organization. In those zoning districts
in which an adult-use cannabis infuser organization may be located, the
proposed facility must comply with the following.
         (a)   The facility may not be located in an area zoned for residential
use.
         (b)   The facility may not be located within 1,500 feet of the
property line of a preexisting adult-use cannabis business establishment.
         (c)   At least 75% of the floor area of any facility occupied by an
infusing organization shall be devoted to the activities of the adult-use
cannabis infuser organization as authorized by the Act. The facility may not
conduct any sales or distribution of cannabis other than as authorized by the
Act.
         (d)   For purposes of determining required parking, said facilities
shall be classified as a “Manufacturing” use per §
165.029(G)(5) (“Number of Parking Spaces Required”).
         (e)   The petitioner shall file an affidavit with the city affirming
compliance with this section and all other requirements of the city code and
Act.
         (f)   The site design shall incorporate adequate security measures,
such as interior and exterior lighting, surveillance cameras, and/or fencing.
Said security measures shall be determined based on the specific
characteristics of the adult-use cannabis infuser organization and of the floor
plan for an adult-use cannabis infuser organization and the site on which it is
located, consistent with the requirements of the Act.
         (g)   Adult-use cannabis infuser organizations shall require approval
of a special use in the city’s industrial districts, and shall be processed in
accordance with §
165.089 (Special Use Permits) of this chapter and this section.
      (7)   Adult-use cannabis processing organization. In those zoning
districts in which an adult-use cannabis processing organization may be
located, the proposed facility must comply with the following.
         (a)   The facility may not be located within 1,500 feet of the
property line of a preexisting adult-use cannabis business establishment.
         (b)   At least 75% of the floor area of any facility occupied by an
adult-use cannabis processing organization shall be devoted to the activities
of the adult-use cannabis processing organization as authorized by the Act. The
facility may not conduct any sales or distribution of cannabis other than as
authorized by the Act.
         (c)   For purposes of determining required parking, said facilities
shall be classified as a “Processing” use per §
165.029(G)(5) (“Number of Parking Spaces Required”).
         (d)   The petitioner shall file an affidavit with the city affirming
compliance with this division (G) and all other requirements of the city code
and Act.
         (e)   The site design shall incorporate adequate security measures,
such as interior and exterior lighting, surveillance cameras and/or fencing.
Said security measures shall be determined based on the specific
characteristics of the adult-use cannabis processing organization and of the
floor plan for an adult-use cannabis processing organization and the site on
which it is located, consistent with the requirements of the Act.
         (f)   Adult-use cannabis processing organizations shall require
approval of a special use in the city’s industrial districts, and shall be
processed in accordance with §
165.089 (Special Use Permits) of this chapter and this section.
      (8)   Adult-use cannabis transporting organization. In those zoning
districts in which an adult-use transporting organization may be located, the
proposed facility must comply with the following.
         (a)   The facility may not be located within 1,500 feet of the
property line of a preexisting adult-use cannabis business establishment.
         (b)   The facility may not conduct any sales or distribution of
cannabis other than as authorized by the Act.
         (c)   For purposes of determining required parking, said facilities
shall be classified as a “Warehouse” use per §
165.029(G)(5) (“Number of Parking Spaces Required”).
         (d)   The petitioner shall file an affidavit with the city affirming
compliance with this division (G) and all other requirements of the city code
and Act.
         (e)   The site design shall incorporate adequate security measures,
such as interior and exterior lighting, surveillance cameras and/or fencing.
Said security measures shall be determined based on the specific
characteristics of the adult-use cannabis transporting organization and of the
floor plan for an adult-use cannabis transporting organization and the site on
which it is located, consistent with the requirements of the Act.
         (f)   Adult-use cannabis transporting organizations shall require
approval of a special use in the city’s industrial districts, and shall be
processed in accordance with §
165.089 (Special Use Permits) of this chapter and this section.
      (9)   Additional requirements. The city may require additional
application requirement and building enhancements for applicants seeking to
operate an adult-use cannabis business establishment within the city,
including:
         (a)   The petitioner shall install the building enhancements, such as
security cameras, lighting or other improvements, as precondition to receiving
a certificate of occupancy, permit, business license, or special use, as
applicable, to ensure the safety of employees and customers of the adult-use
cannabis business establishments, as well as its surrounding environs. Said
improvements shall be determined based on the specific characteristics of the
floor plan for an adult-use cannabis business establishment and the site on
which it is located, consistent with the requirements of the Act;
         (b)   The petitioner shall submit additional information as required
by the city during the special use application process; and
         (c)   The petitioner shall provide written notice by certified mail to
all owners of property within 250 feet of the parcel for which the special use
is sought. Such notice must be sent not more than 30 days nor less than 15 days
before the hearing at which the application for special use is to be
considered. The number of feet occupied by all public roads, streets, alleys
and other public ways shall be excluded in computing the 250 feet requirement.
The notice herein required shall contain the address of the location for which
special use is requested, a brief statement of the nature of the requested
special use, the name and address of the legal and beneficial owner of the
property for which the special use is requested, and the time and date of the
hearing at which the special use will be considered.
      (10)   Signage and advertisements. In addition to local regulations for
business signs, adult-use cannabis business establishments shall comply with
all advertising regulations contained in the Act. No establishment nor any
other person or entity shall place or maintain, or cause to be placed or
maintained an advertisement of cannabis or a cannabis-infused product in any
form or through any medium:
         (a)   Within 1,000 feet of the perimeter of school grounds, a
playground, a recreation center or facility, a child care center, a public park
or public library, or a game arcade to which admission is not restricted to
persons 21 years of age or older;
         (b)   On or in a public transit vehicle or public transit shelter;
         (c)   On or in publicly-owned or publicly-operated property; or
         (d)   That contains information that:
            l.   Is false or misleading;
            2.   Promotes excessive consumption;
            3.   Depicts a person under 21 years of age consuming cannabis:
            4.   Includes the image of a cannabis leaf: or
            5.   Includes any image designed or likely to appeal to minors,
including cartoons, toys, animals, or children, or any other likeness to
images, characters, or phrases that are popularly used to advertise to
children, or any imitation of candy packaging or labeling, or that promotes
consumption of cannabis.
      (11)   Collocation of adult-use cannabis business establishments. To the
extent permitted by the Act and subject to the special use criteria set forth
herein, the city may approve for a single property or structure the collocation
of any combination of adult-use cannabis business establishments. In a
collocation provided for herein, the floor space requirements of this division
(G) shall not apply, but the collocated adult-use cannabis business
establishments shall be the sole use of the tenant space. The most restrictive
distance requirement for any collocated adult-use cannabis business
establishments shall control.
      (12)   Prohibition of ownership by elected city officials. No elected
city official shall during the elected city official’s term of office hold an
ownership interest in any cannabis business establishment which applies for a
special use pursuant to this division (G) or which is licensed to operate in
the city under the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410 ILCS 705/1 et seq.
   (H)   Motor vehicle repair and service.
      (1)   Any use involving the repair or service of motor vehicles shall be
limited to the districts identified in §
165.023 - Schedule of Use Controls. In addition, no use involving motor vehicle
repair or service shall be allowed, either as a permitted use or a special use,
on Western Avenue, regardless of whether that use is allowed in the property’s
underlying zoning district.
      (2)   Vehicle repair/service establishments may not store vehicles
outdoors on the site for longer than 14 days, or seven days once repairs are
complete.
      (3)   Repair of vehicles in prohibited outdoors. Storage of all
merchandise, auto parts, and supplies must be within an enclosed structure.
      (4)   No partially dismantled, wrecked, junked, or discarded vehicles may
be stored outdoors on the premises. This standard does not apply to vehicles
under repair.
      (5)   No motor vehicles may be stored and no repair work may be conducted
in the public right-of-way.
      (6)   The sale of new or used vehicles is prohibited unless separately
approved.
      (7)   Tow trucks are not allowed to be stored on site. Towing drop-off
and pick-up of vehicles is limited to third party towing companies.
      (8)   Vehicle repair/service establishments that share a lot line with a
residential district must be screened along interior side and rear lot lines
with a solid wall or fence, a minimum of six feet in height.
   (I)   Industrial outdoor storage.
      (1)   Definition. INDUSTRIAL OUTDOOR STORAGE (IOS). Refers to the storage
of, on no less than one acre of land, truck- trailers, shipping containers
(aka, cargo or freight containers), and any other enclosed containers intended
to be used primarily for shipping goods or materials on highways, rail lines,
or waterways. The storage of construction equipment is also allowed. IOS does
not include storage of temporary storage containers, modular storage units, or
dismantled, wrecked, junked, discarded, or towed vehicles, or vehicles under
repair. This definition does not include terminals, warehouses, distribution
facilities, junkyard, or recycling facilities.
      (2)   All storage of products, materials, and other goods must occur
within sealed, secured, and enclosed containers. If construction materials are
too large to be contained in an enclosed container, they shall be secured and
covered.
      (3)   Shipping containers and trailers shall be stored with a minimum
front setback of 50 feet, minimum side setbacks of 30 feet, and a minimum rear
setback of 20 feet from property lines.
      (4)   Screening shall be provided in the form of a berm with a minimum
height of six feet. Fencing (100% opaque) with a minimum height of eight feet
shall be used and continuously maintained on the property.
      (5)   Shipping containers shall be stored horizontally and not stacked
greater than two containers in height.
      (6)   Property used for industrial outdoor storage may not be used for
any other motor vehicle or truck use, including repairs, sales, and parking,
unless a separate special use permit is obtained.
(Prior Code, § 166.025) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971; Ord. 2015-029, passed 9-
22-2015; Ord. 2020-010, passed 2-25-2020; Ord. 2022-042, passed 6-29-2022; Ord.
2022-049, passed 10-11- 2022; Ord. 2024-009, passed 3-12-2024; Ord. 2025-017,
passed 4-22-2025)
§ 165.026 NUMBER OF BUILDINGS ON ZONING LOT.
   Except in planned developments, each single-family dwelling hereafter
erected or structurally altered shall be located on a zoning lot and there
shall be not more than one such principal building on each zoning lot.
(Prior Code, § 166.026) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 165.027 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES.
   (A)   Accessory buildings and structures.
      (1)   Time of construction. No accessory building or structure shall be
constructed on any lot prior to the time of construction of the principal
building to which it is accessory.
      (2)   Rear yard occupied. No detached accessory building or buildings
shall occupy more than 50% of the area of a required rear yard.
      (3)   Height. No detached accessory building located in a required rear
yard shall exceed 15 feet in height.
      (4)   Reversed corner lots. On a reversed corner lot in a residential
district, and within 15 feet of any adjacent property to the rear in a
residential district, no accessory building or portion thereof located in a
required rear yard shall be closer to the side lot line abutting the street
than a district equal to two-thirds the least depth which would be required
under this chapter for the front yard on such adjacent property to the rear.
Further, in the above instance, no such accessory buildings shall be located
within five feet of any part of the rear lot line which coincides with the side
lot line or portion thereof of property in any residential district. No
accessory building shall be erected in or encroach upon the required side yard
of a corner lot which is adjacent to the street, nor upon the required side
yard of a reverse corner lot which is adjacent to the street.
   (B)   Accessory uses.
      (1)   Definition. ACCESSORY USES are defined as uses that are incidental
and customarily subordinate to principal uses and that complement permitted
land uses. The intent in adopting these regulations is to ensure accessory uses
are located on the same zoning lot or parcel as the principal use. Accessory
uses are allowed provided they comply with the performance standards and
criteria set forth herein and do not adversely impact surrounding properties.
      (2)   Compliance with ordinance requirements. All accessory uses shall
comply with the applicable requirements of this zoning chapter and the city
code of ordinances, including the use regulations, bulk and area standards,
signage, and permit requirements. The provisions set forth in this section
establish additional requirements and restrictions for particular accessory
uses and structures.
      (3)   Ownership. An accessory use shall be operated and maintained under
the same ownership and on the same zoning lot as the principal use or
structure.
      (4)   Parking. Adequate off-street parking facilities in accordance with
the parking standards and specifications set forth in the city code of
ordinances shall be provided to serve the accessory use. Such parking shall be
considered part of the accessory use and shall be in addition to off-street
parking spaces or loading spaces required for other permitted uses on the site.
      (5)   Unattended donation collection boxes. Unattended donation
collection boxes (“UDCBs”) or other similar structures are prohibited in all
zoning districts unless the boxes are accessory to the principal use of the
premises. To qualify as an allowed accessory use, the UDCB must be owned and
maintained by the owner or lessor of the principal use. The following standards
and requirements must also be met to qualify as a permitted accessory use.
         (a)   No more than one UDCB is permitted per parcel.
         (b)   No UDCB shall be located on a lot unless it contains at least
one operating business or other ongoing activity, not including parking
facilities.
         (c)   UDCBs cannot block or impede access to required parking or
driveways; pedestrian routes; emergency vehicle routes; building ingress and
egress; required handicapped accessibility routes; required easements; or trash
enclosure areas or trash bins/enclosures.
         (d)   No overflow, litter, debris or dumped material shall be allowed
within 20 feet of the UDCB.
         (e)   No solid waste or hazardous materials shall be collected by the
UDCB.
         (f)   UDCBs shall be maintained and in good working order.
         (g)   UDCBs shall be serviced not less than weekly which includes the
removal of donated/collected material and abatement of any prohibited
materials, graffiti, peeling paint, rust and broken collection operating
mechanisms.
         (h)   UDCBs shall contain the name, address, 24-hour telephone number,
website and email address of the owner and operator of the UDCB and parcel
owner/agent.
   (C)   Unless otherwise provided for herein, accessory structures and uses
shall comply with all applicable regulations of this zoning chapter and the
city code of ordinances, including the floor area ratio, lot coverage ratio,
and height and setback regulations.
(Prior Code, § 166.027) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971; Ord. 2022-003, passed 1-
11-2022)
§ 165.028 BULK REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Building bulk limitations (FAR). Building bulk limitations shall be
expressed in terms of minimum yard requirements and maximum building height, or
in terms of floor area ratio (FAR). Structures must comply with the maximum
yard requirement and building height or the floor area ratio (FAR) as indicated
in the “Schedule of Use Controls” set forth in §
165.023 of this chapter.
   (B)   Continued conformity. The maintenance of yards, courts and other open
space and minimum lot areas legally required for a building shall be a
continuing obligation of the owner of such building or of the property on which
it is located, as long as the building is in existence. Furthermore, no legally
required yards, courts, other open space or minimum lot area allocated to any
building shall, by virtue of change of ownership or for any other reason, be
used to satisfy yard, court, other open space or minimum lot area requirements
for any other building.
   (C)   Division of zoning lots. No improved zoning lots shall hereafter be
divided into two or more zoning lots and no portion of any improved zoning lot
shall be sold, unless all improved zoning lots resulting from each such
division or sale shall conform with all the applicable bulk regulations of the
zoning district in which the property is located.
   (D)   Required open space. All yards, courts and other open spaces allocated
to a building or dwelling group shall be located on the same zoning lot as such
building or dwelling group.
   (E)   Required yards. No yards now or hereafter provided for a building
existing on the effective date of this chapter shall subsequently be reduced
below, or further reduced if already less than, the minimum yard requirements
of this chapter for equivalent new construction.
   (F)   Permitted obstructions. The following shall not be considered to be
obstructions when located in the required yards specified:
      (1)   All yards. Open terraces not over three feet above the average
level of the adjoining ground, but not including a permanently roofed-over
terrace or porch; awnings and canopies; steps four feet or less above grade
which are necessary for access to a permitted building or for access to a
zoning lot from a street or alley; chimneys projecting 18 inches or less into
the yard; arbors and trellises; flag poles; and fences, walls and hedges
subject to the applicable height restrictions of this chapter;
      (2)   Front yards. One-story bay windows projecting three feet or less
into the yard; overhanging eaves and gutters projecting three feet or less into
the yard;
      (3)   Rear yards. Enclosed, attached or detached off-street parking
spaces; accessory sheds, tool rooms and similar buildings or structures for
domestic or agricultural storage; balconies; breezeways and open porches; one-
story bay windows projecting three feet or less into the yard; and overhanging
eaves and gutters projecting three feet or less into the yard; and
      (4)   Side yards. Overhanging eaves and gutters projecting 18 inches or
less into the yard.
   (G)   Floor area ratio for certain existing buildings. In all cases where
two or more contiguous zoning lots are in common ownership and there was at the
adoption date of this chapter an existing building on one of such lots with
less than the permitted maximum floor area ratio, the owner may elect to add
the unused portion of the floor area ratio of the existing building to the
maximum permitted floor area ratio of any addition to the existing building to
be constructed on the adjoining zoning lot. In the event such existing building
was lawfully existing at the date of adoption of this chapter and exceeds the
permitted maximum floor area ratio, any addition to the existing building to be
constructed on an adjoining lot shall be entitled to the maximum floor area
ratio permitted in the district in which it is located.
(Prior Code, § 166.028) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 165.029 PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES.
   (A)   Scope of regulations.
      (1)   For all buildings and structures erected and all uses of land
established after the effective date of this chapter, accessory parking and
loading facilities shall be provided as required by the regulations of the
districts in which such buildings or uses are located. However, where a
building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this chapter,
and provided that construction is begun within six months of such effective
date and diligently prosecuted to completion, parking and loading facilities in
the amounts required for issuance of said building permit may be provided in
lieu of any different amounts required by this chapter.
      (2)   When the intensity of use of any building, structure or premises
shall be increased through the addition of dwelling units, gross floor area,
seating capacity or other units of measurement specified herein for required
parking or loading facilities, parking and loading facilities as required
herein shall be provided for such increase in intensity of use. However, no
building or structure lawfully erected or use lawfully established prior to the
effective date of this chapter shall be required to provide such additional
parking or loading facilities unless and until the aggregate increase in units
of measurement shall equal not less than 15% of the units of measurement
existing upon the effective date of this chapter, in which event parking or
loading facilities as required herein shall be provided for the total increase.
However, in the case of expansion or alteration of residential buildings,
required parking or loading facilities shall be provided on the basis of the
total required units of measurement for the entire capacity of such buildings.
      (3)   Whenever the existing use of a building or structure shall
hereafter be changed to a new use, parking or loading facilities shall be
provided as required for such new use. However, if said building or structure
was erected prior to the effective date of this chapter, additional parking or
loading facilities are mandatory only in the amount by which the requirements
for the new use would exceed those for the existing use if the latter were
subject to the parking and loading provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Existing parking facilities. Accessory off-street parking facilities
in existence on the effective date of this chapter and located on the same lot
as the building or use served shall not hereafter be reduced below, or if
already less than, shall not be further reduced below the requirements for a
similar new building or use under the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Permissive parking and loading facilities. Nothing in this chapter
shall be deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment of off-street parking or
loading facilities to serve any existing use of land or buildings, provided all
regulations herein governing the location, design and operation of such
facilities are adhered to.
   (D)   Damage or destruction. For any conforming or legally non-conforming
building or use which is in existence on the effective date of this chapter,
which subsequently thereto is damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion
or other cause, and which is reconstructed, reestablished or repaired, off-
street parking or loading facilities need not be provided; except that, parking
or loading facilities equivalent to any maintained at the time of such damage
or destruction shall be restored or continued in operation. However, in no case
shall it be necessary to restore or maintain parking or loading facilities in
excess of those required by this chapter for equivalent new uses or
construction.
   (E)   Parking allowance. In all residential, commercial, and industrial
zones, off-street parking shall be provided for all uses in accordance to the
table of land uses. However, off-street parking shall be waived for the first
2,000 square feet of commercial space within the C-1 (Central Area Commercial)
District and the UTOD (Uptown Transit Oriented Development) District. Also, on-
street parking directly in front of a business (or the two fronts on a corner
lot) shall count towards meeting the off-street parking requirements. A length
of 23 feet per on-street parking space shall be used in calculating the number
of available on- street parallel parking spaces.
   (F)   Parking requirements. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in
accordance with the following standards:
      (1)   Availability of spaces. All parking spaces approved as part of the
issuance of an occupancy permit shall be made available to the residents,
customers, employees, guests, and/or other users of the principal use. Spaces
shall not be utilized for long-term storage, display of vehicles, materials, or
goods.
      (2)   Accessible parking. Per state requirement, accessible parking
spaces shall be designed and provided as required by the Illinois Accessibility
Code, as amended from time to time, and all additional applicable laws.
Accessible parking shall be provided for all off-street parking lots that
provide parking for employees, visitors, or both, with the exception of single-
family, two-family, and three- family dwellings. The number of accessible
parking spaces may be counted toward the total number of off- street parking
spaces required.
      (3)   Off-premises parking facilities. Parking facilities for land uses
other than a single-family, two-family, and three-family dwellings may be
provided off-premises with the appropriate written Zoning Administrator
approval, provided that the following conditions are met.
         (a)   Location. For residential uses, any off-premises parking
facility must be located within 300 feet, along a pedestrian route or public
sidewalk, of the nearest principal entrance for the building being served. For
non-residential uses, any off-premises parking facility must be located within
600 feet, along a pedestrian route or public sidewalk, of the nearest principal
entrance of the building for which the parking is required.
         (b)   Parking agreement. A written agreement between the lessor and
lessee in a manner satisfactory to the City Attorney shall be executed and
recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Cook County. The agreement
shall include a guarantee among the lessor and lessee for access to and use of
the parking facility, and a guarantee that the parking spaces will be provided,
maintained, and reserved for the land uses served for as long as such users are
in operation.
      (4)   Parking for places of worship. The number of required off-street
parking spaces may be eliminated or reduced if there exists, within 600 feet of
the place of worship, public or private parking lots containing a sufficient
number of off-street parking spaces to satisfy the table of off-street parking
requirements. The place of worship must provide the difference if the number of
parking spaces in the private or public lots is below the number required. Any
space provided in public or private lots must be shown to be available for
worshippers on the day or days of greatest use.
      (5)   Parking space dimensions. Each required off-street parking space
shall be at least nine feet in width and at least 20 feet in length. For
parallel parking, the length of a parking space shall be 23 feet, A commercial
parking lot aisle or driveway shall be unobstructed and allow for the passage
of emergency vehicles at all times. There shall be adequate provision for
ingress and egress to all parking spaces.
      (6)   Location. Off-street parking spaces for uses in R-Zones shall not
be located between the front building line and street line. On corner lots in
R-Zones, this restriction shall also apply to the space between the side street
line and the side building line.
   (G)   Development and maintenance of parking and loading facilities. Every
parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private parking facility for five
or more motor vehicles, or as a loading area, including a commercial parking
lot, shall be developed and maintained in accordance to the following
requirements:
      (1)   Screening and landscaping. Off-street parking areas for five or
more motor vehicles, and off-street loading areas, shall be effectively
screened on each side adjoining or fronting on property situated in a
residential district, or any commercial or industrial districts, by a fence
and/or densely planted compact hedge, not more than four feet in height. The
fence will be 75% open in design, and it will be made of aluminum, wrought
iron, or a combination of wood and stone materials. A vinyl privacy fence will
not be allowed as a substitute fence.
      (2)   Minimum distances and setbacks. No off-street parking facilities,
loading areas, or a part thereof, for five or more motor vehicles shall be
closer than ten feet to any dwelling, school, hospital, or other institution
for human care located on an adjoining lot, or five feet from any lot line, A
parking facility or loading area fence shall be erected no closer than five,
four, or three feet from any lot line. A lot line for this parking section
means the front yard, the side yard, and the rear yard.
      (3)   Surfacing. Off-street parking or loading facilities shall be paved
with an impervious surface, either in asphalt or concrete. An impervious
surface can also be used as a substitute for asphalt or concrete. Impervious
surface can include permeable pavers, permeable concrete, or permeable asphalt,
or a combination of impervious materials or techniques. Grindings, crushed
stones, or gravel are not permitted for any off-street parking or loading
areas.
      (4)   Lighting. Lighting used to illuminate off-street parking or loading
facilities shall be arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining
premises. Off-street parking facilities for multiple-family dwellings shall be
adequately lighted.
      (5)   Drainage. Off-street parking or loading areas shall be graded and
drained so as to dispose of all surface water without detriment to surrounding
areas. It is highly encouraged that these areas incorporate vegetated swales,
infiltration/flow-through planters, or rain gardens.
      (6)   Repair and service. 
         (a)   No storage of any kind, nor any repair, dismantling, or
servicing of any motor vehicles, equipment, materials, or supplies shall be
permitted with any required off-street parking or loading facilities.
         (b)   This division shall be enforced for the creation of a new
parking or loading area, or for the resurfacing, recoating, and restriping of
an existing parking or loading facility. This section is solely intended for
residential, commercial, or industrial properties.
[Chapter 162, Landscaping and Screening, from the Blue Island Code of
Ordinances shall be invoked for the development of new properties, or
properties going through a planned development process.]
   (H)   Residential garage and driveway combination. Each garage car space
shall be counted as one off-street parking space. Access drives or driveways
shall not be less than nine feet in width. No access drive or driveway shall be
located in any residential district to provide access to uses other than those
permitted in a residential district.
      (1)   A one-car garage. A one-car garage and driveway combination shall
count as two off-street parking spaces provided that a paved driveway measures
a minimum of 18 feet in length between the face of the garage door and the
right-of-way.
      (2)   A two-car garage. A two-car garage and driveway combination shall
count as three off-street parking spaces provided a minimum parking area width
of 20 feet is given for a minimum length of 18 feet as specified for a one-car
garage and driveway combination.
   (I)   Submission of plot plan. Any application for a building permit or
certificate of occupancy where no building permit is required shall include
therewith a plot plan, drawn to scale and fully dimensioned, showing any
parking or loading facilities to be provided in compliance with this division.
   (J)   Number of parking spaces required. The required number of parking
spaces for any use shall be as set forth in the following table:
Table: Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use Category Number of Spaces Required
Table: Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use Category                                                                    Number of Spaces Required
RESIDENTIAL
Household Living                                                                 
   Above the Ground Floor Dwelling                                           1 per dwelling unit
   Community Residence                                                       0.50 per bed + 1 per 2 employees
   Single-Family Dwelling                                                    1 per dwelling unit
   Two-Family Dwelling                                                       1 per dwelling unit
   Three-Family Dwelling                                                     1 per dwelling unit
   Multifamily Dwelling                                                      1 per dwelling unit
   Townhouse Dwelling                                                        1 per dwelling unit
Residential Care Facility                                                        
   Assisted Living Facility                                                  0.50 per dwelling unit or 0.25
                                                                                per bed + 1 per 2 employees
   Congregate Care Facility                                                  0.50 per dwelling unit or 0.25
                                                                                per bed + 1 per 2 employees
   Independent Living Facility                                               1 per dwelling unit + 1 per 2
                                                                                employees
   Nursing Home                                                              0.50 per bed + 1 per 2 employees
   Senior Housing                                                            1 per dwelling unit
   Temp. Overnight Shelter (Church Only)                                     0.25 per bed + 1 per 2 employees
   Transitional Housing                                                      0.25 per bed + 1 per 2 employees
PUBLIC/SEMI-PUBLIC
Club, Lodge, or Fraternal Organization                                          1 per 500 sq. ft. + 1 per 2
                                                                                employees
                                                                                1 per 1,000 sq. ft.; first 2,000
Cultural Institution (Library, Museum)                                          sq. ft. waived in C-1, UTOD
                                                                                districts
                                                                                1 per 3 employees + 1 per 10
Daycare Center, Adult or Children                                               seats + drop-off spaces (as
                                                                                determined by the Zoning
                                                                                Administrator)
Daycare, Home (Home Occupation Use)                                             1 per 3 children
Educational Use                                                                  
                                                                                1 per 400 sq. ft. + 1 per 3
   Community College                                                         employees + additional spaces as
   University                                                                required by this parking table
   Trade school                                                              for residential facilities or
   K-12 school                                                               auditoriums, if present on campus
   Preschool                                                                 + drop-off spaces (as determined
                                                                                by the Zoning Administrator)
Governmental Facility, Office Use                                               1 per 300 sq. ft.
Hospital                                                                        1 per 2 staff doctors/employees +
                                                                                1 per 3 beds
                                                                                3 per 1,000 sq. ft. activity
Parks and Recreation, Outdoor                                                   area; minimum of 4 (accommodate
                                                                                passive recreation areas)
                                                                                1 per every 8 fixed seats + 1 per
                                                                                100 sq. ft. of public assembly
                                                                                area not containing fixed seats,
Places of Worship, Religious Assembly                                           or 1 space per 80 sq. ft. of
                                                                                floor area of all auditoria and
                                                                                public assembly area not
                                                                                containing fixed seats
Public Safety Services                                                          1 per 3 employees (or 1 per 600
                                                                                sq. ft.), whichever is better
COMMERCIAL
Adult-Use Business                                                              Please see retail or warehouse
                                                                                requirements
Animal Boarding, Shelter or Kennel                                              1 per 500 sq. ft.
Animal Hospital, Veterinary Clinic                                              1 per exam room + 1 per 500 sq.
                                                                                ft.
Art Studio, Gallery                                                             1 per 800 sq. ft.
Auction House                                                                   1 per employee + 1 per 5 seats
Banquet Hall                                                                    10% of maximum capacity or 1 per
                                                                                200 sq. ft.
                                                                                1 per 500 sq. ft.; first 2,000
Books, Magazines, Music, etc.                                                   sq. ft. waived in C-1, UTOD
                                                                                districts
                                                                                2 per lane + additional spaces
Bowling Alley                                                                   required for restaurant and/or
                                                                                bar
                                                                                1 per 500 sq. ft.; first 2,000
Business Support Service                                                        sq. ft. waived in C-1, UTOD
                                                                                districts
                                                                                1 per 500 sq. ft.; first 2,000
Clothing, Jewelry, Luggage, Shoes                                               sq. ft. waived in C-1, UTOD
                                                                                districts
Drug Store, Pharmacy                                                            1 per 350 sq. ft.
Dry Cleaning                                                                    1 per 500 sq. ft.
Eating and Drinking Establishment                                               First 2,000 sq. ft. waived in C-
                                                                                1, UTOD districts
                                                                                3 per 1,000 sq. ft. of up to
   Bar, Tavern or Wine Bar                                                   2,000 sq. ft. + 1 per 300 sq. ft.
                                                                                or 1 per 3 seats + 1 per employee
   Restaurant, full service with seating                                     2 per 1,000 sq. ft. of up to
                                                                                2,000 sq. ft. + 1 per 300 sq. ft.
   Restaurant, Fast-food or Carry-out                                        3 per 1,000 sq. ft. of up to
                                                                                2,000 sq. ft. + 1 per 300 sq. ft.
                                                                                3 per 1,000 sq. ft. of up to
   Restaurant, Drive-Thru                                                    2,000 sq. ft. + 1 per 300 sq. ft.
                                                                                (vehicles in queue are counted)
Eating and Drinking (Food Services)                                             First 2,000 sq. ft. waived in C-
                                                                                1, UTOD districts
   Bakery                                                                    1 per 350 sq. ft.
   Café, Coffee Shop                                                        1 per 200 sq. ft. or 1 per 50 sq.
                                                                                ft. of public service area
   Candy Store, Nuts, Butcher, Fish                                          1 per 500 sq. ft.
                                                                                0.60 per employee or 1 per
   Caterer, Catering Service                                                 employee + 0.50 per delivery
                                                                                truck or 1 per 400 sq. ft.
   Doughnut Shop                                                             1 per 350 sq. ft.
   Ice Cream Parlor, Soft Serve, Gelato                                      1 per 150 sq. ft.
   Shared Kitchen                                                            1 per 150 sq. ft. of shared
                                                                                kitchen area + 1 per 2 employees
Entertainment, Recreation and Sport                                             First 2,000 sq. ft. waived in C-
                                                                                1, UTOD districts
   Arcades (video games)                                                     1 per 200 sq. ft.
   Health/Fitness Club                                                       1 per 500 sq. ft. + 1 per 200 sq.
                                                                                ft. of exercise area
   Indoor Commercial                                                         10% of maximum capacity
   Marina                                                                    1 per 3 boat slips
   Outdoor Commercial                                                        10% of maximum capacity
   Swim School (private)                                                     1 per 500 sq. ft. + 1 per 2
                                                                                swimmers
Entertainment and Spectator Sport                                               First 2,000 sq. ft. waived in C-
                                                                                1, UTOD districts
   Small Venue (<149 persons)                                                10% of maximum capacity
   Large Venue (>150 or more persons)                                        15% of maximum capacity
Flower Shop                                                                     1 per 500 sq. ft. + 1 per
                                                                                delivery truck
Funeral Service                                                                 10 per parlor or chapel + 1 per
                                                                                business vehicle
General Retail                                                                  1 per 500 sq. ft.
Grocery Store                                                                   1 per 200 sq. ft.
Laundromat                                                                      1 per 4 washing and/or drying
                                                                                machines
Lodging/Accommodation                                                            
   Bed and Breakfast, Short-term rental                                      1 per 3 rooms + owner’s parking
                                                                                requirement
                                                                                1 per room + additional spaces
   Hotel or Motel                                                            required for office, restaurant/
                                                                                bar, meeting rooms, and general
                                                                                retail
Motor Vehicle Use                                                                
   Car Wash                                                                  1.5 per 1,000 sq. ft. + 1 per bay
                                                                                1 per 500 sq. ft. of any
   Gas Station with Mini-Mart                                                accessory convenience retail/food
                                                                                service + number of pumps
   Gas Station with Service Bay                                              1 per 500 sq. ft. + 2 per service
                                                                                bay
   Gas Station with Car Wash                                                 1.5 per 1,000 sq. ft. + 1 per bay
                                                                                2 per 1,000 sq. ft. in excess of
   Heavy Equipment Sales and Rental                                          4,000 sq. ft. (minimum of 4
                                                                                spaces)
                                                                                1 per 1,000 sq. ft. in excess of
   Light Equipment Sales and Rental                                          2,000 sq. ft. (minimum of 4
                                                                                spaces)
   Motorcycle, Scooters, ATV Sales and Rental                                1 per 500 sq. ft. + 2 per bay
   Motor Vehicle Parts (AutoZone, etc.)                                      1 per 500 sq. ft. (same as
                                                                                general retail)
                                                                                1 per 500 sq. ft. + 2 per service
   Motor Vehicle Service and Repair                                          bay + additional outdoor spaces
                                                                                for parking
                                                                                1 per 500 sq. ft. + 2 per service
   Motor Vehicle Sales and Service                                           bay + additional outdoor spaces
                                                                                for viewing
   Truck Rental, Semis (include U-Haul)                                      1 per 500 sq. ft. for office + 1
                                                                                per 2 employees (if provided)
Office Use                                                                      First 2,000 sq. ft. waived in C-
                                                                                1, UTOD districts
   General Office                                                            1 per 1,000 sq. ft.
                                                                                4 per 1,000 sq. ft. + 1 per 2
                                                                                doctors, up to 4 drop off spaces
   Medical and Dental Office                                                 (either off-street or on-street
                                                                                by permission of Zoning
                                                                                Administrator)
                                                                                1 per 500 sq. ft.; first 2,000
Personal Service                                                                sq. ft. waived in C-1, UTOD
                                                                                districts
Residential-to-Office Conversion                                                1 per 1,000 sq. ft., 2 minimum
Super Market                                                                    1 per 200 sq. ft.
Tattoo Parlor                                                                   1 per 300 sq. ft.
INDUSTRIAL
Baking Plant                                                                    1 per 500 sq. ft.
Contractor’s Service                                                           
   Office                                                                    1 per 500 sq. ft.
   Yard                                                                      1 per vehicle + 1 per 1,000 sq.
                                                                                ft. of indoor and outdoor area
Equipment, Sales and Rental                                                     1 per 600 sq. ft. + 1 per
                                                                                employee
Food Processing Establishment                                                   1 per 1,000 sq. ft. + 1 per 500
                                                                                sq. ft. of office area
Lumber Yard                                                                     1 per 150 sq. ft. of sales area +
                                                                                1 per warehouse employee
Machine Shop, Welding Operation                                                 1 per 500 sq. ft. + 1 per 1,000
                                                                                sq. ft. of outside storage
                                                                                1 per 2 employees + 1 for each
Manufacturing, Production and Industrial Services                               vehicle used in the conduct of
                                                                                the business
                                                                                1 per 1,000 sq. ft. + 1 per 300
Microbrewery, Micro Distillery                                                  sq. ft. of any public tasting
                                                                                area
                                                                                1 per 500 sq. ft. + 1 space per
Recycling Facility                                                              2,500 sq. ft. of outside storage
                                                                                area
Research Laboratory                                                             1 per 500 sq. ft.
Self-Storage, Residential                                                       1 per 100 storage units
                                                                                1 per 2 employees + 1 for each
Storage or Warehouse (commercial)                                               vehicle used in the conduct of
                                                                                the business
Substation/Distribution Equipment, Indoor or Outdoor                            1 per 500 sq. ft. + 1 per
                                                                                employee during peak shift
                                                                                1 per 2 employees + 1 for each
Truck Terminal, Truck Parking                                                   vehicle used in the conduct of
                                                                                the business
Utility                                                                         1 per 3 employees
                                                                                1 per 500 sq. ft. of office + 1
Wholesale Establishment                                                         per 600 sq. ft. of wholesale
                                                                                space
OTHER USES
Temporary Use                                                                   2 per 1,000 sq. ft. of public use
                                                                                area
Community Garden                                                                None
                                                                                1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of combined
Plant Nursery                                                                   total square footage and outdoor
                                                                                sales/display areas
Maximum Capacity: 100 SF ÷ 7 (dance floor), 100 SF ÷ 12 (fixed tables) and 100 
SF ÷ 15 (worst case scenario, may include folding chairs and tables)
 
   (K)   Off-street loading. In all zones, in connection with buildings
occupied by industrial, commercial and certain uses, there shall be provided
and maintained, on the same lot with such building, off-street loading berths
in accordance with the requirements of the following table:
      (1)   Dimensions. Each loading space shall be not less than 12 feet in
width, 35 feet in length and have a minimum vertical clearance of 14 feet, and
may occupy all or any part of any required yard.
      (2)   Required number. The required number of off-street loading spaces
shall be as follows:
Uses Square Feet of Gross Floor Area Required Off- Street Loading Spaces
Uses                      Square Feet of Gross Floor Required Off- Street
                          Area                       Loading Spaces
Funeral home              -                          1
                          Under 30,000               1
Hospital                  For each additional 30,000 1 additional
                          or major fraction thereof
Office, motel, service,   Under 25,000               1
wholesale, manufacturing, From 25,001 - 100,000      2 - 4
processing, or repairing  For each additional 50,000 1 additional
                          or major fraction thereof
School                    -                          1
 
   (L)   Additional regulations. Off-street parking and loading facilities for
separate uses may be provided jointly if the total number of spaces so provided
is not less than the sum of the separate requirements for each use, all
regulations governing the location of the accessory spaces in relation to the
use served are adhered to, and no accessory space or portion thereof serves as
a required space for more than one use.
(Prior Code, § 166.029) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971; Ord. 2021-043, passed 9-
14-2021; Ord. 2024-001, passed 1-23-2024)
§ 165.030 EXISTING SPECIAL USES.
   (A)   Where a use is classified by this chapter as a special use in any
district, and exists as a special or permitted use at the date of the adoption
of this chapter, it shall be considered to be a legal special use.
   (B)   Where a use is not allowed as a special or permitted use under this
chapter, and exists as a special use at the date of the adoption of this
chapter, it shall be considered to be a non-conforming use and shall be subject
to the applicable non-conforming use provisions of §
165.046.
(Prior Code, § 166.030) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 165.031 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   (A)   Home occupations are permissible only within a single-family dwelling
unit or accessory building and only by the person or persons maintaining a
dwelling therein.
   (B)   Not more than one non-resident person shall be employed in the home
occupation.
   (C)   One sign having an area of not more than two square feet shall be
permitted.
   (D)   Home occupations shall not utilize more than 25% of the gross floor
area of the dwelling unit.
   (E)   Any use customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling or its
accessory buildings and carried on by the inhabitants thereof, which use is
clearly incidental to the use of the dwelling as a place of residence is a
permissible home occupation; provided that, no article is sold or offered for
sale except as may be produced by the immediate family residing therein. In
particular, a home occupation includes, but is not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Professional office of a physician, dentist, lawyer, engineer,
architect and other similar professions; art studio; dressmaker; seamstress;
milliner; beauty shop operator; the teaching of music and dancing limited to
one student at a time; and other home services and trades; and
      (2)   A home occupation shall not be interpreted to include the
following: barber shops, commercial stables and kennels, restaurants, tea
rooms, tourist or boarding houses, animal hospitals and convalescent homes.
(Prior Code, § 166.031) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 165.032 DWELLINGS CONTAINING 12 UNITS OR MORE.
   (A)   Application for a building permit to construct a multiple-family
dwelling containing 12 units or more shall require approval of the Planning
Commission, the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals and a majority vote of the
City Council. A site development plan shall be submitted by the applicant
showing the location of the structure, driveways, walkways, parking layout,
utility location, recreation areas, landscaping, existing uses and structures
within 100 feet of the site, boundaries and any other elements deemed essential
by the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals and the City Council.
   (B)   All provisions of this chapter applying to the district in which the
building is constructed shall be met as a minimum requirement. To assure the
safety and welfare of the residents and neighbors and to enhance the natural
qualities of the land, the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals and the City
Council shall make findings with respect to the following before approving the
site plan.
      (1)   Parking spaces shall be provided and be easily accessible.
      (2)   The building shall be sited on the lot to provide for adequate
provisions for light, air, access and privacy.
      (3)   Laundry facilities, storage space and garbage storage areas are to
be provided in such a manner as to be unobtrusive to residents of the building
as well as residents of neighboring buildings.
      (4)   Landscaping, open space and recreation space shall be furnished to
provide screening and buffer zones around the lot. A minimum of 30% of the lot
area shall be provided for this purpose exclusive of the area occupied by
buildings, parking and driveways.
      (5)   All driveways and parking areas shall be developed with all-weather
hard surfaces and shall contain facilities for night illumination.
      (6)   Basement apartments exceeding 50% below grade level are prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 166.032) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971; Ord. 2021-043, passed 9-
14-2021)
§ 165.033 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   Special use. Planned development shall be permitted as a special use
in appropriate zones only after specific approval by the Planning and Zoning
Board of Appeals and the City Council as set forth under §
165.089 of this chapter and this section.
   (B)   Purpose.
      (1)   The purpose of planned development regulations is to allow more
creative and imaginative design for land developments than is possible under
more conventional zoning regulations. In this regard, the bulk and use
regulations of any district may be modified within a planned development.
Preservation of natural site qualities, better urban amenities, more open
space, and a higher quality project are the desired results of the planned
development process.
      (2)   In addition to the purposes detailed in §
165.089, the following objectives are sought through the use of the planned
development procedure:
         (a)   To permit a creative approach to the use of land and related
physical facilities that results in better design and development, with the
inclusion of aesthetic amenities;
         (b)   To encourage a pattern of development to preserve natural
vegetation, topographic and geological features and environmentally appropriate
features;
         (c)   To create a method for the permanent preservation of common open
space for the continued use and enjoyment of the residents of the development;
         (d)   To provide for more usable and suitably located recreation
facilities and other public and private facilities; and
         (e)   To encourage a land use which promotes the public health,
safety, comfort, morals, and welfare.
   (C)   Pre-application procedure. Prior to the filing of an application for
approval of a planned development, the developer may request an informal
meeting with the city administration and key department heads and/or with the
Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals at a regularly-scheduled meeting of that
body. The pre-application conference is not mandatory. It is intended that the
informal proposal submitted will be in preliminary conceptual form, and the
substance and detail of the matters presented shall, beyond complying with the
requirements of this chapter, be largely within the discretion of the
developer. However, the city and/or Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals may
request the submission of other specified information or documentation. The
purpose of the conference shall be informal communication, information, and
discussion, and no commitments shall be given nor shall statements or opinions
of the City or Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals be deemed binding. No
recommendations need be made to, or acted upon, by the City Council.
   (D)   Preliminary plan stage. The purpose of the preliminary plan is to
obtain tentative approval and/or commitments from the city that the plans,
design and program that the developer intends to build and follow are
acceptable, and that the developer can reasonably proceed into final detailed
architecture, engineering, surveying and landscape architecture in anticipation
of final plan approval and subsequent construction. This is a relatively
detailed submission that assures the developer that its plan is acceptable and
that it can invest the money necessary to prepare final plans with the
assurance that the final plat and plans will be accepted if they substantially
conform to the preliminary plat and plans. It is at this stage that final
modifications, adjustments and interpretations are made to the conceptual plan.
      (1)   Procedure. Every application for planned development shall begin
with a request for preliminary plan approval, unless waived by the Zoning
Administrator. Applications shall be submitted to the City Clerk who shall
refer same to the Zoning Administrator and Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals
for a public hearing and report and recommendation as to whether the City
Council should approve the preliminary plan.
      (2)   General requirements. Applications for review of preliminary plans
must include all information and materials required in this section and §
165.089(C). Seventeen copies of all required information shall be submitted,
which will then be given to members of the Planning and Zoning Board of
Appeals, the City Council and staff. The application shall be accompanied by a
fee as provided in §
165.089.
      (3)   Specific requirements. The following plans and other documentation
must be submitted as part of planned development applications, unless waived by
the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may also require additional
documents be provided before the preliminary hearing.
         (a)   Detailed plan/plat. A drawing of the planned development shall
be prepared at a scale of not less than one inch to 100 feet (one inch equals
100 feet) and shall show such designations as proposed streets (public and
private), all buildings and their use, common open space, recreation
facilities, parking areas, service areas and other facilities to indicate the
character of the proposed development. The submission shall include:
            1.   Boundary lines bearings and distance;
            2.   Easements - location, width and purpose;
            3.   Streets on and adjacent to the tract street names, right-of-
way widths, existing or proposed centerline elevations, pavement type, walks,
curbs, gutters, culverts and the like;
            4.   Utilities - a preliminary engineering study providing
information on existing and proposed sanitary, storm, water and other utilities
unnecessary to adequately service the development;
            5.   Ground elevations on the tract;
            6.   Other conditions on the tract - watercourses, floodplains,
marshes, rock outcrops, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees one foot or
more in diameter, houses, accessory buildings and other significant features;
            7.   Other conditions on adjacent land - approximate direction and
gradient of ground slope, including any embankments or retaining walls;
character and location of major buildings, railroads, power lines, towers, and
other non-residential land uses or adverse influences; owners of adjacent
unplatted land (adjacent platted land shall be referred to by subdivision plat
name and show approximate percent built-up. typical lot size, and dwelling
type);
            8.   Zoning - show zoning districts on and adjacent to the tract;
            9.   Proposed public improvements - highways or other major
improvements planned by public authorities for future construction on or near
the tract;
            10.   Open space - all parcels of land intended to be dedicated for
public use or reserved for the use of all property owners with the purpose
indicated;
            11.   Structures - general location, purpose, and height of each
building;
            12.   Map data - name of development, name of site planner, north
point, scale, date of preparation, and acreage of site; and
            13.   Miscellaneous - such additional information as may be
required by the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals.
         (b)   Objectives. A statement of planning objectives to be achieved by
the planned development. This statement should include a description of the
character of the proposed development and the rationale behind the assumptions
and choices of the developer;
         (c)   Ownership. Statement of present and proposed ownership of all
land within the project, including present tract designation according to
official records in offices of the County Recorder of Deeds, if legal title to
the property is in trust, then a statement of names and percentage of interest
of all the beneficiaries shall be submitted. If legal title to the property is
in a corporation, limited partnership, or other legal entity, then a statement
of the names of all persons or entities owning 10% or more of the stock or
other ownership interest shall be submitted;
         (d)   Schedule. Development schedule indicating:
            1.   The stages in which the project will be built with an emphasis
on area, density, use, and public facilities such as open space to be developed
with each stage; and
            2.   Approximate dates for beginning and completing each stage. The
overall design of each stage shall be shown on the plat and through supporting
graphic material.
         (e)   Density. In residential planned developments, information on the
density of residential uses, including the number of dwelling units per acre,
the number of dwelling units by type, the number of buildings by type, and the
number of bedrooms in each dwelling unit type;
         (f)   Non-residential use. In all planned developments, information on
the type and amount of ancillary and non-residential uses, including the amount
of open space;
         (g)   Service facilities. Information on all service facilities and
off-street parking facilities;
         (h) Architectural renderings/plans. Preliminary architectural
renderings/plan for all primary buildings shall be submitted in sufficient
detail to permit an understanding of the style of the development, the design
of the building, and the number, size and type of dwelling units. Also, provide
floor area of building types and total ground coverage and height of buildings;
         (i)   Landscape plans. Preliminary plans for vegetation, earth
sculpturing, berming, and aesthetic features, which will adhere to Chapter 162;
         (j)   Facilities plans. Preliminary plans or information, adequate to
indicate that the proposed development can be serviced, shall be submitted for:
            1.   Roads, including classification, width of right-of-way, width
of pavement, and typical construction details;
            2.   Sanitary sewers;
            3.   Storm drainage;
            4.   Water supply system;
            5.   Lighting programs; and
            6.   Sidewalks, paths and trails.
         (k)   School impact study. For residential planned developments,
information on the student load and financial impact on the local school
districts, including expected scheduling of potential students;
         (l)   Tax impact study. Information on the taxes to be generated by
the proposed project and the cost to the various taxing bodies to provide the
necessary services to the project;
         (m)   Traffic analysis. Information on the adequacy of the local
transportation and thoroughfare system to handle anticipated traffic volumes
generated by the planned development. Also, an analysis should be made of the
adequacy of the internal vehicular circulation pattern; and
         (n)   Market, study. An economic feasibility study of the planned
development, including information on land utilization and marketing potential.
Evidence should be presented showing the need and feasibility of the proposed
development.
      (4)   Preliminary hearing. The Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals shall
hold a public hearing on the application for a planned development, in
accordance with the requirements and standards contained in this section and §
165.088. The Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals shall make written findings
of fact and shall submit same together with its recommendation to the City
Council within 30 days of the public hearing.
      (5)   City Council action. The City Council shall not act upon an
application until it has received the report and recommendation of the Planning
and Zoning Board of Appeals. After receipt, the City Council shall approve,
modify or disapprove the preliminary plan, considering the requirements and
standards contained in this section and §
165.088. The City Council may require such special conditions in the approval
of the preliminary plan as it may deem necessary to ensure conformity with the
intent of all comprehensive plan elements, the stated purpose of the planned
development, and the general and specific purposes for planned developments.
      (6)   Preliminary approval. If the preliminary plan is approved by the
City Council, the final plan, once submitted and considered by the Planning and
Zoning Board of Appeals and the City Council, shall be approved and the planned
development, as a form of conditional use, granted by ordinance, if it conforms
with the preliminary plan, including any conditions and/or modifications
imposed by the City Council. Approval of a preliminary plan shall not
constitute approval of the final plan; rather, it shall be deemed an expression
of approval of the layout submitted on the preliminary plan as a guide to the
preparation of the final plan(s). No building permit shall be issued for any
structure until a final planned development plan has been filed and approved.
   (E)   Final plan stage. The developer shall submit the final plan(s) for the
planned development not later than one year (or such additional time, as may be
authorized by resolution of the City Council) after approval of the preliminary
plan. Preliminary and final plans may be filed and approved simultaneously, or
the final plan approved without the preliminary plan, if all of the land is to
be developed at one time and if all requirements of both the preliminary and
final plan procedures are met.
      (1)   Procedure. Final plans shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator, who shall refer same to the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals
for a public hearing and report and recommendation as to whether the City
Council should approve the final plan. All documents required in the
preliminary plan stage must also be provided in the final plan stage, with
updates made for any known or contemplated changes to the preliminary plan.
Such alterations shall not substantially alter the approved preliminary plans
beyond any conditions imposed by the city.
      (2)   Final plat. A final planned development plat, suitable for
recording with the County Recorder of Deeds, shall be prepared and submitted to
the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals. The purpose of the final plat is to
designate with particularity the land subdivided into conventional lots as well
as the division of other land not so treated into common open areas and
building areas. The final plat shall include, but not be limited to:
         (a)   An accurate legal description of the entire area under immediate
development within the planned development;
         (b)   A subdivision plat of all subdivided lands in the same form and
meeting all the requirements of a normal subdivision plat;
         (c)   An accurate legal description of each separate nnsubdivided use
area, including common open space;
         (d)   Designation of the exact location of all buildings to be
constructed;
         (e)   Certificates, seals and signatures required for the dedication
of lands and recording the documents; and
         (f)   Tabulations on separate unsubdivided use area, land area, number
of buildings, number of dwelling units, and dwelling units per acre.
      (3)   Final plans. Any preliminary documents submitted as part of the
approved preliminary plan must be provided in final, updated form, including,
but not limited to, architectural plans, landscaping plans and facilities
plans.
      (4)   Common open space. All common open space may be either conveyed to
a municipal or public corporation, conveyed to a not-for-profit corporation or
entity established for the purpose of benefitting the owners and residents of
the planned development, or retained by the developer. In any event, the City
Council may require legally binding covenants and other guarantees, in a form
approved by the City Attorney, that the common open space will be permanently
preserved as an open area. All land conveyed to a not-for-profit corporation or
like entity shall be subject to the right of said corporation to impose a
legally enforceable lien against the individually owned property in the planned
development for maintenance and improvement of the common open space. Such
documents shall also provide that the city shall have the right, but not the
obligation, to perform necessary maintenance of the common open space and shall
have a lien against the individually owned property in the planned development
for the costs thereof.
      (5)   Public facilities. All public facilities and improvements made
necessary as a result of the planned development shall be either constructed in
advance of the approval of the final plan, or at the election of the city,
escrow deposits, irrevocable letters of credit in a form approved by the City
Attorney, or performance bonds shall be delivered to the city to guarantee
construction of the required improvements.
      (6)   Construction plan. Detailed plans shall be submitted for the
design, construction or installation of site amenities, including buildings,
landscaping, lakes and other site improvements. A final construction schedule
shall be submitted for that portion of the planned development for which
approval is being requested.
      (7)   Covenants. In residential planned developments, agreements,
provisions or covenants that will govern the use, maintenance and continued
protection of the planned development and any of its common open space shall be
provided. Said covenants shall be reviewed and approved by the City Attorney
prior to recordation.
      (8)   Final hearing. Within 30 days after receiving the final plan and
supporting documents, the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals shall review the
final plan at a public meeting to determine whether the final plan is in
substantial conformance with the approved preliminary plan. The Planning and
Zoning Board of Appeals shall determine whether the final plan is in conformity
with the regulations provided in this section and the approved preliminary
plan. The Planning and Zoning Board shall recommend approval, approval with
conditions or denial of approval of the final plat. The Planning and Zoning
Board of Appeals shall make written findings and shall submit same together
with its recommendation to the City Council within 30 days of the public
hearing. If the applicant opted to submit preliminary and final plans together,
or final plans alone, the hearing shall be as provided in division (D)(4)
above.
      (9)   City Council action. The City Council shall not act upon a final
planned development plan until it has received the report and recommendation of
the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals. After receipt, the City Council shall
approve, approve with conditions or disapprove the preliminary plan. The City
Council may require such special conditions in the approval of the final plan
as it may deem necessary to ensure conformity with the intent of all
comprehensive plan elements, the stated purpose of the planned development, and
the general and specific purposes for planned developments. Approval of a final
plan by the City Council is valid for a time period of one year, within which
time the final plat must be recorded. If the applicant opted to submit
preliminary and final plans together, or final plans alone, approval shall be
considered as provided in division (D)(5) above.
   (F)   Notice. Notice of the time and place of any preliminary’ hearing, or
any final hearing when a preliminary hearing has been bypassed, shall be given
in the following manner:
      (1)   By publishing notice at least once in one or more newspapers of
general circulation within the city, not more than 30, nor less than 15 days
prior to such hearing;
      (2)   By posting notice as provided in §
165.085 for special uses;
      (3)   By mailing via certified mail notice to all owners of property
within 250 feet of the boundaries of the planned development, with a
description of the proposed planned development and a legal description of the
subject property; and
      (4)   By mailing via certified mail the same notice to owners of property
beyond 250 feet of the boundaries of the planned development, as required by
the Zoning Administrator if he or she deems it necessary and reasonable because
of the size or nature of the development, unusual configuration of the property
involved, or any other reason likely to result in a direct impact of the
development on residents beyond 250 feet.
   (G)   Generally. The following regulations shall also apply, unless waived
by City Council after consideration by the Planning and Zoning Board of
Appeals.
      (1)   Spacing and orientation of building groups - residential.
         (a)   Walls containing main window exposures or main entrances shall
be so oriented as to ensure adequate light and air exposure.
         (b)   Such buildings shall be so arranged as to avoid undue exposure
to concentrated loading or parking facilities and shall be so oriented as to
preserve visual and audible privacy between adjacent buildings.
         (c)   A building wall containing windows and an entrance way shall be
located no closer to another building than a distance equal to the height of
the taller building of the two, but in no case less than 50 feet.
         (d)   A building wall containing only windows or only an entranceway
shall be located no closer to another building than a distance equal to the
height of the taller building of the two, but in no case less than 25 feet.
         (e)   A building group shall not be so arranged that any temporary or
permanently inhabited building is inaccessible to emergency vehicles.
         (f)   The proposed site shall be properly landscaped, so as to further
enhance the natural qualities of the land. Where adjacent land use dictates,
proper screening and buffer zones may be required. No certificate of occupancy
shall be issued for any such building or buildings, unless the same conforms in
all respects to such site plans and unless all facilities included in the site
plan are in accordance with the requirements set forth herein. Proper
landscaping shall be provided along all walks and streets, around recreation
areas and along the outer property line of the site.
         (g)   The maximum length of any group of attached structures shall not
exceed 150 feet. A building group may not be so arranged as to be inaccessible
by emergency vehicles.
      (2)   Spacing and orientation of building groups - business and
industrial.
         (a)   Exterior walls of opposite buildings shall be located no closer
than a distance equal to the height of the taller building.
         (b)   A building group shall not be so arranged that any permanently
or temporarily occupied building is inaccessible to emergency vehicles.
      (3)   Circulation.
         (a)   There shall be an adequate, safe and convenient arrangement of
pedestrian circulation, facilities, roadways, driveways and off-street parking
and loading space.
         (b)   There shall be an adequate amount in a suitable location, of
pedestrian walks, malls and landscaped spaces, to prevent pedestrian use of
vehicular ways and parking spaces and to separate pedestrian walks, malls and
public transportation loading places from general vehicular circulation
facilities.
         (c)   Buildings and vehicular circulation open spaces shall be
arranged so that pedestrians moving between buildings are not unnecessarily
exposed to vehicular traffic.
      (4)   Paving and drainage. There shall be an adequate design of grades,
paving, gutters, drainage and treatment of turf to handle storm waters, prevent
erosion, and to prevent the formation of dust.
      (5)   Driveways. All driveways and parking areas shall be developed with
all-weather hard surfaces and shall contain facilities for light illumination.
      (6)   Signs and lighting. Signs and lighting devices shall be properly
arranged with respect to traffic-control devices and adjacent residential
districts.
      (7)   Open space.
         (a)   Permanent open space refers to parks, playgrounds, parkway
medians, landscaped green space, landscape swales (or similar drainage
practices), schools, community centers, parking amenities (including, but not
limited to, ride-sharing spots, charging stations and bicycle racks) or other
similar areas in public ownership or areas covered by an open easement.
         (b)   Pervious open space shall be limited to any land used as yards,
parks, recreational areas, landscaped green areas, and landscape swales (or
similar drainage practices), but shall not include areas used for off-street
parking and any area, the use of which notwithstanding, that has been compacted
or covered with a layer of material so that it does not readily absorb or
retain water.
         (c)   No plan for a planned development shall be approved unless such
plan provides for a certain percentage of total area classifiable as permanent
open space. That percentage is 20% in the R-1 District and 10% in the U-TOD
district.
         (d)   No plan for a planned development shall be approved unless such
plan provides for a certain percentage of gross land area classifiable as
pervious open space. That percentage is 20% in the R-1 District, 10% in the C-
2 District, 15% in the I-1 and I-2 Districts, and 10% in the U-TOD District.
         (e)   Any applicant for a planned development who desires a variance
reducing these open space requirements shall be responsible for demonstrating
that the proposed development will not increase the area’s runoff and will
include sufficient green space.
         (f)   Stormwater facilities.
            1.   As used in this division (G)(7), STORMWATER FACILITIES shall
include the following:
               a.   Vegetated swale. A shallow, landscaped area designed to
capture, convey and potentially infiltrate stormwater runoff as it moves from a
paved surface;
               b.   Infiltration/flow-through planter. A contained landscaped
area designed to capture and retain stormwater runoff; and
               c.   Rain garden. A shallow, landscaped area that can collect,
slow down, filter and absorb large volumes of water and can also delay
discharge into a connected watershed system, either natural or human-made.
            2.   All three stormwater facilities can be used in an urban,
suburban or rural area of the city. They can be used in street or parking lot
applications.
      (8)   Minimum lot, area in residential planned developments. Provided the
overall number of dwelling units per acre (density) is not increased beyond the
provisions of §
165.089(I)(4) of this chapter, and provided that the permanent open space in
accord with division (E)(7) above, the minimum individual lot area per dwelling
unit provisions of the district in which the development is located may be
waived.
(Prior Code, § 166.033) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971; Ord. 2021-043, passed 9-
14-2021; Ord. 2021-062, passed 12-14-2021)
§ 165.034 YARD REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Projection into required yards. Certain architectural features may
project into required yards as follows.
      (1)   Cornices, canopies, eaves or other similar architectural features
may project into required yards not more than two feet.
      (2)   Bay windows, balconies, fireplaces, fire escapes and chimneys may
project three feet, six inches provided that such features do not occupy, in
the aggregate, more than one-third of the length of the building wall on which
they are located.
   (B)   Walls and fences. Walls and fences are permitted in yards, except
front yards in R-Zones, subject to the visibility requirements in division (I)
below.
   (C)   Front yards for corner lots. A front yard of the required depth shall
be provided on one of the two frontages and a second front yard shall be
provided on the other frontage; provided that, in any R-Zone, the second front
yard need be only 50% of the required depth for front yards in that zone.
   (D)   Minimum side yard width. Where a side yard to a principal building is
provided, although not required by this chapter, it shall not be less than six
feet in width unless it abuts a street or alley.
   (E)   Dwelling over other permitted uses. The horizontal distance between
the rear lot line and the rear wall of a dwelling unit on any floor of the
building shall be not less than 25 feet.
   (F)   Required yard applies to one building only. No part of a yard or other
open space or off-street parking or loading space required for or in connection
with any building for the purpose of complying with this chapter shall be
included as part of a yard, open space or off-street parking or loading space
similarly required for any other building.
   (G)   No reduction of yard dimensions. No yard existing at the time of
passage of this chapter shall be reduced in dimension below the minimum
requirements set forth in §
165.023 of this chapter.
   (H)   Vacation of public ways. Whenever any street, alley or other public
way is vacated in the manner authorized by law, the zone adjoining each side of
such street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center
of such vacation and all areas included in the vacation shall then and
henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended zone.
   (I)   Visibility at intersection. On any corner lot nothing shall be
erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as materially to
impede vision between a height of two and one-half and ten feet above the
centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the street
lines of such corner lot.
   (J)   Limited number of buildings. There shall be no more than one principal
dwelling and two accessory structures, including a private garage, on each lot
in any R-Zone except as provided in §
165.033 of this chapter.
   (K)   Deposit of wastes. No materials or wastes shall be deposited on any
premises in such form or manner that they may be transferred off such premises
by natural cause or forces. All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or
dust or which constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible by or otherwise
be attractive to rodents, insects or animals shall be stored outdoors only in
closed containers.
   (L)   Access to service stations, garages and parking areas. No automobile
service station, public garage or commercial parking areas of garages for 25 or
more motor vehicles shall have an entrance or exit for vehicles within 200 feet
along the same side of a street on which is located a school, playground, place
of worship, hospital, library or institution for dependents or for children,
except where such property is in another block or on another street on which
the lot does not abut.
(Prior Code, § 166.034) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 165.035 USE DISPERSAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The dispersal standards contained in this section
exist to prevent the clustering of certain uses to promote diversification
within zoning districts and increase the availability of uses that will benefit
the health, safety, and welfare of residents.
   (B)   Applicability.
      (1)   Dispersal standards contained in the table below shall apply to all
proposed new uses, measuring the distance of that new use from all pre-existing
uses of the same description. New uses shall be prohibited if the distance
between the new use and a pre-existing use of the same description is equal to
or less than the dispersal standard listed for that category or use. For the
purposes of this section, distance shall be measured in a straight line between
the nearest point on the lot line occupied by the pre- existing use to the
nearest point on the lot line to be occupied by the proposed new use.
      (2)   The dispersal standards apply irrespective of whether a particular
proposed use is permitted by right or permitted by special use.
      (3)   The dispersal standards apply to uses not listed in the table below
if the proposed use is similar to a listed use, as determined by the Zoning
Administrator (for permitted uses) or the Planning and Zoning Board Of Appeals
(for special uses).
 
      (4)   If a conflict exists between a dispersal standard listed in this
section and a dispersal standard listed elsewhere in the Blue Island Code of
Ordinances or Illinois statutes, the larger distance shall apply.
   (C)   Table of Dispersal Standards.
Use Minimum Dispersal Standard (feet)
                                                                               Minimum
Use                                                                            Dispersal
                                                                               Standard
                                                                               (feet)
All uses in “Group Residential” category except “Assisted Living Facility2,500
Congregate Care, Nursing Home”
All uses in “Adult Business” category                                      2,500
All uses in “Adult-Use Cannabis Business” category                         1,500
Barber Shop                                                                    1,000
Billboards                                                                     500
Check Cashing, Payday or Title Loan Shop                                       2,500
Community Home                                                                 1,500
Currency Exchange                                                              2,500
Hair Salon (i.e. beauty shop or beauty parlor)                                 1,000
Liquor Store (i.e., package goods)                                             1,000
Pawn Shop                                                                      5,000
Small Box Store                                                                5,000
Tattoo Parlor, Tattoo Studio, Body Piercing                                    1,000
Tobacco/Vape Store                                                             2,500
Transitional Residence, Sober House                                            1,500
 
   (D)   Variations. Variations from regulations of this section shall be
considered an Authorized Variation under §
165.086, subject to the procedures contained therein.
(Ord. 2024-34, passed 8-27-2024)
NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS,
STRUCTURES AND USES
§ 165.045 PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this subchapter to provide for the regulation of
non-conforming uses, buildings and structures and to specify those
circumstances and conditions under which those non- conforming uses, buildings
and structures which adversely affect the maintenance, development, use or
taxable value of other property in the district in which they are located shall
be gradually eliminated in accordance with the authority granted by state law.
   (B)   This chapter establishes separate districts, each of which is an
appropriate area for the location of the uses which are permitted in that
district. It is necessary and consistent with the establishment of those
districts that those non-conforming uses, buildings and structures, which
substantially and adversely affect the orderly development and taxable value of
other property in the district not be permitted to continue indefinitely. It is
logical and reasonable, and in accordance with the authority delegated by state
law, that a time limit be placed upon the continuance of such existing non-
conforming uses, based upon the nature of the use; and in the case of non-
conforming buildings and structures, upon their character, age and the
investment therein. In such cases, the adoption of a reasonable amortization
program permits the owner gradually to make his or her plans during a period
when he or she is allowed to continue the non- conforming use of his or her
property, thereby minimizing his or her loss, while at the same time assuring
the public that the district in which the non- conformity exists will
eventually benefit from a substantial uniformity of permitted uses. The use of
the term STRUCTURE herein shall include any improvement upon land, other than
the land itself, and shall include any sign, whether attached to or upon
another structure, or to or upon a building, or whether affixed directly in the
ground, and shall include all such signs as are painted or otherwise applied
directly upon the surface of a building.
(Prior Code, § 166.050) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 165.046 AUTHORITY TO CONTINUE NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES.
   (A)   Any pre-existing non-conforming use, building or structure which
existed lawfully at the time of the adoption of this chapter and which remains
non-conforming, and any use, building or structure which became non-conforming
upon the adoption of this chapter or which will become non-conforming upon the
adoption of any amendment thereto, may be continued, some for specified and
respective periods of time, subject to the regulations which follow.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the above division (A), any use that would require a
special use permit to operate within that zoning district shall be deemed non-
conforming if no special use permit has been obtained. Legally non-conforming
uses of this type shall be allowed to continue until there is a change of
ownership or, for non-residential properties, tenancy, at which time the new
owner or, for non-residential properties, tenant shall apply for a special use
permit under §
165.089 of this chapter to become a conforming use. Such special uses shall be
granted provided that the special use meets all standards under § 165.089(F)
and all violations of building codes discovered during mandatory inspections
have been resolved, except that no special use shall be denied solely for non-
conformance with the regulations listed in §
165.047(A) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 166.051) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971; Ord. 2024-037, passed 8-
27-2024)
§ 165.047 EXEMPTED BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES.
   (A)   No building, structure or use lawfully established on the effective
date of this chapter shall be subject to the amortization provisions of this
subchapter solely by reason of being non-conforming with respect to the
standards prescribed in this chapter for any of the following:
      (1)   Floor area ratio;
      (2)   Yards: front, side, rear or transitional;
      (3)   Lot area per dwelling unit;
      (4)   Building height;
      (5)   Maximum gross floor area;
      (6)   Off-street parking and loading spaces; and
      (7)   Number of employees.
   (B)   No building, structure or use lawfully established on the effective
date of this chapter and located in any commercial or industrial district shall
be subject to the amortization provisions of this subchapter, except for a non-
conforming use of land. To protect the health and safety of those using the
buildings or structures, this provision shall not prevent the city from
requiring property owners to repair or modify buildings or structures that are
not in compliance with the requirements of this Code, except those standards
exempted in division (A).
   (C)   No residential use lawfully established on the effective date of this
chapter shall be subject to the amortization provisions of this subchapter.
This provision shall include principal dwelling units, guest houses, and coach
houses. For purposes of this section, “coach house” refers to a structure, or
part of a structure, that is not the principal dwelling unit and contains
exactly one accessory dwelling unit. To protect the health and safety of its
residents, this provision also shall not prevent the city from requiring
property owners to repair or modify buildings or structures that are not in
compliance with the requirements of this Code, except those standards exempted
in division (A) above.
   (D)   Non-conforming signs shall be subject to amortization only as provided
in this subchapter, but in all other respects, signs shall be subject to the
provisions applicable to non-conforming structures and the use thereof.
(Prior Code, § 166.052) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971; Ord. 2024-037, passed 8-
27-2024)
§ 165.048 BUILDING NOT IN CONFORMANCE WITH DISTRICT REGULATIONS; CONTINUANCE
OF.
   Any lawfully existing building or structure which does not conform to the
regulations of the district in which it is located may be continued subject to
the provisions of this section.
   (A)   Repairs and alterations. Ordinary repairs and alterations may be made
to a non-conforming building or structure; provided that, no structural
alterations shall be made in or to a building or structure all, or
substantially all, of which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in
the district in which it is located, except those required by law or except to
make the building or structure and use thereof conform to the regulations of
the district in which it is located. For the purpose of this section, repairs
shall include the replacement of storage tanks where the safety of operation of
the installation required such replacement, and other replacements of, or
substitutions for, machinery or equipment not involving structural alterations
to the building or structure except as hereinabove provided.
   (B)   Additions and enlargements. A non- conforming building or structure
which is non- conforming as to bulk, or all or substantially all of which is
designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district, in which it is
located shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner unless such additions
and enlargements thereto are made to conform to all the regulations of the
district in which it is located, and unless such non-conforming building or
structure, including all additions and enlargements thereto, shall conform to §
165.023 of this chapter.
   (C)   Moving. No building or structure which does not conform to all of the
regulations of the district in which it is located shall be moved in whole or
part to any other location on the lot unless every portion of such building or
structure which is moved and the use thereof is made to conform to all the
regulations of the district in which it is located.
   (D)   Restoration of damaged non-conforming building. A building or
structure, all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use
which is not permitted in the district in which it is located, and which is
destroyed or damaged by fire or other casualty or act of God to the extent that
the cost of restoration to the condition in which it was before the occurrence
shall exceed 50% of the cost of restoration of the entire building new, shall
not be restored unless said building or structure and the use thereof shall
conform to all the regulations of the district in which it is located. In the
event such damage or destruction is less than 50% of the cost of restoration of
the entire building new, no repairs or reconstruction shall be made unless such
restoration is started within one year from date of the partial destruction and
is diligently prosecuted to completion.
   (E)   Discontinuance of use. A building, structure or portion thereof, all
or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use which is not
permitted in the district in which it is located, which is or hereafter becomes
vacant and remains unoccupied or is not used for a continuous period of six
months, shall not thereafter be occupied or used, except by a use which
conforms to the use regulations of the district in which it is located.
   (F)   Elimination. Any structure or building, all or substantially all of
which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in the district in which
it is located shall be removed and its use thereafter cease, or shall be
converted to a building or structure designed or intended for a use permitted
in the district in which it is located, in accordance with the following
amortization schedules:
      (1)   Under $2,000 assessed valuation of building or structure at
effective date of this chapter or when erected, whichever last occurs: five
years from the date of adoption of this chapter;
      (2)   At least $2,000, but not more than $5,000, assessed valuation of
building or structure at effective date of this chapter or when erected,
whichever last occurs: ten years from the date of adoption of this chapter;
      (3)   In all residential districts any building or structure, other than
those specified in divisions (F)(1) and (F)(2) above, all or substantially all
of which is designed or intended for a use permitted only in one of the
commercial or industrial districts, shall be removed or it shall be altered and
converted to a building or structure designed for a use permitted in the
district in which it is located within six months after the termination of the
respective period of time set out hereinafter, which periods are hereby
established as a reasonable amortization of the normal, useful life of each
class of building and type of construction above the foundation walls or piers
(when two or more construction types occur in a structure, the least fire-
resistant type shall govern as the basis for amortization), as follows:
         (a)   Fire-resistive construction (that type of construction in which
all structural elements including walls, bearing partitions, floors, ceilings
and roofs and their support, are of non-combustible materials providing fire
resistance as required by the Building Code; except that, subject to the
Building Code, combustible material may be used for doors, door frames and
bucks, window and window frames, interior trim including grounds and furring,
finished flooring and sleepers, frames, platforms and aprons of exterior show
windows at street level, handrails, interior wall and ceiling finishes, and
roof insulation): 60 years from the date of issuance of the building permit for
the construction of either the whole structure or the initial building or
initial part thereof, or 40 years after the effective date of this chapter,
whichever last occurs;
         (b)   Exterior protected construction (that type of construction in
which all exterior walls are non-combustible materials providing fire
resistance not less than required in the Building Code; except that, subject to
the Building Code, combustible material may be used for doors, door frames and
bucks, windows and window frames, interior trim including grounds and furring,
finished flooring and sleepers, frames, platforms and aprons of exterior show
windows at street level, handrails, interior wall and ceiling finishes, and
roof insulation): 50 years from the date of issuance of the building permit for
the construction of either the whole structure or the initial part thereof, or
35 years after the effective date of this chapter, whichever last occurs; and
         (c)   Non-combustible construction (that type of construction in which
all structural elements including walls, bearing partitions, floor, ceilings
and roofs and their supports are of non-combustible materials, but which are
generally not fire-protected except as required in the Building Code, and
except that subject to the Building Code, combustible material may be used for
doors, door frames and bucks, windows and window frames, interior trim
including grounds and furring, finished flooring and sleepers, frames,
platforms and aprons of exterior show windows at street level, handrails,
interior wall and ceiling finishes and roof insulation); and combustible frame
construction (that type of construction in which the structural elements
including enclosing walls, are entirely or in part of wood or other materials
not more combustible than wood): 40 years from the date of issuance of the
building permit for the construction of either the whole structure or the
initial building or initial part thereof, or 25 years after the effective date
of this chapter, whichever last occurs.
      (4)   Any sign which is located in a residential district and which does
not conform to all the regulations of such residential district in which it is
located, shall be removed or shall be altered or converted to a sign permitted
in the district in which it is located within eight years from the date of
adoption of this chapter.
      (5)   If, prior to the adoption of this chapter, substantially all of a
non-conforming building or structure has been reconstructed, rebuilt or
structurally altered, or if an addition at least equal in size or assessed
value has been structurally attached thereto, the normal useful life of such
building is hereby fixed in accordance with the foregoing schedule from the
date of the issuance of the building permit for such reconstruction or
addition.
      (6)   Any building or structure which is located in a commercial
district, and which is designed or intended for a use permitted only in an
industrial district, shall be removed or shall be altered, remodeled and
converted for a permitted use within six months after the termination of the
normal useful life of such building, which is hereby established in accordance
with the respective amortization periods set out in divisions (F)(1), (F)(2) or
(F)(3) above.
      (7)   The non-conforming use of a building or structure, all or
substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in
the district in which it is located and which building or structure is required
to be removed or altered, remodeled, or converted by divisions (F)(3) or (F)(6)
above shall be terminated and said use shall not be operated on the premises
after said building or structure is removed, altered, remodeled or converted.
      (8)   Where the application of the amortization schedule of divisions (F)
(1), (F)(2) or (F)(3) above would cause two or more buildings or structures in
common ownership or possession and located upon the same lot or adjoining lots
or parcels of land to be removed or reconstructed at different periods, the
Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the authority, upon petition,
to extend the amortization period for not more than the longest period
permitted one of the buildings or structures.
   (G)   Condemnation. The city, at any time, and from time to time, by
ordinance duly enacted and in accordance with the authority vested in it by
state law, may:
      (1)   Acquire by condemnation of any non- conforming building or
structure, all or substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use
not permitted in the district in which it is located, and all land which is
necessary or appropriate for the rehabilitation or redevelopment of the area
blighted by such non-conforming building or structure;
      (2)   Remove or demolish all such non- conforming buildings and
structures so acquired;
      (3)   Hold and use any remaining property for public purposes; and
      (4)   Sell, lease or exchange such property as is not held for public
purposes, subject to the provisions of this chapter, or any amendment hereto.
(Prior Code, § 166.053) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971; Ord. 2021-043, passed 9-
14-2021)
§ 165.049 NON-CONFORMING USE OF BUILDING WHICH IS DESIGNED FOR USE PERMISSIBLE
IN DISTRICT.
   The lawfully existing non-conforming use of part or all of a building or
structure, all or substantially all of which building or structure is designed
or intended for a use which is permitted in the district in which it is located
may be subject to the following provisions.
   (A)   Expansion. The non-conforming use of part of a building or structure,
all or substantially all of which building or structure is designed or intended
for a use permitted in the district in which it is located, may be expanded or
extended into any other portion of such building or structure.
   (B)   Discontinuance. If a non-conforming use of a building or structure,
all or substantially all of which building or structure is designed or intended
for a use permitted in the district in which it is located, is discontinued for
a period of six consecutive months, it shall not be renewed and any subsequent
use of the building or structure shall conform to the use regulations of the
district in which the premises are located.
   (C)   Change. No non-conforming use shall be changed to another non-
conforming use when such non-conforming use is located in a building or
structure, all or substantially all of which building or structure is designed
or intended for a permitted use.
   (D)   Elimination.
      (1)   In all residential districts, any use lawfully existing at the
adoption of this chapter but permitted only in the commercial districts or the
industrial districts, and which use is located in a building, all or
substantially all of which is designed or intended for a residential purpose or
for a residential accessory purpose, shall be entirely discontinued and shall
thereafter cease operation within ten years of the effective date of this
chapter.
      (2)   In all commercial districts, any use lawfully existing at the
adoption of this chapter but permitted only in an industrial district and
located in a building, all or substantially all of which is designed or
intended for a use permitted in a commercial district, shall be entirely
discontinued and shall thereafter cease operation 15 years from the date of
adoption of this chapter.
      (3)   The non-conforming use of a building or structure, all or
substantially all of which is designed or intended for a use not permitted in
the district in which it is located and which building or structure is required
to be removed or altered, remodeled, or converted by §
165.048(C) or (F) of ths chapter, shall be terminated and said use shall not be
operated on the premises after said building or structure is removed, altered,
remodeled or converted.
(Prior Code, § 166.054) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 165.050 NON-CONFORMING USE OF LAND.
   The non-conforming use of land not involving a structure or building, or in
connection with which any building or structure thereon is incidental or
accessory to the principal use of the land, may be continued, subject to the
following provisions.
   (A)   Expansion. A non-conforming use of land shall not be expanded or
extended beyond the area it occupies.
   (B)   Discontinuance. If the non-conforming use of land is discontinued for
a period of six consecutive months, it shall not thereafter be renewed, and any
subsequent use of the land shall conform to the regulations of the district in
which the land is located.
   (C)   Change of use. The non-conforming use of land shall not be changed to
any other use, except to a use permitted in the district in which the land is
located.
   (D)   Elimination.
      (1)   The non-conforming use of land shall be discontinued and cease 11
years from the date of the adoption of this chapter in each of the following
cases:
         (a)   Where no buildings or structures are employed in connection with
such use;
         (b)   Where the only buildings or structures or other physical
improvements employed are accessory or incidental to such use or have an
assessed valuation of less than $2,000; or
         (c)   Where such use is maintained in connection with a conforming
building or structure; except that inadequate off-street parking facilities
used in connection with a building the use of which complies with the
requirements of the district in which it is located may be continued for so
long as the premises are used for a permitted use.
      (2)   A non-conforming use of land which is accessory to the non-
conforming use of building or structure shall be discontinued on the same date
the non-conforming use of the building or structure is discontinued.
(Prior Code, § 166.055) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971)
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
APPLICABLE TO ALL DISTRICTS
§ 165.065 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   (1)   Permitted uses of land or buildings as hereinafter listed, shall
be permitted in the districts indicated under the conditions specified.
      (2)   No buildings or zoning lots shall be devoted to any use other than
a use permitted hereinafter in the zoning district in which such building or
zoning lot shall be located, with the exception of the following:
         (a)   Uses lawfully established on the effective date of this chapter;
and
         (b)   Special uses allowed in accordance with the provisions of §
165.066 of this chapter.
   (B)   Uses already established on the effective date of this chapter, and
rendered non-conforming by the provisions thereof, shall be subject to the
regulations of §§
165.045 through
165.050 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 166.070) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 165.066 SPECIAL USES.
   Special uses, as hereinafter listed, may be allowed in the zoning districts
indicated, subject to the issuance of special use permits in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 166.071) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 165.067 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   No use established in any district after the effective date of this chapter
shall be so operated as to exceed the performance standards established
hereinafter. Any use already established on the effective date of this chapter
shall be permitted to be altered, enlarged, expanded or modified provided that
new sources of noise, vibration, smoke and particulate matter, toxic matter,
odorous matter and glare shall conform to the performance standards established
herein for the district in which such use is located.
   (A)   Noise limitations.
      (1)   (a)   Sound levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and
associated octave band filter manufactured according to standards prescribed by
the American Standards Association.
         (b)   Impulsive type noises shall be subject to the performance
standards hereinafter prescribed provided that such noises shall be capable of
being accurately measured with such equipment.
         (c)   Noises capable of being so measured, for the purpose of this
chapter, shall be those noises which cause rapid fluctuations of the needle of
the sound level meter with a variation of no more than plus or minus two
decibels. Noises incapable of being so measured, such as those of an irregular
and intermittent nature, shall be controlled so as not to become a nuisance to
adjacent uses.
      (2)   No industrial activity shall be responsible for the transmission of
noise across any residential or business zoning district boundary line in
excess of the levels established below:
 
                                                   Sound Level in Decibels (Re
Preferred Center Frequency 8:01 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. .0002 Microbar) 10:01 p.m.
                                                   to 8:00 a.m.
31.5                       79                      73
1,000                      50                      44
2,000                      46                      40
4,000                      43                      37
8,000                      40                      34
 
   (B)   Vibration limitations.
      (1)   Earthborne vibrations from any industrial operation, equipment, or
process shall not constitute a nuisance nor exceed the displacement limits set
forth herein. Vibrations shall be expressed as displacement in inches and shall
be measured with a three-component measuring system.
      (2)   (a)   No industrial activity shall be responsible for the
transmission of earthborne vibrations across any residence or business zoning
district boundary line in excess of the displacement limits established through
use of the following formula:
D = .001     K
      F
   where:
      D = The maximum allowable displacement in inches;
      F = The vibration frequency in cycles per second; and
      K = The value set forth in the following table:
 
Type of Vibration K Value
Constant          3
Impulsive         6
Impact            15
 
         (b)   For the purpose of this division (B)(2), CONSTANT VIBRATIONS are
those which are continuous or which occur in discrete pulses more frequent than
one per second; IMPULSIVE VIBRATIONS
are those which occur in discrete pulses less frequent than one per second; and
IMPACT VIBRATIONS are those which occur in discrete pulses separated by an
interval of at least one minute.
   (C)   Glare limitations. In any industrial district, any operation or
activity producing intense glare shall be so conducted that direct and indirect
illumination from the source of light shall not cause illumination in excess of
one-half of one footcandle when measured at any residential district boundary
line. Flickering or intense sources of light shall be so controlled as not to
cause a nuisance across any lot lines.
   (D)   Heat limitations. No direct or reflected heat shall be detectable from
any lot line.
   (E)   Radioactivity. No operation shall be permitted which causes
radioactivity in violation of federal or state regulations.
(Prior Code, § 166.072) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 165.080 VARIOUS OFFICIALS TO ENFORCE.
   (A)   The administration of this chapter is hereby vested in these offices
of the government of the city, as follows:
      (1)   Office of the Building Official; and
      (2)   The Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (B)   This subchapter shall set out the authority of each of the above
offices, and then describe the procedure and substantive standards with respect
to the following administrative functions:
      (1)   Issuance of zoning certificates;
      (2)   Issuance of occupancy certificates;
      (3)   Variations;
      (4)   Appeals;
      (5)   Amendments;
      (6)   Special uses; and
      (7)   Fees.
(Prior Code, § 166.085) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971; Ord. 2021-043, passed 9-
14-2021)
§ 165.081 BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   The Building Official of the city and such deputies or assistants as have
been, or shall be duly appointed by the Mayor, shall enforce this chapter and,
in addition thereto, and in furtherance of such authority shall:
   (A)   Issue all zoning certificates and make and maintain records thereof;
   (B)   Issue all certificates of occupancy and make and maintain records
thereof;
   (C)   Conduct inspections of buildings, structures, and uses of land to
determine compliance with the terms of this chapter;
   (D)   Maintain permanent and current records of this chapter including, but
not limited to, all maps, amendments, special uses, variances, appeals and
applications therefor;
   (E)   Provide and maintain a public information service relative to all
matters arising out of this chapter;
   (F)   Receive from the City Clerk copies of all applications for amendments,
special uses, variances and appeals to review for compliance with applicable
ordinances;
   (G)   Issue permits regulating the erection and use of tents for periods not
to exceed 15 days for specific purposes such as temporary carnivals, churches
or charitable uses, which are not detrimental to the public health, safety,
morals, comfort, convenience or general welfare; provided, however, that, said
tents or operations are in conformance with all other ordinances and codes of
the city; and
   (H)   Review, from time to time, a study of the provisions of this chapter,
and make reports of any recommendations to the Planning and Zoning Board of
Appeals not less frequently than once a year.
(Prior Code, § 166.086) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971; Ord. 2021-043, passed 9-
14-2021)
§ 165.082 PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (A)   Creation and membership. There is hereby established the Planning and
Zoning Board of Appeals. The members of the Planning and Zoning Board of
Appeals shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council.
The Board shall consist of seven members to serve for a term of five years. One
of the members so appointed shall be named as Chairperson at the time of his or
her appointment. The Board shall elect from its members an acting Chairperson
to act whenever the Chairperson is absent. The Chairperson and members of the
Board shall serve until the expiration of their terms, or until their
respective successors have been duly appointed and qualified. Vacancies shall
be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant,
in the manner herein provided for the appointment of such member. The amount of
compensation and expenses of the Board or any member thereof shall be as
provided by any appropriation ordinance.
   (B)   Jurisdiction. The Board is hereby vested with the following
jurisdiction and authority:
      (1)   Hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the Building Official under this chapter;
      (2)   Hear and make recommendations to the Mayor and Aldermen of the city
regarding applications for variances and special use permits in the manner
prescribed by and subject to the standards established in this chapter;
      (3)   Review and hear all applications for text and map amendments to
this chapter, including pre- annexation agreements, and report said findings
and recommendations to the City Council in the manner prescribed in §
165.088 of this chapter for amendments;
      (4)   Receive from the Building Official his or her recommendations as to
the effectiveness of this chapter and report its conclusions and
recommendations to the City Council not less frequently than once a year; and
      (5)   Hear and make recommendations to the City Council with regard to
all matters referred to it or upon which it is required to pass under this
chapter, or which are prescribed by the applicable provisions of state law.
   (C)   Meetings and rules. All meetings of the Board shall be held at the
call of the Chairperson and at such times as the Board may determine. All
hearings conducted by the Board shall be open to the public. Any person may
appear and testify at a hearing either in person or by duly authorized agent or
attorney. The Chairperson or, in his or her absence, the acting Chairperson may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The Board shall keep
minutes of its proceedings and shall also keep records of its hearings and
other official actions. A copy of every rule or regulation, order, requirement,
decision or determination of the Board shall be filed in the office of the
Building Official, and shall be a public record. The Board shall adopt its own
rules and procedures, not in conflict with this chapter or with applicable
state law and select or appoint such officers as it deems necessary.
(Prior Code, § 166.087) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971; Ord. 2021-043, passed 9-
14-2021)
§ 165.083 ZONING CERTIFICATES.
   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided, no permit pertaining to the use of
land or buildings shall be issued by any officer, department or employee of the
city unless the application for such permit has been examined by the Building
Commissioner and has affixed to it a certificate of the Building Commissioner,
indicating that the proposed building, structure or use complies with all the
provisions of this chapter. Any permit or certificate of occupancy issued in
conflict with the provisions of this chapter shall be null and void.
   (B)   In the event an application has affixed to it the certificate or a
“registered architect” or a “registered professional engineer” registered with
the state, certifying that the building or structure, and the proposed use
thereof, complies with the applicable provisions of §§
165.065 through
165.067 of this chapter respecting performance standards, the Building
Commissioner shall upon receipt of such application, approve and authorize the
issuance certificate; provided, all other relevant provisions of this chapter
are complied with. Such certificate shall be valid for all purposes. The
Building Commissioner may, however, before issuance of the occupancy
certificate, and upon examination of the plans or on the basis of other
evidence, determine that the proposed activity will not in fact comply with the
performance standards and so advise the architect or engineer in writing.
   (C)   Every application for a zoning certificate shall be accompanied by:
      (1)   A plat (the original or a reproduction thereof), in duplicate, of
the parcel of land, lots, blocks or parts or portions thereof, drawn to scale
showing the actual dimensions, as certified by a “
      (2)   A plat, in duplicate, drawn to a scale in such form as may, from
time to time, be prescribed by the Building Commissioner, showing the ground
area, height, and bulk of the building or structure, the building lines in
relation to lot lines, the use to be made of the building, structure or land,
and such other information as may be required by the Building Commissioner for
the proper enforcement of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 166.089) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 165.084 OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATES.
   (A)   No building or addition thereto constructed after the effective date
of this chapter, and no addition to a previously-existing building, shall be
occupied, and no land vacant on the effective date of this chapter shall be
used for any purpose until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the
Building Commissioner. No change in a use shall be made until a certificate of
occupancy has been issued by the Building Commissioner. Every certificate of
occupancy shall state that the use or occupancy complies with the provisions of
this chapter.
   (B)   Every application for a building permit or zoning certificate shall be
deemed to be an application for an occupancy certificate. Every application for
an occupancy certificate for a new use of land where no building permit is
required shall be made directly to the Building Commissioner.
   (C)   No occupancy certificate for a building or portion thereof constructed
after the effective date of this chapter shall be issued until construction has
been completed and the premises inspected and certified by the Building
Commissioner to be in conformity with the plans and specifications upon which
the zoning certificate was based. No occupancy certificate for a building or
addition thereto constructed after the effective date of this chapter shall be
issued and no addition to a previously-existing building shall be occupied
until the premises have been inspected and certified by the Building
Commissioner to be in compliance with all the applicable performance standards
of the zoning district in which it is located.
      (1)   Pending the issuance of a regular certificate, a temporary
certificate may be issued to be valid for a period not to exceed six months
from its date during the completion of any addition or during partial occupancy
of the premises.
      (2)   The occupancy certificate shall be issued or written notice shall
be given to the applicant stating the reasons why a certificate cannot be
issued, not later than ten days after the Building Commissioner is notified in
writing that the building or premises are ready for occupancy.
(Prior Code, § 166.090) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 165.085 PROCEDURE FOR VARIANCES, SPECIAL USES AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   (1)   Any applicant requesting a zoning amendment, a special use, a
variation of bulk and coverage controls or any other type of zoning permit,
pursuant to the terms and provisions of this chapter, as amended, shall publish
notice of the public hearing to be held by the City Planning and Zoning Board
of Appeals to consider the application by erection of at least one, but not
more than four, signs on the real property which is the subject matter of the
application. The sign(s) shall be furnished and erected by the applicant at the
applicant’s sole cost and expense. The number, size, location and content of
the sign(s) shall conform to the additional requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   The applicant shall erect the sign(s) giving notice of the public
hearing not more than 30 days, nor less than 15 days, before the date of the
public hearing. The sign(s) shall be maintained by the applicant and kept on
the property until after the date of the public hearing unless the application
is withdrawn. The applicant shall remove the sign(s) within seven days of the
date of the public hearing. The Building Commissioner or his or her designee
shall be authorized by the applicant, as a condition of the original
application, to enter onto the property to establish the location for the sign
(s), to maintain the sign(s) or to remove the sign(s) in the event the
applicant fails to do so within the seven-day period after the public hearing.
      (3)   The applicant shall submit a $50 refundable security deposit with
the application to assure maintenance of the sign(s) and their timely removal
by the applicant. This deposit shall be forfeited if the applicant fails to
maintain the sign(s) or remove them in accordance with the terms of this
chapter. The security deposit shall be refunded by the city when the Building
Commissioner determines that the sign(s) was properly maintained and has been
removed within the time limit provided herein. This determination shall be made
within ten days of the date of the public hearing.
      (4)   The Building Commissioner or his or her designee shall designate
the size, number and location(s) on the property where the sign(s) shall be
erected. This designation shall be made within ten days of the date the
application is filed. The Building Commissioner shall consider the location of
the property in relation to the public streets, highways, other means of public
access to the property, the location of buildings on adjacent properties and
the topography of the land when determining the number and location(s) of the
signs.
      (5)   The dimensions of the sign(s) shall be not less than 36 inches in
height and not less than 48 inches in width. The sign(s) shall read as follows:
 
Public Notice
 
The property is being considered for (rezoning to                   or approval of a special use,
or a variation in the bulk and coverage controls or other type of zoning permit). A public hearing
will be held on the          day of        ,          at       p.m. in Blue Island City Council
Chambers, 2nd Floor City Hall, 13051 Greenwood Avenue, Blue Island, Illinois.
 
For information call the Building Commissioner at 708-597-8606.
 
      (6)   The notice provided for in this chapter shall be in addition to the
public notice which must be published in a newspaper of general circulation
published within the city as required hereby.
   (B)   (1)   Any applicant requesting a garage variation shall publish notice
of the public hearing to be held by the Community Development and Human
Services Committee of the City Council to consider the application by erection
of one sign on the real property which is the subject matter of the
application. The sign shall be furnished and erected by the applicant at the
applicant’s sole cost and expense. The size, location and content of the sign
shall conform to the additional requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   The applicant shall erect the sign giving notice of the public
hearing not more than 30 days, nor less than 15 days, before the date of the
public hearing. The sign shall be maintained by the applicant and kept on the
property until after the date of the public hearing unless the application is
withdrawn. The applicant shall remove the sign within seven days of the date of
the public hearing.
      (3)   The Building Commissioner or his or her designee shall be
authorized by the applicant, as a condition of the original application, to
enter onto the property to establish the location for the sign, to maintain the
sign or to remove the sign in the event the applicant fails to do so within the
seven days of the public hearing.
(Prior Code, § 166.091) (Ord. 95-342, passed 8-8-1995; Ord. 97-137, passed 3-
11-1997; Ord. 2021-043, passed 9-14-2021)
§ 165.086 VARIATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. The City Council, by ordinance, may grant a variation in the
regulations of this chapter in harmony with their general purpose and intent,
only in the specific instances and in accordance with standards and procedures
hereinafter set forth.
   (B)   Procedure. An application for a variation shall be filed in writing
with the Zoning Administrator on forms recommended by the Planning and Zoning
Board of Appeals and prepared by the Zoning Administrator. Such application
shall be forwarded from the Zoning Administrator to the Planning and Zoning
Board of Appeals with a request to hold a public hearing and thereafter set
forth its findings and recommendations to the City Council. Notice of the time
and place of such public hearing shall be published at least once, not more
than 30 days, or less than 15 days, before the hearing, in a newspaper of
general circulation published within the city. The published notice may be
supplemented by such additional notice as the Planning and Zoning Board of
Appeals by rule, may require.
      (1)   Standards. The City Council shall not vary the regulations relating
to use, construction or alteration of buildings or structures or the use of
land as authorized in this chapter, unless the Planning and Zoning Board of
Appeals shall have made findings based upon the evidence presented to it in
each specific case that the following conditions have been complied with:
         (a)   The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if
permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the regulations in
the district in which it is located;
         (b)   The proposed variation will not merely serve as a convenience to
the applicant, but will alleviate some demonstrable and unusual hardship which
would result if the strict letter of the regulations were carried out and which
is not generally applicable to other property within the same district;
         (c)   The alleged hardship has not been created by any person
presently having a proprietary interest in the premises;
         (d)   The proposed variation will not be materially detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the
neighborhood;
         (e)   The proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of
light and air to adjacent property, substantially increase congestion in the
public streets, increase the danger of fire or endanger the public safety;
         (f)   The proposed variation will not alter the essential character of
the neighborhood; and
         (g)   The proposed variation is in harmony with the spirit and intent
of this chapter.
      (2)   Recommend. The Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals may recommend
the imposition of such conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefitted
by a variation as may be necessary to comply with the standards established
above, to reduce or minimize the effect of such variation upon other properties
in the neighborhood, and to better carry out the general intent of this
chapter.
   (C)   Authorized variations.
      (1)   Variations from the regulations of this chapter shall be granted by
the City Council only in accordance with the standards established in this
section and only in the following instances:
         (a)   To permit any yard or setback less than a yard or a setback
required by the applicable regulations, or an impervious coverage of 10% or
less of the allowed impervious lot area;
         (b)   To permit the use of a lot or lots for a use otherwise
prohibited solely because of insufficient area or width of the lot or lots, but
in no event shall the respective area and width of the lot or lots be less than
75% of the required area and width;
         (c)   To permit the same off-street parking facility to qualify as
required facilities for two or more uses, provided that substantial use of such
facility by each user does not take place at approximately the same hours of
the same days of the week;
         (d)   To reduce the applicable off-street parking or loading
facilities required by not more than one parking space or loading space, or 20%
of the applicable regulations, whichever number is greater;
         (e)   To increase by not more than 25% the maximum distance that
required parking spaces are permitted to be located from the use served;
         (f)   To allow a fence, wall or hedge in excess of the height
limitations specified in this chapter; and
         (g)   In such other instances as may be provided by law.
      (2)   No ordinance of the City Council granting a variance shall be valid
for a period longer than six months from the date of such ordinance unless the
building permit is obtained within such period and the erection or alteration
of a building is started or the use is commenced with such period.
(Prior Code, § 166.092) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971; Ord. 2021-019, passed 6-
22-2021; Ord. 2021-043, passed 9-14-2021)
§ 165.087 APPEALS.
   (A)   An appeal may be taken to the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals by
any person, firm or corporation, or by any office, department, board or bureau
aggrieved by a decision of the Building Official. Such an appeal shall be taken
within 30 days after the decision on the action complained of, by filing with
the Building Official a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The
Building Official shall forthwith transmit to the Planning and Zoning Board of
Appeals all of the papers constituting a record upon which the action appealed
from was taken.
   (B)   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from unless the Building Official certifies to the Planning and Zoning
Board of Appeals, after the notice of the appeal has been filed with him or
her, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his or
her opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property, in which case the
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may
be granted by the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals or by a court of record.
   (C)   The Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals shall select a reasonable
time and place for the hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof to the
parties by mailing notice thereof to the parties in interest, said mailing to
be made at least ten days prior to the date of hearing. The Board shall
thereafter reach its decision within 60 days from the filing of the appeal. The
Board may affirm or may reverse wholly or in part, or modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination, and to that end, shall have all the
powers of the officer to whom the appeal is taken. The Building Official shall
maintain records of all actions of the Board relative to appeals.
(Prior Code, § 166.093) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971; Ord. 2021-043, passed 9-
14-2021)
§ 165.088 AMENDMENT OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   Authority. The City Council may, from time to time, in the manner
hereinafter set forth, amend the regulations imposed in the districts created
by this chapter or amend district boundary lines; provided that, in all
amendatory ordinances adopted under the authority of this section, due
allowance shall be made for existing conditions, the conservation of property
values, the direction of building development to the best advantage of the
entire city and the uses to which property is devoted at the time of the
adoption of such amendatory ordinance.
   (B)   Initiation of amendment. Amendments may be proposed by the City
Council, the Planning Commission, the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals or
by any owner or owners of property within a zoning district which would be
affected by such amendment or the duly authorized agent or agents thereof.
   (C)   Application. An application for an amendment shall be filed with the
Zoning Administrator on a suitable form provided by the Zoning Administrator,
accompanied by such information and data as is recommended by the Planning and
Zoning Board of Appeals. Copies of such application shall be forwarded by the
Zoning Administrator to the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals with a request
to hold a public hearing thereon and to the Building Official for examination
of the application and compliance with all applicable ordinances.
   (D)   Hearing. The Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold a public
hearing on each application for an amendment at such time and place as shall be
established by the Board. The hearing shall be conducted and a record of such
proceedings shall be preserved in such manner as the Board shall, by rule,
prescribe from time to time.
   (E)   Notice. Notice of time and place of such hearing shall be published at
least once in one or more newspapers of general circulation within the city,
not more than 30, nor less than 15, days before such hearing. Supplemental or
additional notices may be published or distributed as the Planning and Zoning
Board of Appeals may, by rule, prescribe from time to time.
   (F)   Findings.
      (1)   The Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals shall make written
findings of fact and shall submit same together with its recommendations to the
City Council within 30 days of the public hearing. Where the purpose and effect
of the proposed amendment is to change the zoning classification of a
particular property, the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals shall make
findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case with
respect to the following matters:
         (a)   Existing uses of property within the general area of the
property in question;
         (b)   The zoning classification of the property within the general
area of the property in question;
         (c)   The suitability of the property in question to the uses
permitted under the existing zoning classification;
         (d)   The trend of development, if any, in the general area of the
property in question; and
         (e)   Projected use of the property, as indicated in the comprehensive
plan.
      (2)   The Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals shall not recommend the
adoption of a proposed amendment unless it finds that the adoption of such
amendment is in the public interest and is not solely for the interest of the
applicant. The Board may recommend the adoption of an amendment changing the
zoning classification of the property in question to any higher classification
than that requested by the applicant. For the purpose of this division (F), the
R-1 District shall be considered the highest classification and the I-
2 District shall be considered the lowest classification.
   (G)   Action by City Council.
      (1)   The City Council shall not act upon a proposed amendment to this
chapter until it shall have received a written report and recommendation from
the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals on the proposed amendment.
      (2)   The City Council may grant or deny any application for an
amendment; however, in the event of a written protest against any proposed
amendment, signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20% of the frontage
proposed to be altered, or by the owners of 20% of the frontage immediately
adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or by the owners of 20% of the frontage
directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered, such amendment shall not
be passed except by a favorable vote of two-thirds of all the members of the
City Council then holding office.
      (3)   If an application for a proposed amendment is not acted upon
finally by the City Council, within 90 days of the date upon which such
application is received by the City Council, it shall be deemed to have been
denied.
(Prior Code, § 166.094) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971; Ord. 2021-043, passed 9-
14-2021)
§ 165.089 SPECIAL USE PERMITS.
   (A)   Purpose. The development and execution of this chapter is based upon
the division of the city into
districts within which the use of land and buildings, and the bulk and location
of buildings and structures in relation to the land, are substantially uniform.
It is recognized, however, that there are certain uses which, because of their
unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified in any particular
district or districts, without consideration, in each case, of the impact of
those uses upon neighboring land and of the public need for the particular use
at the particular location. Such uses fall into two categories:
      (1)   Uses publicly operated or traditionally affected with a public
interest; and
      (2)   Uses entirely private in character, but of such an unusual nature
that their operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their
impact upon neighboring property or public facilities.
   (B)   Initiation of special use. Any person having a freehold interest in
land, or a possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession, or a
contractual interest which may become a freehold interest or an exclusive
possessory interest, and which is specifically enforceable, may file an
application to use such land for one or more of the special uses provided for
in this chapter in the zoning district in which the land is located.
   (C)   Application. An application for a special use shall be filed with the
Zoning Administrator on a suitable form provided by the Zoning Administrator
and shall be accompanied by such plans and other data as are recommended by the
Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals, and shall include a statement in writing
by the applicant and adequate evidence showing that the proposed special use
will conform to the standards hereinafter set forth. Copies of such application
shall be forwarded by the Zoning Administrator to the Planning and Zoning Board
of Appeals with a request to hold a public hearing thereon and to the Building
Official for examination of the application and compliance with all appliance
ordinances.
   (D)   Hearing. Upon receipt in proper form of the application and statement,
the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold at least one public hearing
on the proposed special use. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall
be published at least once in one or more newspapers of general circulation
within the city, not more than 30, nor less than 15, days prior to such
hearing. The published notice may be supplemented by such additional forms of
notice as the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals may, by rule, require.
   (E)   Authorization. For each application for a special use, the Planning
and Zoning Board of Appeals shall report to the City Council its findings and
recommendations, including the stipulation of additional conditions and
guarantees that such conditions will be complied with when they are deemed
necessary for the protection of the public interest. If an application for a
proposed use is not acted upon finally by the City Council within 90 days of
the date upon which such application is received by the City Council, it shall
be deemed to have been denied.
   (F)   Standards. No special use shall be recommended by the Planning and
Zoning Board of Appeals unless such Board shall find that:
      (1)   The establishment, maintenance or operation of the special use will
not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort or
general welfare;
      (2)   The special use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of
other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted,
nor substantially diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood;
      (3)   The establishment of the special use will not impede the normal and
orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses
permitted in the district;
      (4)   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or necessary
facilities have been or are being provided;
      (5)   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and
egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in public streets; and
      (6)   The special use shall, in all other respects, conform to the
applicable regulations of the district in which it is located, except as such
regulations may in each instance be modified by the City Council pursuant to
the recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (G)   Special conditions and guarantees. Prior to the granting of any
special use, the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals may recommend, and the
City Council shall stipulate, such conditions and restrictions upon the
establishment, location, construction, maintenance and operation of the special
use as is deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest and to
secure compliance with the standards and requirements specified herein. In all
cases in which special uses are granted, the City Council shall require such
evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions
stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be complied with. In
addition, all special use permits shall be conditioned upon the following:
      (1)   The special use shall be limited to the applicant and shall not be
transferable except upon reapplication, hearing and approval in the manner
provided in the Zoning Code;
      (2)   The special use approval authorizes the conduct of the special use
only on the applicant's property identified in the application and is not
transferable to other properties;
      (3)   Any modification or intensification of a special use that alters
the essential character or operation of the use in a way not intended at the
time the special use was granted shall require a new special use approval;
      (4)   The approval of a special use authorizes the property to be used in
the manner proposed, but does not alone authorize the establishment or
extension of any use, nor development, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, or moving of any building, structure, or parking lot without first
obtaining any other required permit, including a zoning certificate, building
permit and certificate of occupancy;
      (5)   The special use shall comply with all other codes and ordinances of
the City of Blue Island, the County of Cook, the State of Illinois, and the
federal government; and
      (6)   The special use shall not involve uses, activities, processes,
materials, equipment and conditions of operation that will be detrimental to
any persons, property or the general welfare by reason of excessive production
of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare or odors.
   (H)   Adult regulated special use.
      (1)   General. In the development and execution of this chapter, it is
recognized that there are some uses which, because of their very nature, are
recognized as having serious objectionable operational characteristics,
particularly when several of them are concentrated under certain circumstances,
thereby having a deleterious effect upon the adjacent areas. Special regulation
of these uses is necessary to ensure that these adverse effects will not
contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood.
These special regulations are itemized in this section. The primary controls or
regulations are also itemized in this section and are for the purpose of
preventing a concentration of these uses in any one area (i.e., not more than
two such uses within 1,000 feet of each other which would create such adverse
effects). Uses subject to these controls are as follows:
         (a)   Adult book store;
         (b)   Adult motion picture theater;
         (c)   Adult mini motion picture theater; and
         (d)   Adult entertainment cabaret.
      (2)   Waiver. The Mayor and City Council may waive the locational
provision set forth in division (H)(1) above for adult book stores, adult
motion picture theaters, adult mini motion picture theaters or adult
entertainment cabarets, if the following findings are made:
         (a)   The proposed use will not be contrary to the public interest or
injurious to nearby properties, and that the spirit and intent of this chapter
will be observed;
         (b)   The proposed use will not enlarge or encourage the development
of a “skid row” area;
         (c)   The establishment of an additional regulated use in the area
will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation nor will it
interfere with any program of urban renewal; and
         (d)   All applicable regulations of this chapter will be observed.
      (3)   Locations near residential areas. It shall be unlawful to hereafter
establish any adult book store, adult motion picture theater, adult mini
theater or adult entertainment cabaret within 1,500 feet of any area zoned for
residential use or use by churches or schools. This prohibition may be waived
if the person applying for the waiver shall file with the Planning and Zoning
Board of Appeals a petition which indicates approval of the proposed regulated
use by 60% of the persons owning, residing or doing business within a radius of
1,500 feet of the location of the proposed use. The petitioner shall attempt to
contact all eligible locations within this radius, and must maintain a list of
all addresses at which no contact was made.
         (a)   The Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals shall adopt rules and
regulations governing the procedure for securing the petition of consent
provided for in division (H)(3) above. The rules shall provide that the
circulator of the petition requesting a waiver shall subscribe to an affidavit
attesting to the fact that the petition was circulated in accordance with the
rules of the Board, that the circulator personally witnessed the signatures on
the petition, and that the same were affixed to the petition by the person
whose name appeared thereon.
         (b)   The Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals shall not consider the
waiver of locational requirements set forth in division (H)(3) above until the
above described petition shall have been filed and verified.
      (4)   Application for adult regulated special use. An application for an
adult regulated special use shall be filed with the City Clerk on a suitable
form provided by the City Clerk, shall be accompanied by such plans and other
data recommended by the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals, and shall include
a statement in writing by the applicant along with adequate evidence showing
that the proposed adult regulated special use will conform to the standards
hereinafter set fo shall be supported by the waiver of location requirements as
set forth in this division (H). Copies of such application shall be forwarded
by the City Clerk to the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals with a request to
hold a public hearing thereon and to the Building Official for examination of
the application and compliance with all applicable ordinances.
      (5)   Hearing on application. Upon receipt in proper form of the
application and statement, the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold
at least one public hearing on the proposed adult regulated special use. Notice
of the time and place of such hearing shall be published at least once in one
or more newspapers of general circulation within the city, not more than 30,
nor less than 15, days prior to such hearing. The published notice may be
supplemented by such additional forms of notice as the Planning and Zoning
Board of Appeals, by rule, requires.
      (6)   Authorization. For each application for an adult regulated special
use, the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals shall report to the City Council
its findings and recommendations, including the stipulation of additional
conditions and guarantees that such conditions will be complied with when they
are deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest. If an
application for a proposed adult regulated special use is not acted upon
finally by the City Council within 90 days of the date upon which such
application is received by the City Council, it shall be deemed to have been
denied.
      (7)   Standards. No adult regulated special use shall be recommended by
the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals unless such Board shall find that:
         (a)   The establishment, maintenance or operation of the adult
regulated special use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health,
safety, morals, comfort or general welfare;
         (b)   The adult regulated special use will not be injurious to the use
and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes
already permitted, nor substantially diminish and impair property values within
the neighborhood;
         (c)   The establishment of the adult regulated special use will not
impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding
property for uses permitted in the district;
         (d)   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or other
necessary facilities have been or are being provided;
         (e)   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress
and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in public streets; and
         (f)   The adult regulated special use, in all respects, conforms to
the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located, except as
such regulations may, in each instance, be modified by the City Council
pursuant to the recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals.
      (8)   Conditions and guarantees. Prior to the granting of any adult
regulated special use, the Zoning Board of Appeals may recommend, and the City
Council shall stipulate, such conditions and restrictions upon the
establishment, location, construction, maintenance and operation of the adult
regulated special use as is deemed necessary for the protection of the public
interest and to secure compliance with the standards and requirements specified
herein. In all cases in which adult regulated special uses are granted, the
City Council shall require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem
necessary as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith are
being and will be complied with.
   (I)   Planned developments. Planned developments are of such substantially
different character from other special uses that specific and additional
standards and exceptions are hereby established to govern the report and
recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals and the action of
the City Council.
      (1)   Purposes. Some specific purposes of the planned development
procedure are:
         (a)   Residential planned development. To offer recreational
opportunities close to home; to enhance the appearance of neighborhoods by the
conservation of streams and local spots of natural beauty; to add to the sense
of spaciousness through the preservation of natural green spaces; to counteract
the effects of urban monotony and congestion in the streets; to encourage
cooperative relationships between neighbors and participation by all age groups
in the use and care of local open space tracts in new residential subdivisions;
to promote harmonious architecture between adjacent dwellings or institutional
buildings; and to encourage the placement of structures in proper relationship
to the natural characteristics of the site;
         (b)   Business planned development. To promote the cooperative
development of business centers each with adequate off-street parking; to
control access points on thoroughfares; to separate pedestrian and automobile
traffic; to aid in stabilizing property values; to develop centers of size and
location compatible with the market potential; to buffer adjacent residential
areas with landscaped green spaces; and to encourage harmonious architecture
between adjacent commercial structures; and
         (c)   Industrial planned development. To promote the establishment of
industrial parks; to permit groups of industrial buildings with an integrated
design and coordinated physical plan; to encourage recreational facilities
within industrial areas; and to buffer adjacent residential areas with
landscaped green spaces.
      (2)   Required information. The developer shall be required to submit
plans and other documentation to the Planning and Zoning Board as detailed in §
165.033 .
      (3)   Use exceptions. The Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals may
recommend and the City Council may authorize that there be in part of the area
of such development, and for the duration of such development, specified uses
not permitted by the use regulations of the district in which said development
is located; provided, the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals finds that:
         (a)   The uses permitted by such exception are necessary or desirable
and are appropriate with respect to the primary purpose of the development;
         (b)   The uses permitted by such exception are not of such a nature or
so located as to exercise a detrimental influence on the surrounding
neighborhood; and
         (c)   Not more than 25% of the ground area or of the gross floor area
of such development shall be devoted to the uses permitted by said exception.
      (4)   Bulk regulations. In the case of any planned development, the
Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals may recommend and the City Council may
authorize exceptions to the applicable bulk regulations of this chapter within
the boundaries of such development; provided, the Planning and Zoning Board of
Appeals finds that:
         (a)   Such exception shall be solely for the purpose of promoting an
integrated site plan no less beneficial to the residents or occupants of such
development and the neighboring property, than would be obtained under the bulk
regulations of this chapter for building development on separate zoning lots;
         (b)   The lot coverage percent for residential planned development
would not exceed by more than 20% the maximum lot coverage percent which would
be determined on the basis of the percentage required for the individual uses
in such planned developments, as listed in §
165.023 of this chapter; and
         (c)   In a residential planned development the maximum number of
dwelling units permitted shall be determined by dividing the net development
area by the minimum lot area per dwelling unit required by the district or
districts in which the area is located, and then increasing this number by 20%.
Net development area shall be determined by subtracting the area set aside for
non-residential uses from the gross development area and deducting 10% of the
remainder for streets regardless of the amount of land actually required for
streets. The area of land set aside for common open space or recreational use
may be included in determining the number of dwelling units permitted.
      (5)   Additional standards.
         (a)   In addition to meeting the special use standards provided in §
165.088(F), no planned development shall be recommended by the Zoning Board of
Appeals and approved by the City Council unless the Board and Council find that
the development meets the following standards.
            1.   Size and ownership. The site of the planned development must
be under single ownership and/or unified control and be not less than two acres
in area.
            2.   Compatibility. The planned development shall be demonstrated
by developer to be of a type, and to be so located as to exercise no undue
detrimental influence upon surrounding properties and to be compatible with the
surrounding uses.
            3.   Need. A showing of the desirability of the plan and its
benefit to the community must be made.
            4.   Yards. The required yards along the periphery of the planned
development shall be at least equal in width or depth to that of the adjacent
zoning district or districts.
            5.   Parking requirements. Adequate parking shall be provided as
required in other sections of this chapter.
            6.   Traffic. Adequate provision shall be made to provide ingress
and egress so designated as to minimize traffic congestion on the public
streets and promote safety.
         (b)   The planned development may depart from strict conformance with
the required density, dimension, area, height, bulk, use and other regulations
for the zoning district in which the property is located, as long as all
special use and planned development standards are met.
      (6)   Conditions and restrictions. Prior to the granting of any planned
development, the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals and/or the City Council
may require such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location,
design, layout, height, density, construction, maintenance, aesthetics,
operation and other elements of the planned development as deemed necessary for
the protection of the public interest, protection of the adjacent area, and to
secure compliance with the standards specified in this section. In all cases in
which planned developments are granted, the City Council shall require such
evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the developer is
complying and will comply with the conditions stipulated.
   (J)   Denial of a special use. No application for a special use which has
been denied wholly or in part by the City Council shall be resubmitted for a
period of one year from the date of said order of denial, except on the grounds
of new evidence or proof of change of conditions found to be valid by the
Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals and the City Council.
   (K)   Revocation. In any case where a special use has not been established
within one year after the date of granting thereof, then without further action
by the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals or the City Council the
authorization for the special use shall be null and void.
(Prior Code, § 166.095) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971; Ord. 2482, passed 10-9-
1979; Ord. 2021-043, passed 9-14-2021; Ord. 2021-062, passed 12-14-2021; Ord.
2024-037, passed 8-27-2024)
§ 165.090 FEES.
   (A)   Any appeal from a decision of the Building Commissioner filed by, or
on behalf of any person, firm, or corporation aggrieved by such decision shall
be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $25.
   (B)   Any application for a variation or special use permit filed by, or on
behalf of the owner or owners of the property affected shall be accompanied by
a fee in the amount of $50, except in the case of an application for a special
use for a planned development which in such case shall be accompanied by a fee
of $200. There shall be no such fee, however, in the case of an application for
a variation or special use permit filed by the city or other duly constituted
public body whether federal, state or local.
   (C)   Any application for an amendment filed by, or on behalf of any owner
or owners of property located in the city shall be accompanied by a fee in the
amount of $150. There shall be no such fee, however, in the case of an
application for an amendment filed by the city or other duly constituted public
body, whether federal, state or local.
   (D)   All fees payable pursuant to this section shall be paid at the time of
filing of application and shall be in cash or in a check payable to the City
Treasurer. All such fees collected shall be credited to the General Revenue
Fund of the city.
(Prior Code, § 166.096) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971)
SIGNS
§ 165.105 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to achieve balance among the following
goals:
   (A)   To protect the property values and economic well-being of the city;
   (B)   To encourage the effective use of signs as a means of identification
and communication for businesses, organizations and individuals in the city;
   (C)   To provide a means of way finding in the community, thus reducing
traffic confusion and congestion;
   (D)   To assure maintenance of signs;
   (E)   To prohibit signs of such excessive size and number that they obscure
one another to the detriment of the economic and social well-being of the city;
   (F)   To protect the safety and welfare of the public by minimizing sign-
related hazards to pedestrian and vehicular traffic;
   (G)   To preventing unsightly and chaotic visual clutter which has a
blighting influence upon the community; and
   (H)   To minimize the possible adverse effects of signs on nearby public and
private property, in particular on residential uses and districts.
(Prior Code, § 166.105) (Ord. 2014-040, passed 7-8-2014)
§ 165.106 APPLICABILITY.
   It is unlawful for any person to construct, maintain, display or alter or
cause to be constructed, maintained, displayed or altered, a sign within the
city, except in conformance with this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 166.106) (Ord. 2014-040, passed 7-8-2014) Penalty, see §
165.999
§ 165.107 RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ORDINANCES.
   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall be deemed or construed to modify
or alter the provisions of any other ordinance or chapter in the city code. In
the event of a conflict between the requirements of this subchapter and those
of any other provision of the city code, the more restrictive shall prevail and
control.
(Prior Code, § 166.107) (Ord. 2014-040, passed 7-8-2014)
§ 165.108 SUBSTITUTION OF MESSAGES.
   The sign regulations of this subchapter are not intended to favor commercial
speech over constitutionally protected political or noncommercial speech. A
sign containing a noncommercial message may be substituted for any sign
containing a commercial message that is allowed by the regulations of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 166.108) (Ord. 2014-040, passed 7-8-2014)
§ 165.109 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following signs are exempt from regulation under this subchapter:
   (A)   Any public notice, warning or temporary sign posted by a valid and
applicable federal, state or local law, regulation, or ordinance; or posted by
a public agency, acting in accordance with an adopted law or ordinance, or by
order of a court of competent jurisdiction;
   (B)   Public utility signs and safety signs required by law;
   (C)   Any sign inside a building, not attached to a window or door that is
not legible from a distance of more than three feet beyond the property line,
development site or parcel on which the sign is located, or any sign that the
Zoning Administrator determines is not intended to be legible from any street
right-of-way or beyond the property line;
   (D)   Traffic-control signs on private property, such as stop, yield and
similar signs, the faces of which meet standards set forth in the Illinois
Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices and which contain no commercial
message of any sort;
   (E)   Ghost signs are deemed conforming. Ghost signs may be maintained and
repainted but no new information or images may be added to the existing sign.
No new wall signs may be painted over an existing ghost sign; or
   (F)   Signs installed or placed within the city, for the benefit of the city
and its residents, by the city staff, with the consent and approval of the City
Council; or
   (G)   Signs in the public right-of-way and on public property:
      (1)   Signs installed by any of the following government agencies and
directly related to the use of the right-of-way or of public property,
including the control and direction of traffic are permitted in the public
right-of-way and on public property: the city; county; state; any transit
company authorized to provide service to or through the city; any public
utility with a franchise or other agreement with the city; or any other
government entity or person expressly authorized by Illinois law to install a
sign in the right-of-way;
      (2)   Honorary signs acknowledging voluntary efforts to provide
landscaping, litter control, or other maintenance, when the signs are installed
pursuant to a written policy of the city or the state; or
      (3)   Any other sign installed or placed in the public right-of-way will
be deemed an unlawful sign and will be subject to immediate removal and
disposal by the city, without compensation to the owner. The owner or other
person placing the sign will, nevertheless, be subject to the penalty
provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 166.109) (Ord. 2014-040, passed 7-8-2014; Ord. 2023-030, passed
5-23-2023)
§ 165.110 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   The following signs are expressly prohibited in all zoning districts:
   (A)   Animated signs;
   (B)   Moving signs or signs that give the illusion of movement in any
manner, including signs with moving, revolving or rotating parts or visible
mechanical movement of any kind, including wind-activated, but not including
clocks with movable hands;
   (C)   Flashing, blinking, mechanically moving, twinkling, scrolling or full-
motion video elements or other lighting that does not provide constant
illumination, including strobe lights, moving or fixed spotlights and
floodlights;
   (D)   Wind-blown signs (e.g., feather flags), balloon signs, and signs
painted on or attached to balloons or other inflatable devices (e.g., cars
being sold in an auto dealership);
   (E)   Handwritten signs, pictures, symbols or lettering on window signs or
displays;
   (F)   Banners or pennant flags that are intended to be temporary for 15 days
but left in place indefinitely;
   (G)   Signs that cover any architectural elements or obstruct any ingress or
egress, including doors, windows or fire escapes;
   (H)   Roof signs, except were allowed by special use permit in the U-TOD
Sign Overlay District;
   (I)   Any sign that interferes with, obstructs the view of, or may be
confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device because of its
position, shape or color, including signs illuminated in red, green or amber
color to resemble a traffic signal;
   (J)   Signs which make use of words such as stop, look, “one way”, danger,
yield, or any similar word, phrase or symbol or light so as to interfere with
or confuse pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
   (K)   Signs displaying an obscene, indecent or immoral matter;
   (L)   Signs on benches, as well as benches located on private or public
property that advertise a business, product, or service or contain any other
type of message;
   (M)   Signs on trees;
   (N)   Signs on utility poles, other than signs installed by the city or
other government agency or utility provider;
   (O)   Portable signs, including mobile advertising signs and signs attached
to trailers or that are equipped for towing, and any commercial vehicle that
displays business identification or any advertising that is viewable from the
public right-of-way and that is not regularly used in the course of everyday
business;
   (P)   Signs in the public right-of-way, unless otherwise provided by
division (F) or elsewhere in this subchapter; and
   (Q)   Obsolete or abandoned signs, including any sign that advertises a
business, product, service or activity that is no longer located on the
premises where the sign is displayed;
   (R)   Off-premises signs that advertise a business not conducted on the
premises where the sign is located or a product not sold on the premises where
the sign is located;
   (S)   Signs placed or painted on a vehicle that is parked in a location such
that the primary purpose is to advertise a product or service, or to direct the
public to a business or activity located on or off the premises. Signs
displayed on trucks, buses or other vehicles, which are being operated and
stored in the normal course of a business, such as signs indicating the owner
or business using the delivery trucks, moving vans and rental trucks, are
allowed, provided that the primary purpose of such vehicles is not the display
of signs. Such a truck must be parked or stored in an area appropriate to its
use;
   (T)   Trailer and portable signs that are temporary or permanent signs
resting on, or attached to, vehicles or trailers; and
   (U)   The list of prohibited sign types set out in this section is
illustrative only. Any sign that is not exempt from this subchapter under §
165.109 and not established as a lawful non-conforming sign in accordance with
§
165.127 or not expressly allowed under another section of this subchapter is a
prohibited sign.
(Prior Code, § 166.110) (Ord. 2014-040, passed 7-8-2014; Ord. 2023-030, passed
5-23-2023) Penalty, see §
165.999
§ 165.111 DETERMINATION OF VISIBILITY.
   In determining visibility of a sign from a residential property, it will be
assumed that a two-story residence will occupy the property with second-story
windows facing toward the sign.
(Prior Code, § 166.111) (Ord. 2014-040, passed 7-8-2014)
§ 165.112 MEASUREMENT, CONSTRUCTION AND DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Computation of sign area. For signs on a background, the entire area
of the background will be calculated for sign area, including any material or
color forming the sign face or background used to differentiate the sign from
the structure against which it is placed. Sign area does not include any
supporting framework or bracing, unless such framework or bracing is part of
the message or sign face.
      (1)   Computation of sign area.
      (2)   Computation of sign area, non-rectangle.
      (3)   Computation of sign area, individual lettering.
         (a)   For wall signs consisting of individually attached letters or
logos, the area of a sign face (“sign area”) is calculated by means of the
smallest square, circle, rectangle or triangle, or combination thereof that
will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem or
other display. Sign area does not include any supporting framework or bracing,
unless such framework or bracing is part of the message or sign face.
         (b)   For awning or canopy signs, the sign area is calculated in the
same manner as for wall signs consisting of individual letters and logos.
      (4)   Computation of sign area, individual lettering.
      (5)   Measurement of area of multi-faced signs. Where the sign faces of a
double-faced sign are parallel and the distance between the faces is three feet
or less, only one display face will be measured in computing sign area. If the
two faces of a double-faced sign are of unequal area, the area of the sign will
be the area of the larger sign. In all other cases, the areas of all faces of a
multi-faced sign will be added together to compute the area of the sign.
      (6)   Sign height and clearance measurements. The height of a sign will
be computed as the distance from the highest point of the sign structure to the
elevation of the centerline of the adjacent public street or highway. The
required clearance of a pole or projecting sign will be computed as the
distance from the lowest point of the sign structure to the established grade
on which the sign rests or is directly below the sign.
      (7)   Sign height and clearance measurements.
   (B)   Design loads (wind, direct and snow). Any sign, other advertising
structure, marquee, canopy or awning as defined in this chapter must be
designed and constructed to withstand a wind pressure of not less than 30
pounds per square foot of net surface area, snow loads as required by the city
code, and ASCE/SEI minimum design loads for buildings and other structures as
required in the Building Code and/or other ordinances of the city.
   (C)   Location. On a corner lot, no freestanding sign over two feet tall may
be placed within the clear sight area, as defined.
   (D)   Illumination.
      (1)   Reflector lighting. Any sign illumination, including gooseneck or
reflectors and internally illuminated signs, and all electronic signs must be
designed, located, shielded and directed to prevent the casting of glare or
direct light upon roadways and surrounding properties, or the distraction of
motor vehicle operators or pedestrians in the public right-of-way. In the case
of internally illuminated signs, the sign face must function as a filter for
any illumination.
      (2)   The use of neon lighting as an accent is permitted for projecting,
window and wall signs in the U-TOD and Commercial Sign Overlay Districts,
subject to the following.
         (a)   Neon lighting shall only be used as an accent material on
projecting and wall signs, such as for letters, logos and/or sign details.
         (b)   Neon lighting on projecting and wall signs shall not be
illuminated during the daylight hours. When lit, neon lighting must be
continuously illuminated. Flashing neon is prohibited.
         (c)   Neon lighting on projecting and wall signs shall not be combined
with any reflective materials (such as mirrors, polished metal, highly-glazed
tiles or other similar materials) that would cause glare and increase the
spread of light.
         (d)   Neon tubes or LED-related neon tubes (flexible, “opaque,” or
frosted) are allowed to accent windows in a commercial setting (i.e., a
storefront window), but LED light strips are prohibited, especially if LED
emitting diodes can be seen.
      (3)   LED light strips are prohibited to outline business signs,
buildings, or building elements such as windows, doors, staircases, and etc.
      (4)   Any sign that uses illumination shall be turned off while the
related business is not open to the public for regular distribution of goods or
services.
      (5)   No sign illumination shall exceed one footcandle of illumination at
the property line, except indirect lighting where permitted in accordance with
this section.
   (E)   Landscaping. All ground signs must be landscaped at the base of the
sign in accordance with the following:
      (1)   Landscaping must extend a minimum of one square foot for every one
square foot of sign area. All landscaping must be maintained in good condition,
and free and clear of rubbish and weeds. Landscaping around the base of a sign
is included in the total amount of landscaping required on a site, if
applicable.
      (2)   Ground signs (monument or pole) must be landscaped with small
shrubs a minimum of 18 inches in height at planting. The remainder of the
landscaped area must be planted with a mix of perennials, ornamental grasses,
shrubs, groundcover and organic mulch.
   (F)   Items of information.
      (1)   All signs must limit the number of items of information on any
single sign face to no more than six items to prevent traffic hazards for
passing motorists and to minimize the cluttered appearance of signs.
      (2)   Each piece of information on a sign shall be defined as an item of
information. For example, each of the following would be defined as one item of
information: a telephone number, the name of the business, even if multiple
words, or the business logo. If the sign advertises products or services, each
product or service would be one item of information. The street number address
of the business is not counted as an item of information.
      (3)   In the case of an electronic sign, the electronic portion of the
sign counts as one item of information. Changeable copy signs, where the items
of information are changed manually, are also counted as one item of
information.
      (4)   All signs on a zoning lot must be related to goods and/or services
sold or offered on the premises, with the exception of non-commercial or
political signs.
      (5)   Ground signs for multi-tenant commercial buildings used to
advertise which tenants are located within the development, are limited to one
item of information per tenant within the development, in addition to the name
and address of the development.
      (6)   Directory signs and hospital signs are exempt from the items of
information limitation.
   (G)   Design criteria.
      (1)   The purpose of these design criteria is to establish a checklist of
those items relative to signs that affect the physical aspect of the city’s
environment. Pertinent to signs is the design of the sign, its scale and
relationship to buildings and structures, plantings, street furniture and
miscellaneous other objects.
      (2)   The following criteria are not intended to restrict imagination,
innovation or variety, but rather to assist in focusing on design principles
that can result in creative solutions that will develop a satisfactory visual
appearance within the city, preserve property values and promote the public
health, safety and welfare.
         (a)   Every sign shall have good scale and proportion in its design
and in its visual relationship to buildings and surroundings.
         (b)   Sign materials, size, color, lettering, location and arrangement
shall be an integral part of site and building design.
         (c)   The colors, materials and lighting of every sign shall be
restrained and harmonious.
         (d)   The number of graphic elements on a sign shall be held to the
minimum needed to convey the sign’s major message and shall be composed in
proportion to the area of the sign face. Text should be kept to a minimum.
         (e)   Lighting for signs shall be in harmony with the signs’ and the
project’s design. If external lighting is used, it should be arranged so the
light source is shielded from view.
         (f)   Sign supports and braces shall whenever possible be an integral
part of the sign design. Necessary supports or braces shall whenever possible
be hidden from public view.
(Prior Code, § 166.112) (Ord. 2014-040, passed 7-8-2014; Ord. 2023-030, passed
5-23-2023) Penalty, see §
165.999
§ 165.113 ESTABLISHMENT OF SIGN OVERLAY DISTRICTS.
   (A)   The following Sign Overlay Districts are established, and are mapped
in division (C) below:
      (1)   Residential Sign Overlay District. The purpose of the Residential
Sign Overlay District is to ensure proper regulation of signs common to
residential areas for both limited non-residential uses that need to identify
their location and services, and the variety of temporary and non-commercial
signs residents may require, provided in a manner that is not contrary to the
established predominant residential character of the district.
      (2)   Commercial Sign Overlay District. The purpose of the Commercial
Sign Overlay District is to ensure that signs within these areas are able to
balance the needs of commercial users located adjacent to or within residential
neighborhoods to identify their premises and the goods and/or services sold on
the premises without negative impact to the character of the surrounding
residential neighborhoods.
      (3)   Uptown-Transit Oriented Development Sign Overlay District. The
purpose of the Uptown Transit Oriented Development (U-TOD) Sign Overlay
District is to ensure that signs within the Uptown central business district,
Vermont Street Station area and Old Western Historic District are compatible in
character and image and provide businesses with a number of alternatives for
identifying their premises and the goods and/or services sold on the premises
to pedestrian and automotive patrons.
      (4)   Industrial Sign Overlay District. The purpose of the Industrial
Sign Overlay District is to ensure that signs provide an effective means of
identifying their premises and the goods and/or services sold on the premises,
as well as presenting a positive and coordinated appearance along the roadway.
Signs within the industrial areas are to be primarily oriented toward the
automobile.
   (B)   Hospital use. A hospital that falls within any of the Sign Overlay
Districts established is subject to the regulations for a hospital, as defined
in this subchapter, provided under §
165.117(H).
   (C)   Sign Overlay District location. 
(Prior Code, § 166.113) (Ord. 2014-040, passed 7-8-2014; Ord. 2021-062, passed
12-14-2021) Penalty, see §
165.999
§ 165.114 SIGNS ALLOWED WITHOUT A SIGN PERMIT.
   The following signs are allowed in all city sign overlay districts without a
permit, subject to the requirements of this section and provided they are not
directly illuminated, cause glare or cast light onto adjacent property. Such
signs are not counted toward the applicable limits on the number or area of
signs allowed on a site.
   (A)   Address and nameplate signs on all buildings, not exceeding four
square feet in area.
   (B)   Directional signs, of up to six per zoning lot or business, with none
exceeding six square feet in area. Commercial messages on each directional
signs may comprise no more than 50% of the sign area.
   (C)   Multi-tenant developments are permitted one directory sign per
building entrance that is open to the general public. Directory signs may not
exceed 16 square feet in area and, if a ground sign, may not exceed six feet in
height.
   (D)   Temporary signs, provided they are limited to one per lot or street
frontage and removed upon completion of the activity identified on the sign:
      (1)   Identifying the location of garage or yard sale, not exceeding six
square feet in area;
      (2)   Advertising property for sale, lease or rent, including open-house
directional signs, not exceeding six square feet in area in residential zoning
districts or 32 square feet area in nonresidential districts;
      (3)   Contractor, developer or construction- project identification
signs, not exceeding 32 square feet in area, provided the sign is not larger
than 12 square feet and such signs are removed promptly upon completion of the
work;
      (4)   Artisan and trade signs of painters, tradespeople and other
artisans may be erected and maintained during the period such persons are
performing work, provided the sign is not larger than 12 square feet and such
signs are removed promptly upon completion of the work;
      (5)   Political signs located on private property, limited to a maximum
of 20 square feet in area;
      (6)   Temporary signs protecting private property or identifying property
hazards;
      (7)   Seasonal signs and holiday decorations erected for periods of time
not exceeding the customary duration of general celebration;
      (8)   Incidental signs, including but not limited to signs identifying a
private driveway, “No Trespassing”, “Beware of Dog”, for example, are permitted
provided that the size of any such sign is no larger than two square feet;
      (9)   Signs located on private property but not visible from any public
right-of-way or public lands; and
      (10)   Signs no larger than four square feet not requiring a building
permit or electrical permit and signs not legible from a distance of more than
three feet beyond the property line of the development site or parcel on which
the sign is located, except as otherwise regulated in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 166.114) (Ord. 2014-040, passed 7-8-2014)
§ 165.115 SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   In addition to the requirements of this section, signs that are accessory to
residential uses are subject to the regulations of §
165.109, which allows real estate (for sale/for rent) signs, home occupation
signs and other signs typically associated with residential uses. Illumination
of signs on residential lots in residential districts, by any means, exterior
or internal is prohibited. All ground signs in residential districts must be
set back at least 12 feet from any street right-of-way. Monument signs in
residential areas should be decorative and blend in with the surrounding
neighborhood, constructed of brick or masonry materials or of materials used on
the exterior of the principal use on the lot.
(Prior Code, § 166.115) (Ord. 2014-040, passed 7-8-2014)
§ 165.116 SPECIFIC NONRESIDENTIAL USES.
   Nonresidential uses that are permitted by right in residential zoning
districts are allowed one monument sign per street frontage, but no more than
two monument signs are allowed if a property has three frontages or more.
Monument signs shall not exceed 24 square feet in sign area and five feet in
height. All monument signs must be set back at least six feet from any street
right-of-way. Pole signs are prohibited for nonresidential uses in residential
districts.
   (A)   Schools and places of worship. Signs at schools and places of worship
may be erected and maintained in a residential district provided:
      (1)   Monument signs and wall signs are permitted;
      (2)   No more than one sign is permitted on such a site, except for
properties located on a corner lot, in which case two such signs may be
erected, one on each frontage;
      (3)   Pole signs are prohibited;
      (4)   The permitted sign area for each sign allowed is 24 square feet,
except that the permitted sign area for wall signs made of individually pin-
mounted letters is 32 square feet;
      (5)   Up to 35% of the permitted sign area of an institutional monument
sign may be used for a manual changeable copy area or an electronic message
board.
   (B)   Signs accessory to parking areas. Signage for parking areas for multi-
family developments and nonresidential uses may be erected and maintained in a
residential district provided:
      (1)   Signs designating entrances and exits must be no larger than four
square feet in size; and
      (2)   One additional sign of up to nine square feet in area may be used
to identify the parking area or designate the terms of use.
   (C)   Development signs. A sign announcing the sale or development of the
premises upon which they are erected, when erected in connection with the
development of the premises by a builder, contractor, developer, or other
persons interested in such sale or development, may be erected and maintained,
provided:
      (1)   Such a sign is no larger than 32 square feet;
      (2)   No more than one such sign is placed on a property, provided that
on a corner lot, two such signs may be erected, one on each frontage; and
      (3)   Any such sign must be removed by the developer within 30 days of
the final sale of property.
   (D)   Neighborhood or subdivision identification signs. Neighborhood and
subdivision identification signs must be monument signs and must not exceed six
feet in height and 32 square feet in sign area.
   (E)   Signs for nonresidential uses allowed by special use permit or planned
development. Signs for nonresidential uses in residential districts that
require special use approval must be established during the special use review
and approval process. A master sign plan must be reviewed and approved as part
of the special use approval process, as specified in §
165.123. Certain sign deviations may be granted via this process that deal with
sign area, sign height or sign location on the property.
(Prior Code, § 166.116) (Ord. 2014-040, passed 7-8-2014; Ord. 2023-030, passed
5-23-2023) Penalty, see §
165.999
§ 165.117 SIGNS IN COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Permitted sign types. The following types of signs are permitted in
the Commercial Sign Overlay District subject to the requirements of this
subchapter:
      (1)   Wall signs, including individually mounted channel letter signs;
      (2)   Awnings and canopy signs;
      (3)   Window signs;
      (4)   Projecting signs, including hanging and blade signs;
      (5)   Monument and pole ground signs; and
      (6)   Temporary signs including sidewalk signs, banners and pennant flags
pursuant to §
165.121(D).
   (B)   Wall signs.
      (1)   The maximum size of a wall sign in the Commercial Sign Overlay
District is one square foot per lineal foot of zoning lot frontage to a maximum
of 40 square feet in area.
      (2)   On a corner lot, the maximum size of a wall sign located on each
building wall is one square foot per linear foot of zoning lot frontage as
measured along the front or corner side lot line of that building wall. The
size of a wall sign on each side of the building is limited to the square
footage calculated on that side only. In no case can the square footage
permitted for the building wall located along the front lot line and the square
footage permitted for the building will located along the corner side lot line
be combined to create a larger sign on a wall other than that permitted on each
individual wall.
      (3)   Wall signs must be safely and securely attached to the building
wall. Wall signs must be affixed flat against the building wall and must not
project more than 12 inches from the building wall. No aesthetic sign elements
may be affixed or painted directly on a building’s exterior facade. All signs
must be mounted in such a way that they may be removed with minimal impact on
the building’s exterior wall.
      (4)   Wall signs must be located on the sign band of the building
immediately above the first floor window and below the second floor window
sills in the case of a two-story building. No wall sign is permitted to rise
above the second story sill line. On one-story buildings, the top of the sign
must be no more than five feet above the top of the main display window on the
first floor.
      (5)   No wall sign affixed to a building, including sign support
structure, may project beyond the ends or top of the wall to which it is
attached. On existing buildings, a parapet wall must not be constructed for the
sole purpose of increasing the allowable height of a wall sign.
      (6)   For new buildings, when a sign is to be mounted on a parapet wall,
that parapet wall must be consistent with the architectural design of the
building, including building materials. Wall signs may not be attached to un-
reinforced masonry parapets. Wall signs must not cover windows, doors or
architectural elements.
      (7)   Individually lettered, pin-mounted wall signs may consist of
channel, H-channel, reverse channel, cast metal and flat cut metal letters
mounted above the storefront in the masonry sign band or suspended in front of
the storefront at the transom or recessed entry. The size of the lettering is
restricted so that the height of the letters does not exceed 80% of height of
the sign band or 18 inches, whichever is less. The length of the lettering is
to be contained within 80% of the length of the sign band.
      (8)   Gooseneck or reflector lighting fixtures are permitted on all wall
signs provided the reflectors must concentrate the illumination upon the area
of the sign face only.
      (9)   Within a multi-tenant commercial development, all wall signs must
be located at a generally uniform height on the building wall.
   (C)   Awnings or canopy signs. Awnings that are an architectural feature of
a structure and are not used for identifying the premises or the goods and/or
services sold are not considered a sign. Awnings and canopies used as signs are
subject to the following regulations.
      (1)   Non-illuminated awning signs or canopy signs may be substituted for
allowed wall signs, provided that the total combined sign area of all wall
signs and awning or canopy signs does not exceed 32 square feet.
      (2)   Where an awning sign is used as the primary sign on the premises,
the maximum sign area permitted on an awning sign is equal to 1.25 square feet
per one foot of awning length or 25% of the awning area, whichever is less. The
total combined length all elements of the sign copy area may not exceed 75% of
the awning or canopy length.
      (3)   No portion of an awning sign shall be less than eight feet above
the level of the public sidewalk or thoroughfare over which it is erected.
      (4)   No awning sign shall be permitted to extend beyond any point that
is less than five feet from the curb line.
      (5)   Awning signs shall be constructed out of canvas or canvas-like
material, unless other material is approved by the Zoning Administrator. Back-
lit, vinyl and metal awnings are prohibited.
      (6)   Awning signs shall be securely attached to and supported by a
building. All frames and supports shall be made of metal or other similar rigid
material.
      (7)   The valance of an awning sign shall not include any text or images
other than the name of the business, the service offered by that business, and
the house number (no street name). Such valance shall be no more than eight
inches in height and any lettering printed on such valance shall be no more
than six inches in height.
      (8)   In any district other than the Uptown-Transit Oriented Development
(UTOD) District, in lieu of any wall sign, the name of the business or logo may
be printed on the portion of the awning above the valance. Printing above the
valance shall be limited to one awning, except in the case of a corner lot
where one awning with printing above the valance shall be allowed on each
street frontage. Such name or logo printed above the valance shall be limited.
      (9)   Awnings shall be compatible in material and construction to the
style and character of the building. The color of the awning shall be
compatible with the overall color scheme of the facade.
      (10)   When feasible, awnings shall be generally aligned with others
nearby in order to maintain a sense of visual continuity.
   (D)   Window signs.
      (1)   Window signs affixed to the interior of a ground floor exterior
window are permitted. Regulations for temporary window signs are located in §
165.121(B).
      (2)   Not more than 40% of a window area may be covered.
      (3)   Permanent window signs for businesses that are not located on the
ground floor are permitted only for businesses located within the room situated
behind the window on which such signs are located.
   (E)   Projecting signs (includes hanging and blade).
      (1)   One projecting sign is permitted per ground floor establishment
with frontage on a public street. For a multi-tenant building, one additional
projecting sign is permitted. The maximum sign area of a projecting sign is 24
square feet.
      (2)   The outer edge of a projecting sign must be set back a minimum of
one foot from curb line of any street or alley.
      (3)   A projecting sign must be pinned away from the wall at least six
inches and must not extend more than six and one-half feet from the face of the
building to which it is attached, including the area between the sign and the
face of the building.
      (4)   The top of a projecting sign may be no higher than 20 feet above
the sidewalk or thoroughfare. No projecting sign affixed to a building may
project higher than the building height, including the sign support structure.
      (5)   Projecting signs must have a minimum vertical clearance of eight
feet, as measured by a line extending straight down from the bottom of the sign
to the ground immediately below the sign.
      (6)   No projecting or hanging sign is permitted to be attached to a
roof.
   (F)   Ground signs. One monument sign or pole sign is allowed per zoning
lot, pursuant to the requirements of this chapter except as otherwise provided
in this chapter.
      (1)   In the Commercial Overly District, the maximum allowable sign area
of a monument sign is 48 square feet and the maximum sign area of a pole sign
is 36 square feet. The maximum height of such a sign is ten feet.
      (2)   Ground signs associated with multi-tenant office or commercial
developments must devote at least 40% of the total sign area to the name and
address of the development. No more than four tenant panels are permitted per
sign face. Tenant panels may be used for the display of leasing information
pertaining to the development.
      (3)   In addition to a ground sign, drive-through establishments are
allowed one menu board sign with a maximum area of 32 square feet, maximum
height of six feet.
      (4)   Poles or pylons used to support pole signs must be constructed of a
material or covered or concealed by a decorative cover. The cover must be that
architecturally compatible with the overall design of the sign and the
architectural character of buildings on the site, in terms of style, colors and
materials.
      (5)   All ground signs must be landscaped in accordance with §
165.112(E).
   (G)   Electronic message boards. Electronic message boards may be allowed as
a special use in the Commercial Sign Overlay District under the following
conditions. A master sign plan must be reviewed and approved as part of the
special use approval process.
      (1)   A maximum of one electronic message board sign is permitted per
zoning lot. An electronic message board must not exceed 35% of the total
permitted sign area for the lot. Electronic message boards are allowed only on
single-user lots. A minimum 300 feet of lot frontage is required. A minimum of
500 feet is required between electronic message board signs.
      (2)   All illumination must be consistent in color. The message must not
flash, scroll or scintillate. Illumination representing movement is prohibited.
Each message must be displayed for a minimum of five seconds.
      (3)   The owner of an electronic message board that was granted permit
approval prior to the adoption of this subchapter will be permitted to repair
the sign provided the repaired sign does not exceed the size, number and
operation requirements of this section.
   (H)   Signs for hospital use. Signs for a hospital use as shall comply with
the above regulations for the Commercial Overlay District and this subchapter,
except for directional signs (permanent) as follows:
      (1)   Such signs may designate hospital entrances, parking, walkways,
emergency room locations and other hospital-related facilities, as well as
entrances or exits, by means of symbols or words. There is no limitation on the
items of information.
      (2)   Each driveway access from a public street is permitted one
directional sign.
      (3)   Each intersection of drives within a site is permitted one sign to
identify traffic routing, entrances and services, such as drive-in lanes.
Additional directional signs may be permitted subject to Zoning Administrator
approval.
      (4)   Directional signs shall be located entirely on the property to
which they pertain. Directional signs shall not project beyond the property
line.
      (5)   Directional signs may have a maximum height of 12 feet and a
maximum surface area of 50 square feet.
      (6)   Directional signs may be illuminated.
(Prior Code, § 166.117) (Ord. 2014-040, passed 7-8-2014; Ord. 2023-030, passed
5-23-2023) Penalty, see §
165.999
§ 165.118 RESERVED.
§ 165.119 SIGNS IN INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
   Any sign located the Industrial Sign Overlay District that is placed within
100 feet of a residential zoning district and is visible from that residential
zoning district is subject to the Commercial Sign Overlay District regulations
of §
165.117. Other signs in the Industrial Overlay District are subject to the
following standards.
   (A)   Wall signs. In the Industrial Sign Overlay District, one wall sign is
permitted per zoning lot frontage. The maximum size of such wall sign is 50
square feet, plus one square foot for each foot of building wall frontage in
excess of 50 feet.
   (B)   Ground signs. In the Industrial Sign Overlay District, one monument or
pole ground sign is permitted per zoning lot. The maximum sign area of such
sign is 50 square feet, plus one square foot for each two feet of street
frontage in excess of 100 feet to a maximum of 72 square feet. The maximum
height of such a sign is 15 feet.
   (C)   Projecting signs. In the Industrial Overlay Districts, a projecting
sign may be used in lieu of a ground sign.
      (1)   The maximum sign area of a projecting sign is 16 square feet plus
one square foot for each three feet of building frontage in excess of 50 feet,
to a maximum of 32 square feet of sign area.
      (2)   The outer edge of a projecting sign must be set back a minimum of
two feet from curb line of any street or alley.
      (3)   A projecting sign must be pinned away from the wall at least six
inches and must not extend more than six and one-half feet from the face of the
building to which it is attached, including the area between the sign and the
face of the building.
      (4)   The top of a projecting sign may be no higher than 20 feet above
the sidewalk or thoroughfare. No projecting sign affixed to a building may
project higher than the building height, including the sign support structure.
      (5)   Projecting signs must have a minimum vertical clearance of eight
feet, as measured by a line extending straight down from the bottom of the sign
to the ground immediately below the sign.
      (6)   No projecting or hanging sign is permitted to be attached to a
roof.
(Prior Code, § 166.119) (Ord. 2014-040, passed 7-8-2014) Penalty, see §
165.999
§ 165.120 BILLBOARDS (ADVERTISING SIGNS, OFF-PREMISES SIGNS).
   (A)   Billboards (also known as outdoor advertising signs or off-premises
signs) which advertise products, commercial or public service activities, not
related to the occupancy and use of the premises, may be permitted as a special
use in the Industrial Sign Overlay District, only along Interstate 57, and must
conform to the requirements of this section. (Billboards are limited to
industrial zones by Ord. 2329, adopted 4-13-1976.)
    (B)   Billboards are not permitted in any Residential, Commercial or U-TOD
Sign Overlay District. Existing non-conforming billboards shall not be
converted to LED, electronic, or other similar displays. Billboards in the
Industrial Sign Overlay District changing their display or construction must
conform to the requirements of this subchapter.
      (1)   Relationship to other laws.
         (a)   If a billboard site is adjacent to a federal-aid primary or
interstate highway, a copy of a valid Illinois Department of Transportation
sign permit must accompany the city permit application.
         (b)   Whenever an applicant for a permit does not own the proposed
site, a fully executed site lease or other proof of consent to erect and
maintain a billboard on the site must accompany the special use permit
application.
      (2)   Height and clearance. Billboards must be freestanding. The maximum
height of a billboard is 50 feet with a minimum vertical clearance of eight
feet from ground at the base of the sign structure to the bottom of the sign
board perimeter or casing.
      (3)   Number. Where a sign or billboard has two or more faces, the area
of all faces in total must be included in determining the area of the sign,
except that as follows.
         (a)   Where two such faces are placed parallel back to back and are at
no point more than two feet from one another, the area of the sign will be
measured as the area of one face if the two faces are of equal area, or as the
area of the larger face if the two faces are of unequal area.
         (b)   Where two such faces are placed together creating a V shape with
an angle no greater than 25 degrees, the area of the sign will be measured as
the area of one face if the two faces are of equal area or as the area of the
larger face if the two faces are of unequal area. Where two such faces are
placed together creating a V shape with an angle greater than 25 degrees, the
area of the sign will be measured as the total area of the two sign faces.
      (4)   Area and dimensions. The maximum permitted sign area of a billboard
is determined by the type of road from which the owner or lessee intends it to
be viewed and readable. The maximum permitted sign area for billboards adjacent
to roadways in the city is as follows:
         (a)   Interstate 57: maximum area is 672 square feet.
      (5)   Illumination of billboards. The light from any illuminated
billboard must be directed or shielded in a manner that minimizes to the
maximum extent possible light trespass onto adjoining residential districts.
Billboards shall not utilize changeable digital displays.
         (a)   Top- or bottom-mounted light fixtures are allowed on billboards
provided at least 90% of the illumination is of the sign face.
         (b)   The source of illumination must not be directly visible from any
right-of-way or adjoining property.
         (c)   Billboards are prohibited from having any flashing lights or
animation in adherence to federal highway standards.
      (6)   Spacing and placement of billboards.
         (a)   Billboards must not be erected within 500 feet of any existing
billboard on either side of the highway, roadway or street. Spacing of
billboards will be measured by the minimum distance between outdoor advertising
billboard structures measured along the nearest edge of the pavement between
points directly opposite the billboards along each side of the highway and will
apply to outdoor advertising billboard structures located on both sides of the
highway involved.
         (b)   Billboards must be located a minimum of 200 feet from
residential districts.
         (c)   All billboards must be located a minimum of 200 feet from any
public park or outdoor recreation area.
         (d)   All billboards must be located at least 20 feet from any
property line.
(Prior Code, § 166.120) (Ord. 2014-040, passed 7-8-2014; Ord. 2023-030, passed
5-23-2023) Penalty, see §
165.999
§ 165.121 TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   (A)   Sidewalk signs. Freestanding, A-frame or sandwich board signs are
allowed in the public way in Commercial and U-TOD Districts pursuant to the
applicable measurement, construction and design standards of §
165.112 and this section:
      (1)   Limited to six square feet in area and four feet in height;
      (2)   On display during business hours only. Signs must be stored indoors
at all other times;
      (3)   Kept inside and out of use when high winds or heavy snow conditions
exist;
      (4)   Limited to one such sign per business and separated by at least 20
feet from any other sign of the same type;
      (5)   Placed within 15 feet of the primary entrance of the business, and
must not interfere with pedestrian traffic or violate standards of
accessibility as required by the ADA or other accessibility codes; and
      (6)   Placed so as to maintain a five-foot sidewalk clearance at all
times.
   (B)   Temporary window signs. Window signs which are, in the opinion of the
Zoning Administrator, substantially tattered, discolored, frayed, ripped or
otherwise in a state of visible disrepair are prohibited and must be removed.
   (C)   Temporary banner signs. The following regulations shall apply to
banner signs that are displayed in the Commercial, U-TOD or Industrial Sign
Overlay Districts.
      (1)   A permit is required for all banners in nonresidential zoning
districts and must be obtained prior to locating, erecting or displaying any.
      (2)   Banner signs may only be displayed for a period of time not to
exceed 15 consecutive days. Banner signs can be no larger than 24 square feet
in size.
      (3)   Banner signs may only be displayed by a commercial establishment or
business entity on two occasions in any single calendar year. The display shall
be for a period not to exceed 15 days.
      (4)   A minimum 30-day period of time between separate displays of a
banner sign or signs by any commercial establishment or business entity shall
apply.
      (5)   Displays of banner signs shall only be permitted for the purpose of
advertising grand openings by new businesses or sales of commodities or
services by existing businesses.
      (6)   Banner signs may not be displayed as replacements for permanent
signs.
   (D)   Temporary pennant flags. Pennant flags are permitted in nonresidential
sign overlay districts and must comply with the following standards.
      (1)   A permit is required for all pennant flags in nonresidential zoning
districts and must be obtained prior to locating, erecting or displaying any.
      (2)   
Pennant flags may only be displayed by a commercial establishment or business
entity on two occasions in any single calendar year. The display shall be for a
period not to exceed 15 days.
      (3)   A temporary sign permit is required for each 15-day period, and
each 15-day period must not be consecutive to each other.
(Prior Code, § 166.121) (Ord. 2014-040, passed 7-8-2014; Ord. 2023-030, passed
5-23-2023) Penalty, see §
165.999
§ 165.122 SIGN PERMITS.
   (A)   Applicability. No sign, except those identified as exempt or as
allowed without a permit (but still subject to the provisions of this
subchapter), is allowed to be erected, constructed, altered or relocated
without first obtaining a sign permit.
   (B)   Authority and execution. The Zoning Administrator is responsible for
determining compliance with this subchapter, and the Building and Zoning
Department is responsible for issuing a sign permit.
   (C)   Permit issuance.
      (1)   Upon the filing of an application with the Building and Zoning
Department for a sign permit to erect, alter or relocate a sign, the Building
Commissioner or his or her designee will determine whether the application is
complete. If necessary, the Commissioner will notify the applicant of any
deficiencies, and will not process the application until the deficiencies are
remedied. Once the application is determined to be complete, it will be
received, logged in and forwarded to the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Upon receipt of a complete application, the Zoning Administrator
will examine the plans and specifications, and the premises upon which the
proposed sign is to be erected to ensure compliance with the requirements of
the city’s Building Code and all other applicable ordinances of the city. The
Building and Zoning Department will issue a sign permit if the structure
complies with the requirements of this subchapter, as determined by the Zoning
Administrator, and all other ordinances of the city.
   (D)   Approval of electric signs. The application for an electrical permit
for the erection of a sign in which electrical wiring and connections are to be
used must be submitted to the Building and Zoning Department, who shall forward
the specifications regarding all wiring and connections to the Building
Commissioner, or his or her designee. The Building Commissioner will examine
the plans and specifications to determine compliance with the Electrical Code
of the city as a condition of granting the sign permit.
   (E)   Inspection. The Building Commissioner may inspect, at such times as
deemed appropriate, signs regulated by this subchapter. The purpose of the
inspection is to ascertain whether the structure is secure or not secure,
whether in need of repair or removal, or in conformance with the permit
application and the provisions of this subchapter.
   (F)   Revocation of permit. All rights and privileges acquired under the
provisions of this section are licenses revocable at any time by the City
Council. Upon the termination or revocation of the sign permit, the licensee
must remove the sign or other sign structure without cost or expense to the
city. In the event of the failure, neglect or refusal on the part of the
licensee to do so, the city will remove the sign and charge the expense to the
licensee.
   (G)   Void. If the work authorized under a sign permit is not completed
within 180 days after the date of issuance, the permit becomes null and void.
(Prior Code, § 166.122) (Ord. 2014-040, passed 7-8-2014) Penalty, see §
165.999
§ 165.123 MASTER SIGN PLAN.
   The purpose of a master sign plan is to coordinate signs on commercial
developments, and create a plan that establishes a building or site’s overall
sign design, which then provides direction to future tenants.
   (A)   Applicability. For any new commercial development where multiple signs
are varying types are being proposed, the applicant must submit a master sign
plan for review and approval by the Zoning Administrator.
   (B)   Required information. A master sign plan must include, at a minimum,
criteria and specifications for general appearance, location, lighting and
approved construction materials including:
      (1)   The type, number, location, materials, colors and dimensions of all
signs proposed for the development;
      (2)   A description and visual illustration of the proposed signs that
demonstrates a consistent pattern of signage planned for the development;
      (3)   All signs within the development must have at least three of the
following design elements in common:
         (a)   Colors on the background or text;
         (b)   Lettering style;
         (c)   Size (such as, a height or wall location common to each sign);
or
         (d)   Building and sign materials.
      (4)   All sign casings, trim caps, returns and all sign supports such as
poles and braces must be of a common color.
(Prior Code, § 166.123) (Ord. 2014-040, passed 7-8-2014) Penalty, see §
165.999
§ 165.124 HISTORIC SIGNS.
   The city has several historic signs in its commercial areas that serve as
important visual markers which residents and visitors closely identify with an
existing or former business or civic entity or a period of time in the city.
Many such signs were erected or painted under a previous code and may not
conform to the height, shape, type and sign area requirements of this chapter
nor to the non-conforming and obsolete signs provisions of this chapter.
   (A)   Purpose. The intent of this section is to permit historic signs to be
kept in place and be maintained to ensure their continued display for as long
as possible and to be exempt from any provisions of this chapter that would
require that such a sign be removed or significantly altered.
   (B)   Required characteristics of a historic sign. To be eligible for
classification as a historic sign in the city, a sign must:
      (1)   Have been lawfully erected prior to June 28,1971 and has been
continuously maintained in the same location since that date;
      (2)   Is attached to or painted on a significant historic building or
landmark, and has come to be identified with that building or landmark, whether
or not it is original to it;
      (3)   Is located on a site that has been continuously operated for the
same business use since June 28,1971 or earlier;
      (4)   Is of a unique shape or type of design representative of its era;
      (5)   Is a ghost sign; or
      (6)   Identifies a building or business that is associated with a family,
business or organization that was noteworthy in the history of the city
community.
   (C)   Procedure.
      (1)   The owner of a property on which an historic sign is located may
submit a request to the Building and Zoning Department to have such sign
classified as historic for the purposes of this subchapter. The Building and
Zoning Department will review such a request and refer it to the Historic
Preservation Commission. The Historic Preservation Commission will review the
property owner’s request and make a recommendation to the City Council that
such sign should be classified as historic and thus exempt from the
requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   The Historic Preservation Commission may also initiate a review of
a historic sign and make its own direct recommendation to the City Council that
such sign should be classified as historic and thus exempt from the
requirements of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 166.124) (Ord. 2014-040, passed 7-8-2014) Penalty, see §
165.999
§ 165.125 OBSOLETE SIGNS.
   Any sign, whether existing on or erected after the effective date of this
subchapter, which identifies a business no longer being conducted or a product
no longer being sold in or from must be taken down and removed by the owner or
agent of the building, structure or premises upon which such sign is found.
Removal must be effected within 20 days after written notice from the Building
and Zoning Department. If such a sign is not removed after such 20-day period,
the Building and Zoning Department is authorized to have the sign removed. Any
reasonable cost incident thereto will be filed as a lien against the property
where the sign was located.
(Prior Code, § 166.125) (Ord. 2014-040, passed 7-8-2014) Penalty, see §
165.999
§ 165.126 UNSAFE SIGNS.
   When any sign becomes insecure, in danger of falling, or otherwise unsafe,
or if any sign is found to be unlawfully installed, erected or maintained in
violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter or any other law enacted
by the city, the owner thereof or the person or firm maintaining same, must,
upon written notice of the Building and Zoning Department, forthwith in the
case of immediate danger, and in any case within no more than ten days, make
such sign conform to the provisions of this subchapter or remove it.
(Prior Code, § 166.126) (Ord. 2014-040, passed 7-8-2014) Penalty, see §
165.999
§ 165.127 NON-CONFORMING SIGNS.
   All signs not in conformance with this section must comply with the
provisions of this section.
   (A)   Any sign lawfully existing or under construction from or before the
effective date of this subchapter that does not conform to one or more of the
provisions of this section may be continued in operation and maintained
indefinitely as a non- conforming sign, subject to compliance with this
section. A sign shall be deemed to lawfully exist when the consent, license or
permit to erect the sign can be proven or verified.
   (B)   As an incentive to encourage the removal of non-conforming signs, the
City Council, after review and recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Board
of Appeals, is expressly authorized to waive sign permit fees and special use
permit application fees and approve special use permit requests for replacement
signs. In deciding such requests, the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals must
consider whether the public benefit derived from removal and replacement will
be generally proportionate to the fee waiver and/or deviation requested. The
Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals is also authorized to approve minor
exception requests for replacement signs if the Committee determines that the
public benefit derived from removal and replacement will be generally
proportionate to the exception requested.
   (C)   Routine maintenance of non-conforming signs is allowed, including
changing of copy, necessary non-structural repairs, and incidental alterations
that do not expand, extend or enlarge the non-conforming features of the sign.
However, no structural alteration, enlargement, or expansion may be made to a
non-conforming sign unless the alteration, enlargement, or expansion will
result in the elimination of the non-conforming features of the sign.
   (D)   A non-conforming sign and its associated sign structure must be
removed or modified to comply with these regulations if the sign or sign
structure is demolished or destroyed to an extent exceeding 50% of its
replacement cost. A non-conforming sign or sign structure subject to removal
under this division (D) must be removed by the owner of the sign or the owner
or lessee of the property. If the owner or lessee fails to remove the sign, the
Zoning Administrator must give the owner/lessee written notice of the
requirements of this division (D) and the sign must be removed within 30 days
of such notice.
(Prior Code, § 166.127) (Ord. 2014-040, passed 7-8-2014; Ord. 2021-043, passed
9-14-2021) Penalty, see §
165.999
§ 165.128 SIGN MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   All signs must be adequately maintained in good appearance and repair.
   (B)   Painted signs will be considered in need of refinishing if:
      (1)   Twenty percent or more of the surface is missing or shows evidence
of peeling, checking, cracking or blistering of the paint;
      (2)   Twenty percent or more of the surface shows evidence of mildew; or
      (3)   The colors used have faded appreciably and the surface sheen is
gone.
   (C)   All sign framing and support structures must be adequately maintained
to keep them in a state of good appearance and repair.
   (D)   Illuminated signs will be considered in need of repair if 20% or more
of the light bulbs are not fully illuminated, or if 20% or more of the surface
area of an internally illuminated sign is not illuminated.
(Prior Code, § 166.128) (Ord. 2014-040, passed 7-8-2014) Penalty, see §
165.999
§ 165.129 SIGN VARIATIONS.
   The Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and make recommendations
to the City Council with regard to requests for variations from the city sign
ordinance.
   (A)   Determination of need for a variation. It shall be the duty of the
Zoning Administrator, after an application for any sign permit, to advise the
applicant whether under the provisions of this subchapter, a sign variation is
required.
   (B)   Preliminary conference.
      (1)   Any applicant for a sign permit that requires a variance may file a
written request for a preliminary conference with the Planning and Zoning Board
of Appeals. At the conference, the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals shall
give consideration to preliminary exterior drawings, sketches or photographic
examples, landscape and site plans and materials on a specific project, and
shall provide the applicant with guidance in the development of a plan which
would be consistent with the requirements and purposes of this subchapter.
      (2)   Notice of this preliminary meeting shall be provided to tenants
within 250 feet of the subject property. Notice will be by mail and shall be
given no more than 30 days nor less than 15 days before the meeting. Such
notice shall include the time and place of the hearing, a general description
of the contents of the request to be heard, and the address or location of the
property to which the request applies.
   (C)   Procedure.
      (1)   An applicant for a sign permit that requires a variation shall
apply to the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals for such variation and shall
submit all items as required in division (C)(3) below. Upon receipt of such
application, the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals shall schedule a meeting
where the applicant shall be given an opportunity to make a presentation and
all interested parties shall be given the opportunity to comment.
      (2)   Notice of public hearings on requests for variances shall be given
no more than 30 days nor less than 15 days before the hearing by publication in
a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Such notice shall include the
time and place of the hearing, a general description of the contents of the
request to be heard, and the address or location of the property to which the
request applies. The published notice may be supplemented by such additional
form of notice as provided by rule of the hearing body.
      (3)   At the time of the public hearing, the applicant shall provide the
Board with the following documents depicting exterior design features:
         (a)   Drawings which shall include plans, elevations and site plans;
         (b)   Landscaping and screening plans (when appropriate);
         (c)   Renderings and specifications for signs;
         (d)   A statement as to kind, color and texture of materials; and
         (e)   All documents shall be drawn to scale.
      (4)   Based upon the findings of fact in division (D) below, the Planning
and Zoning Board of Appeals shall make its recommendation to the Mayor and
Aldermen of the city within 30 days of the conclusion of the hearing. The
concurring vote of a majority of the members of the City Council shall be
necessary to grant a variance. The order of the City Council shall be by
written resolution and contain its findings of fact.
      (5)   Upon the granting of a variation by the City Council, the exterior
drawings, sketches, landscape and site plans, renderings and materials upon
which the variance was granted shall be turned over to the Zoning Administrator
whose responsibility it shall be to determine that, upon completion, there have
been no deviations from the approval regarding sign design, aesthetics or
regulations contained within this subchapter.
      (6)   The Building and Zoning Department will be responsible for
inspecting the built sign plans and built sign to ensure that it does not
deviate from this and other city codes related to structural, electrical and
any other regulations contained in this subchapter or other city codes. Such
deviations shall constitute a violation of this subchapter, in which event the
Zoning Administrator or Building and Zoning Department may stop work on the
project in the same manner as for a violation of the city code. Work may not be
resumed until such deviations are corrected.
      (7)   It shall be the duty of the person to whom a variation has been
granted to comply with the requirements and/or conditions of the variation and
to obtain such inspections as are necessary to assure compliance. The Building
Official shall give notice to said person of any deficiencies found to exist.
Failure to correct any deficiencies within ten days after receipt of
notification of such deficiency shall constitute a violation of this
subchapter.
   (D)   Findings of fact. After hearing and considering the materials
presented, the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals shall recommend a variation
if it finds that:
      (1)   The applicant’s plans are substantially consistent with the design
criteria of this subchapter;
      (2)   The proposed exterior design features of the sign are suitable and
compatible with the character of neighboring buildings and structures existing
or under construction and with the character of the neighborhood and the
applicable zoning district, and enhance the environment of the city;
      (3)   The exterior design features of the sign will not be detrimental to
the harmonious and orderly growth of the city; or
      (4)   The exterior design features of the sign will not cause a
substantial depreciation in the property values in the neighborhood.
   (E)   Validity and extension of time.
      (1)   No order granting a variation shall be valid longer than 12 months
from the date the approval was granted unless an application for building
permit is filed within such period or the use is commenced within such period.
      (2)   The City Council may grant one additional extension of time not
exceeding 12 months, upon written application made within the initial 12- month
period, without further notice or hearing. The right to so extend said time
shall not include the right to grant additional relief by expanding the scope
of the variation.
   (G)   Amendments to approved variations. Amendments to a variation may be
obtained by application in the same manner as provided for an original
variation.
(Prior Code, § 166.129) (Ord. 2014-040, passed 7-8-2014; Ord. 2021-043, passed
9-14-2021) Penalty, see §
165.999
§ 165.130 ENFORCEMENT.
   Any violation or attempted violation of this subchapter of any condition or
requirement adopted pursuant hereto may be restrained, corrected, or abated, as
the case may be, by injunction or other appropriate proceedings pursuant to
city codes and state law.
   (A)   The Building Official, Building and Zoning Department Inspectors and
Code Enforcement Officers for the city are authorized to inspect all signs and
to issue notices of violations and a summons to appear at a hearing conducted
pursuant to the provisions of the local ordinance court of the city. The
official issuing the notice of violation and summons shall photograph the
violation as proof thereof and preserve said photograph for the hearing.
   (B)   In the event that any person, business, commercial or industrial
establishment fails to pay any fine imposed, after a hearing and conviction for
a violation of this subchapter, within 30 days of the date of the imposition of
the fine, the business registration and license for the establishment shall be
immediately suspended until payment is made.
   (C)   (1)   In the event the licensee of any business or commercial
establishment is convicted of three or more violations of this subchapter for
violations occurring within any 90-day period, the licensee of the
establishment shall be required to appear before the Planning and Zoning Board
of Appeals for a hearing to show cause why the business registration and
license should not be suspended or revoked. After such hearing the Planning and
Zoning Board of Appeals may recommend to the Mayor and Aldermen of the city
suspension or revocation the license.
      (2)   If the City Council finds sufficient cause to suspend or revoke the
establishment’s business registration and license, the establishment shall
cease operations for the period specified by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 166.130) (Ord. 2014-040, passed 7-8-2014; Ord. 2021-043, passed
9-14-2021) Penalty, see §
165.999
§ 165.131 PERMIT FEES.
   The city shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses for
permits for any inspection, construction, alteration, repair, demolition or
removal of any sign regulated by this subchapter. Fees shall be paid to the
city at the time application for permit is made. The schedule of fees shall be
posted in the office of the City Clerk and may be altered or amended from time
to time by the Mayor and City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 166.131) (Ord. 2014-040, passed 7-8-2014)
§ 165.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys or fails to
comply with any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than $100,
nor more than $750, for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
   (B)   Any person, business, commercial or industrial establishment found to
be in violation of §§
165.105 through
165.131 after a hearing conducted pursuant, the local ordinance court shall,
upon such a finding, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than
$750 at the discretion of the Hearing Officer. Each day that a violation
continues after the day notice of the violation and summons have been served in
accordance with the terms and provisions hereof shall be deemed a separate
offense subject to a separate fine.
(Prior Code, § 166.199) (Ord. 2151, passed 6-28-1971; Ord. 2482, passed 10-9-
1979; Ord. 98-196, passed 2-24-1998; Ord. 2014-040, passed 7-8-2014)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES
ILCS Section Code Section
ILCS Section                   Code Section
5 ILCS 120                     32.03
                               30.01 ,
5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.           30.08,
                               35.12
5 ILCS 120/2.02(a)             35.12
5 ILCS 120/2.05                30.08
5 ILCS 120/2.06                35.12
5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.           35.11
5 ILCS 430/1-1 et seq.         34.02
5 ILCS 430/5-15                34.02
5 ILCS 430/5-65                34.07
5 ILCS 430/10-10 through 10-40 34.02
5 ILCS 430/15-10               34.07
5 ILCS 430/50-5                34.02
5 ILCS 430/70-5                34.02,
                               34.07
5 ILCS 430/70-5(a)             34.02
5 ILCS 430/70-5(c)             34.02
15 ILCS 505/17 et seq.         35.06
20 ILCS 2105/2105-5 et seq.    92.06
20 ILCS 3125                   150.023
20 ILCS 3305/                  35.12
                               33.019,
20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.         91.01,
                               91.03,
                               91.09
30 ILCS 105/6z-20.2            37.135
30 ILCS 235/0.01 et seq.       35.06
35 ILCS 115/9                  37.031
35 ILCS 120/2-22               37.135
35 ILCS 120/3                  37.046 ,
                               37.135
35 ILCS 130/1                  112.01
35 ILCS 130/1 et seq.          112.02
35 ILCS 135/1 et seq.          112.02
35 ILCS 143/10-5               112.01
35 ILCS 505/1 et seq.          37.125
35 ILCS 636/5-1 et seq.        163.01
35 ILCS 645/5-1 et seq.        163.05
40 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.        33.080
                               37.003,
50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.           122.026,
                               122.027
50 ILCS 150/                   35.11
50 ILCS 705/1 et seq.          33.042
50 ILCS 740/15                 33.016
50 ILCS 750/15/2               95.074
50 ILCS 750/15.2               95.083
                               152.01,
50 ILCS 840/1 et seq.          152.03,
                               152.04
65 ILCS 5                      10.05
65 ILCS 5/1-1-1 et seq.        35.12,
                               163.01
                               11.10,
65 ILCS 5/1-2-1                70.041,
                               156.001
65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.5              95.074
65 ILCS 5/1-2-4                37.049
65 ILCS 5/1-2-9                95.098
65 ILCS 5/1-2-9.1              31.02,
                               32.04
65 ILCS 5/1-2-11               32.04
65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-1 et seq.      11.01
65 ILCS 5/3.1                  35.12
65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-10            31.01
65 ILCS 5/3.1-20-10            30.02
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-5             31.01
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-40 et seq.    31.05
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-90            31.04
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-120           31.03
65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-25            30.01 ,
                               30.03
65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-30            30.04
65 ILCS 5/8-11-1               37.135
                               37.045,
65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.3             37.077 ,
                               37.135
65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.4             37.030 ,
                               37.135
65 ILCS 5/8-11-2.3             37.125
65 ILCS 5/8-11-24              37.145
65 ILCS 5/11-10-1              32.03
65 ILCS 5/11-10-2              32.03
65 ILCS 5/11-12-4 et seq.      32.05
65 ILCS 5/11-12-12             156.001
65 ILCS 5/11-13                164.01
65 ILCS 5-11-20 et seq.        95.005
65 ILCS 5/11-20-5              163.01
65 ILCS 5/11-20-7              164.01,
                               164.60
65 ILCS 5/11-20-7(d)           164.63
65 ILCS 5/11-20-8              164.01,
                               164.60
65 ILCS 5/11-20-8(d)           164.63
65 ILCS 5/11-20-10             163.01
65 ILCS 5/11-20-12             164.01,
                               164.60
65 ILCS 5/11-20-12(d)          164.63
65 ILCS 5/11-20-13             164.60
65 ILCS 5/11-20-13(e)          164.63
                               95.005,
65 ILCS 5/11-20-15             164.01,
                               164.62
                               164.01,
65 ILCS 5/11-20-15.1           164.05,
                               164.63
65 ILCS 5/11-30-1 et seq.      150.017
65 ILCS 5/11-30-2              156.001
65 ILCS 5/11-30-4              97.01
65 ILCS 5/11-30-8              156.001
65 ILCS 5/11-31.1 et seq.      11.03
65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-1 et seq.    32.04,
                               150.026
65 ILCS 5/11-31-1.01           164.60,
                               164.63
65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-2            32.04
65 ILCS 5/11-31-2              156.001
                               70.085,
65 ILCS 5/11-40-3.1            70.087,
                               70.091
65 ILCS 5/11-42-11             122.045,
                               163.01
65 ILCS 5/11-42-11.2           163.01
                               95.005,
65 ILCS 5/11-60-2              97.01,
                               164.01
65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-1, et seq.   161.01,
                               161.05
                               161.01—
65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-4.2          161.03,
                               161.05
65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-5(a)         161.14
65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-5(c)         161.14
65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-5(d)         161.14
65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-5(d)(9)      161.14
65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-6(e)         161.14
65 ILCS 5/11-80-1              163.01
65 ILCS 5/11-80-3              163.01
65 ILCS 5/11-80-6              163.01
65 ILCS 5/11-80-7              163.01
65 ILCS 5/11-80-8              163.01
65 ILCS 5/11-80-9              121.26
65 ILCS 5/11-80-10             163.01
65 ILCS 5/11-80-13             163.01
65 ILCS 11-208.6               70.060
205 ILCS 5/1 et seq.           35.06,
                               38.09
210 ILCS 115                   150.026
210 ILCS 117                   150.026
210 ILCS 120                   150.026,
                               156.093
220 ILCS 5/3-105               152.03
220 ILCS 5/16-102              152.03
220 ILCS 5/16-108.5(i)         152.03
                               122.020,
220 ILCS 5/21-100 et seq.      163.01,
                               163.06
220 ILCS 5/21-201(v)           163.03
220 ILCS 5/21-301(c)           122.022,
                               122.023
220 ILCS 5/21-401              122.021,
                               163.03
220 ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6)        122.022
220 ILCS 5/21-801              122.020,
                               122.021
220 ILCS 5/21-801(b)           122.021
220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(l)(vi)    122.021
220 ILCS 5/21-801(d)           122.021
220 ILCS 5/22-501 et seq.      122.001—
                               122.004
220 ILCS 5/22-501(r)(1)        122.999
220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.          163.14
220 ILCS 65/4                  163.01,
                               163.06
225 ILCS 227/1 et seq.         93.02
225 ILCS 305                   150.023,
                               150.046
225 ILCS 312/1 et seq.         93.35
225 ILCS 325                   150.023
225 ILCS 325/1 et seq.         156.002
225 ILCS 330/1 et seq.         156.002
225 ILCS 340                   150.023
225 ILCS 340/4                 152.03
225 ILCS 460/0.01 et seq.      121.24
225 ILCS 470                   123.060
230 ILCS 5                     113.185
230 ILCS 10/1 et seq.          113.185
230 ILCS 15/0.01 et seq.       132.02
230 ILCS 15/0.01               113.200
230 ILCS 30/2                  121.26
                               111.58,
230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.          113.186,
                               132.02
230 ILCS 40/1                  111.58
230 ILCS 40/35                 113.999
230 ILCS 40/35(a)              113.999
235 ILCS 5                     111.03
235 ILCS 5/1 et seq.           95.074
                               111.41,
                               111.54,  
235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.         111.58,  
                               113.999,
                               124.01
235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.         111.03
235 ILCS 5/4-1                 111.54
235 ILCS 5/5-4                 111.64
235 ILCS 5/6-12                111.54
235 ILCS 5/6-16                95.074,
                               111.20
235 ILCS 5/6-20                95.074,
                               111.20
235 ILCS 5/6-25                111.54
235 ILCS 5/7-5 et seq.         111.64
305 ILCS 5/1-2 et seq.         32.04
410 ILCS 25/5                  150.026
410 ILCS 82 et seq.            94.50
410 ILCS 82/1                  130.24
410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.         112.01,
                               130.20
                               124.09,
410 ILCS 130/1                 124.11,
                               130.22—
                               130.25
410 ILCS 625                   110.03,
                               110.05
410 ILCS 625/4                 110.02
410 ILCS 650                   110.03,
                               110.05
410 ILCS 650/11                110.02
                               124.01,
410 ILCS 705/1 et seq.         124.09,
                               165.025
                               124.07,
410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq.       165.003,
                               165.025
425 ILCS 35                    93.05
425 ILCS 35/0.01 et seq.       93.01
425 ILCS 35/1                  93.02
425 ILCS 35/2                  93.01
430 ILCS 115/1                 150.026
505 ILCS 89/1 et seq.          124.01
510 ILCS 5/1 et seq.           90.043
510 ILCS 20/1 et seq.          90.119
605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.       163.01,
                               163.03
615 ILCS 5/5 et seq.           156.002,
                               156.062
615 ILCS 5/18g                 156.001
625 ILCS                       72.08
625 ILCS 3/100 et seq.         70.002
                               11.02,
625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.       70.001,
                               70.010,
                               70.061
625 ILCS 5/1-159.1             72.13
625 ILCS 5/3-112(b)            70.001
625 ILCS 5/3-401(a)            70.001
625 ILCS 5/3-402.1             73.02
625 ILCS 5/3-404               70.001
625 ILCS 5/3-411(a)            70.001
625 ILCS 5/3-413(a)            70.001
625 ILCS 5/3-413(b)            70.001
625 ILCS 5/3-413(f)            70.001
625 ILCS 5/3-416               70.001
625 ILCS 5/3-417(a)            70.001
625 ILCS 5/3-609               73.04
625 ILCS 5/3-707               70.087
625 ILCS 5/3-815               72.08
625 ILCS 5/4-201               70.087
625 ILCS 5/4-202               70.087
625 ILCS 5/4-204               70.086
625 ILCS 5/4-208               70.041
625 ILCS 5/11-208.3(b)(4)      70.042
625 ILCS 5/4-209               70.089
625 ILCS 5/6-118               39.01
625 ILCS 5/6-204               11.02,
                               11.03
625 ILCS 5/6-303               70.087
625 ILCS 5/7-601(b)            70.087
625 ILCS 5/11-204              70.040
625 ILCS 5/11-204.1            70.040
                               11.02,
625 ILCS 5/11-208.3            11.03,
                               11.08
652 ILCS 5/11-208.7(b)         70.040
625 ILCS 5/11-501              70.040,
                               70.087
625 ILCS 5/11-506              70.087
625 ILCS 5/11-506(a)           70.087
625 ILCS 5/11-904              71.03
625 ILCS 5/11-1001             71.30
625 ILCS 5/11-1002             71.31
625 ILCS 5/11-1301 et seq.     72.13
625 ILCS 5/11-1301             72.13
625 ILCS 5/11-1301.3           72.13
625 ILCS 5/11-1306             11.08
625 ILCS 5/11-1419.01          70.001
625 ILCS 5/11-1419.02          70.001
625 ILCS 5/11-1426.1           70.065,
                               70.066
625 ILCS 5/11-1426.2           70.065,
                               70.066
625 ILCS 5/11-1427             70.001
625 ILCS 5/11-1507(a)          70.001
625 ILCS 5/11-1507.1           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-101(a)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-201(a)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-201(b)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-201(c)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-202(a)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-202(b)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-203(a)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-204              70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-205              70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-207(a)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-207(b)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-208(a)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-209(c)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-210(a)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-210(b)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-211(a)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-211(b)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-212(a)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-212(b)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-215              70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-301              70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-401              70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-405(d)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-501(a)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-502              70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-503(a)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-503(b)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-503(c)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-503(d)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-503(e)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-601(a)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-601(b)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-602              70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-603(b)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-603.1            70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-604.1            70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-606              70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-606(a)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-606(b)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-606(c)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-606(d)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-607(a)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-607.1(a)         70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-607.1(b)         70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-608(a)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-610(a)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-702(a)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-702(c)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-702(d)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-702(e)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-702(f)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-702(g)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-707              70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-711              70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-806              70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-808              70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-809              70.001
625 ILCS 5/12-810              70.001
625 ILCS 5/13-111              70.001
625 ILCS 5/15-105              70.001
625 ILCS 5/15-106              70.001
625 ILCS 5/15-108              70.001
625 ILCS 5/15-109(a)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/15-109(b)           70.001
625 ILCS 5/15-109.1            70.001
625 ILCS 5/15-112(f)           75.02
625 ILCS 5/15-114              70.001
625 ILCS 5/18a                 70.087
625 ILCS 5/18a-200             70.087
625 ILCS 5/18b-101             73.02,
                               113.185
625 ILCS 5/18c-4104            70.001
625 ILCS 5/18c-4604            70.001
625 ILCS 5/18c-4701(l)         70.001
625 ILCS 5/18c-7201            152.03
705 ILCS 405                   133.01
720 ILCS 5/9-1                 130.03
720 ILCS 5/9-3.3               130.03
720 ILCS 5/10-1                130.03
720 ILCS 5/10-4                130.03
720 ILCS 5/11-1.30             130.03
720 ILCS 5/12-2                130.03
720 ILCS 5/12-3.05             130.03
720 ILCS 5/12-5.1              95.074
720 ILCS 5/12-6                130.03
720 ILCS 5/12-6.5              130.03
720 ILCS 5/18-1                130.03
720 ILCS 5/18-2                130.03
720 ILCS 5/19-1                130.03
720 ILCS 5/19-3                130.03
720 ILCS 5/19-5                130.03
720 ILCS 5/19-6                130.03
720 ILCS 5/20-1                130.03
720 ILCS 5/20-1.1              130.03
720 ILCS 5/20-2                130.03
720 ILCS 5/24-1 - 5/24-3.9     70.040
720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(6)          130.03
720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(7)          130.03
720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(9)          130.03
720 ILCS 5/24-1.1              130.03
720 ILCS 5/24-1.2              130.03
720 ILCS 5/25.1                130.03
720 ILCS 5/26-1 et seq.        95.074
720 ILCS 5/26-1                95.082
720 ILCS 5/28-5                113.999
720 ILCS 5/33-1                130.03
720 ILCS 5/33A-2               130.03
720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.         95.074,
                               130.20
720 ILCS 550/3                 130.20,
                               130.27
720 ILCS 550/5                 130.03
720 ILCS 550/5.1               130.03
720 ILCS 550/7                 130.03
720 ILCS 550/9                 130.03
720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.       95.074
720 ILCS 570/102               130.27
720 ILCS 570/401               130.03
720 ILCS 570/401.1             130.03
720 ILCS 570/405               130.03
720 ILCS 570/406.1             130.03
720 ILCS 570/407               130.03
720 ILCS 570/407.1             130.03
720 ILCS 600/1 et seq.         130.27
720 ILCS 600/2                 130.27
720 ILCS 646/1 et seq.         95.074
730 ILCS 5                     133.04
735 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.       32.04
735 ILCS 5/2-203               32.04
                               11.10,
735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.       11.11,
                               32.04
735 ILCS 5/3-101               70.026
735 ILCS 5/9-1 et seq.         95.082
735 ILCS 5/10-101 et seq.      95.074
740 ILCS 174/15(a)             34.07
740 ILCS 174/15(b)             34.07
750 ILCS 30/1 et seq.          133.23
765 ILCS 120                   157.30
765 ILCS 205                   156.005
765 ILCS 750/10                95.072
765 ILCS 1030                  33.040
770 ILCS 50/                   70.087
775 ILCS 5/1-101               34.07
775 ILCS 5/6-101               34.07
805 ILCS 5                     111.56
805 ILCS 105                   111.03
805 ILCS 110/0.01              121.20
805 ILCS 110/35                121.20
805 ILCS 405/0.01 et seq.      119.030
820 ILCS 305                   163.09
820 ILCS 305/1 et seq.         119.098
                               
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Section Code Section
Prior Code Section Code Section
10.01              10.01
10.02              10.02
10.03              10.03
10.04              10.04
10.05              10.05
10.06              10.06
10.07              10.07
10.08              10.08
10.09              10.09
10.10              10.10
10.11              10.11
10.12              10.12
10.13              10.13
10.14              10.14
10.15              10.15
10.16              10.16
10.17              10.17
10.18              10.18
10.99              10.99
11.01              11.01
11.02              11.02
11.03              11.03
11.04              11.04
11.05              11.05
11.06              11.06
11.07              11.07
11.08              11.08
11.09              11.09
11.10              11.10
11.11              11.11
11.12              11.12
11.13              11.13
30.01              30.01
30.02              30.02
30.03              30.03
30.04              30.04
30.05              30.05
30.15              30.20
30.16              30.21
30.17              30.22
30.18              30.23
31.01              31.01
31.02              31.02
31.03              31.03
31.04              31.04
31.05              31.05
32.01              32.01
32.02              32.02
32.05              32.03
32.06              32.04
33.001             33.001
33.002             33.002
33.003             33.003
33.004             33.004
33.005             33.005
33.006             33.006
33.007             33.007
33.008             33.008
33.009             33.009
33.010             33.010
33.011             33.011
33.012             33.012
33.013             33.013
33.014             33.014
33.015             33.015
33.016             33.016
33.017             33.017
33.018             33.018
33.019             33.019
33.020             33.020
33.035             33.035
33.036             33.036
33.037             33.037
33.038             33.038
33.039             33.039
33.040             33.040
33.041             33.041
33.042             33.042
33.043             33.043
33.044             33.044
33.045             33.045
33.046             33.046
33.047             33.047
33.048             33.048
33.060             33.060
33.061             33.061
33.062             33.062
33.063             33.063
33.064             33.064
33.065             33.065
33.066             33.066
33.067             33.067
33.080             33.080
33.081             33.081
33.082             33.082
33.999             33.999
34.01              34.01
34.02              34.02
34.04              34.03
35.01              35.01
35.02              35.02
35.03              35.03
35.04              35.04
35.05              35.05
35.06              35.06
35.07              35.07
35.08              35.08
35.09              35.09
35.10              35.10
36.01              36.01
36.02              36.02
37.001             37.001
37.002             37.002
37.003             37.003
37.004             37.004
37.005             37.005
37.006             37.006
37.007             37.007
37.008             37.008
37.009             37.009
37.010             37.010
37.011             37.011
37.012             37.012
37.013             37.013
37.014             37.014
37.015             37.015
37.016             37.016
37.017             37.017
37.018             37.018
37.019             37.019
37.030             37.030
37.031             37.031
37.032             37.032
37.033             37.033
37.045             37.045
37.046             37.046
37.047             37.047
37.048             37.048
37.049             37.049
37.060             37.075
37.061             37.076
37.062             37.077
37.063             37.078
37.064             37.079
37.065             37.080
37.066             37.081
37.067             37.082
37.080             37.095
37.081             37.096
37.082             37.097
37.083             37.098
37.084             37.099
37.095             37.110
37.096             37.111
37.097             37.112
37.098             37.113
37.999             37.999
38.01              38.01
38.02              38.02
38.03              38.03
38.04              38.04
38.05              38.05
38.06              38.06
38.07              38.07
38.08              38.08
38.09              38.09
38.10              38.10
38.11              38.11
38.12              38.12
38.13              38.13
38.14              38.14
38.15              38.15
38.16              38.16
38.17              38.17
Ch. 38, App. A     Ch. 38, App. A
Ch. 38, App. B     Ch. 38, App. B
Ch. 38, App. C     Ch. 38, App. C
Ch. 38, App. D     Ch. 38, App. D
Ch. 38, App. E     Ch. 38, App. E
Ch. 38, App. F     Ch. 38, App. F
50.01              50.01
50.02              50.02
50.03              50.03
50.04              50.04
50.07              50.07
50.08              50.08
50.10              50.10
50.25              50.25
50.26              50.26
50.27              50.27
50.28              50.28
50.29              50.29
51.01              52.004
52.01              52.001
52.02              52.002
52.03              52.003
52.04              52.004
52.05              52.005
52.06              52.006
52.07              52.007
52.08              52.008
52.09              52.009
52.10              52.010
52.11              52.011
52.12              52.012
52.13              52.013
52.16              52.015
52.17              52.016
52.18              52.017
52.23              52.021
52.24              52.022
52.25              52.023
52.26              52.024
52.35              52.030
52.36              52.031
52.37              52.032
52.51              52.050
52.52              52.051
52.53              52.052
52.54              52.053
52.56              52.054
52.99              52.999
70.001             70.001
70.002             70.002
70.003             70.003
70.004             70.004
70.005             70.005
70.006             70.006
70.007             70.007
70.008             70.008
70.013             70.009
70.025             70.025
70.026             70.026
70.027             70.027
70.028             70.028
70.060             70.060
70.061             70.061
70.062             70.062
70.063             70.063
70.064             70.064
70.065             70.065
70.066             70.066
70.067             70.067
70.068             70.068
70.069             70.069
70.070             70.070
70.071             70.071
70.999             70.999
71.01              71.01
71.02              71.02
71.03              71.03
71.04              71.04
71.05              71.05
71.06              71.06
71.07              71.07
71.08              71.08
71.09              71.09
71.10              71.10
71.11              71.11
71.12              71.12
71.13              71.13
71.14              71.14
71.15              71.15
71.16              71.16
71.17              71.17
71.18              71.18
71.19              71.19
71.30              71.30
71.31              71.31
71.32              71.32
71.33              71.33
71.34              71.34
72.01              72.01
72.02              72.02
72.03              72.03
72.04              72.04
72.05              72.05
72.06              72.06
72.07              72.07
72.08              72.08
72.09              72.09
72.10              72.10
72.12              72.11
72.13              72.12
72.14              72.13
72.15              72.14
73.02              73.01
73.03              73.02
73.04              73.03
73.06              73.04
73.07              73.05
73.08              73.06
73.09              73.07
73.10              73.08
73.11              73.09
74.01              74.01
74.04              74.02
74.05              74.03
90.001             90.001
90.015             90.015
90.016             90.016
90.017             90.017
90.018             90.018
90.019             90.019
90.020             90.020
90.021             90.021
90.022             90.022
90.023             90.023
90.024             90.024
90.025             90.025
90.040             90.040
90.041             90.041
90.042             90.042
90.043             90.043
90.044             90.044
90.045             90.045
90.046             90.046
90.047             90.047
90.048             90.048
90.060             90.060
90.061             90.061
90.062             90.062
90.063             90.063
90.064             90.064
90.066             90.065
90.080             90.080
90.081             90.081
90.082             90.082
90.083             90.083
90.095             90.095
90.096             90.096
90.097             90.097
90.098             90.098
90.099             90.099
90.100             90.100
90.101             90.101
90.102             90.102
90.103             90.103
90.104             90.104
91.01              91.01
91.02              91.02
91.03              91.03
91.04              91.04
91.05              91.05
91.06              91.06
91.07              91.07
91.08              91.08
91.09              91.09
91.10              91.10
91.11              91.11
91.12              91.12
91.25              91.25
91.26              91.26
91.27              91.27
91.28              91.28
91.29              91.29
91.30              91.30
91.31              91.31
92.01              92.01
92.02              92.02
92.03              92.03
92.04              92.04
92.05              92.05
92.06              92.06
92.20              92.20
92.21              92.21
92.22              92.22
92.23              92.23
93.01              93.01
93.02              93.02
93.03              93.03
93.04              93.04
93.05              93.05
93.06              93.06
93.07              93.07
93.50              93.20
93.54              93.21
93.55              93.22
93.56              93.23
93.57              93.24
93.58              93.25
93.59              93.26
93.60              93.27
93.61              93.28
93.62              93.29
93.63              93.30
93.64              93.31
93.65              93.32
93.66              93.33
93.68              93.34
93.69              93.35
93.99              93.99
94.005             94.01
94.006             94.02
94.007             94.03
94.008             94.04
94.011             94.05
94.028             94.20
94.029             94.21
94.035             94.22
94.036             94.23
94.046             94.24
94.047             94.25
94.048             94.26
94.049             94.27
94.050             94.28
94.053             94.29
94.054             94.30
94.055             94.31
94.056             94.32
94.057             94.33
94.058             94.34
94.059             94.35
94.060             94.36
94.061             94.37
94.062             94.38
94.075             94.50
94.076             94.51
94.077             94.52
94.078             94.53
94.079             94.54
94.080             94.55
94.081             94.56
95.06              95.006
95.20              95.020
95.21              95.021
95.22              95.022
95.23              95.023
95.35              95.055
95.36              95.056
95.37              95.057
95.38              95.058
96.01              96.001
96.02              96.002
96.03              96.003
96.20              96.015
96.21              96.016
96.22              96.017
96.23              96.018
96.35              96.030
96.36              96.031
96.37              96.032
96.50              96.045
96.51              96.046
96.52              96.047
96.53              96.048
96.54              96.049
97.001             51.001
97.002             51.002
97.015             51.015
97.016             51.016
97.017             51.017
97.018             51.018
97.019             51.019
97.020             51.020
97.021             51.021
97.022             51.022
97.035             51.035
97.036             51.036
97.037             51.037
97.038             51.038
97.039             51.039
97.050             51.050
97.051             51.051
97.052             51.052
97.053             51.053
97.054             51.054
97.055             51.055
97.070             51.070
97.071             51.071
97.072             51.072
97.073             51.073
97.074             51.074
97.085             51.085
97.086             51.086
97.087             51.087
97.088             51.088
97.089             51.089
97.090             51.090
97.091             51.091
97.105             51.105
97.106             51.106
97.107             51.107
97.108             51.108
97.109             51.109
98.001             98.001
98.002             98.002
98.003             98.003
98.004             98.004
98.005             98.065
98.006             98.004
98.020             98.006
98.021             98.007
98.022             98.008
98.024             98.009
98.025             98.010
98.026             98.011
98.027             98.012
98.028             98.013
98.060             98.060
98.061             98.061
98.062             98.062
98.075             98.075
98.076             98.076
98.077             98.077
98.078             98.078
98.079             98.079
98.999             98.064
110.01             110.01
110.02             110.02
110.03             110.03
110.04             110.04
110.05             110.05
110.06             110.06
110.07             110.07
110.20             110.20
110.21             110.21
110.22             110.22
110.23             110.23
110.24             110.24
110.25             110.25
110.26             110.26
110.27             110.27
110.28             110.28
110.29             110.29
110.30             110.30
110.31             110.31
110.32             110.32
110.33             110.33
110.45             110.45
110.46             110.46
110.47             110.47
110.48             110.48
110.49             110.49
110.50             110.50
110.99             110.99
111.01             111.01
111.02             111.02
111.03             111.03
111.04             111.04
111.05             111.05
111.06             111.06
111.07             111.07
111.20             111.20
111.21             111.21
111.22             111.22
111.23             111.23
111.24             111.24
111.25             111.25
111.26             111.26
111.27             111.27
111.28             111.28
111.29             111.29
111.30             111.30
111.31             111.31
111.32             111.32
111.33             111.33
111.34             111.34
111.35             111.35
111.36             111.36
111.37             111.37
111.38             111.38
111.39             111.39
111.50             111.50
111.51             111.51
111.52             111.52
111.53             111.53
111.54             111.54
111.55             111.55
111.56             111.56
111.57             111.57
111.58             111.58
111.59             111.59
111.60             111.60
111.61             111.61
111.62             111.62
111.63             111.63
111.64             111.64
111.65             111.65
111.99             111.99
112.01             112.01
112.02             112.02
112.03             112.03
112.04             112.04
112.99             112.99
113.001            113.001
113.002            113.002
113.003            113.003
113.004            113.004
113.005            113.005
113.006            113.006
113.007            113.007
113.008            113.008
113.009            113.009
113.020            113.020
113.021            113.021
113.022            113.022
113.023            113.023
113.024            113.024
113.025            113.025
113.040            113.040
113.041            113.041
113.042            113.042
113.043            113.043
113.044            113.044
113.045            113.045
113.046            113.046
113.060            113.060
113.061            113.061
113.062            113.062
113.063            113.063
113.064            113.064
113.065            113.065
113.066            113.066
113.080            113.080
113.081            113.081
113.082            113.082
113.095            113.095
113.096            113.096
113.097            113.097
113.098            113.098
113.099            113.099
113.100            113.100
113.101            113.101
113.102            113.102
113.103            113.103
113.104            113.104
113.105            113.105
113.106            113.106
113.107            113.107
113.108            113.108
113.109            113.109
113.110            113.110
113.111            113.111
113.112            113.112
113.125            113.125
113.126            113.126
113.127            113.127
113.140            113.140
113.141            113.141
113.142            113.142
113.143            113.143
113.155            113.155
113.156            113.156
113.157            113.157
113.158            113.158
113.159            113.159
113.170            113.170
113.171            113.171
113.172            113.172
113.173            113.173
113.174            113.174
113.999            113.999
114.001            114.001
114.002            114.002
114.003            114.003
114.004            114.004
114.005            114.005
114.006            114.006
114.007            114.007
114.008            114.008
114.020            114.020
114.035            114.035
114.036            114.036
114.037            114.037
114.038            114.038
114.039            114.039
114.040            114.040
114.041            114.041
114.042            114.042
114.043            114.043
114.044            114.044
114.045            114.045
114.046            114.046
114.047            114.047
114.048            114.048
114.049            114.049
114.050            114.050
114.065            114.065
114.066            114.066
114.067            114.067
114.068            114.068
114.069            114.069
114.070            114.070
115.001            115.001
115.002            115.002
115.003            115.003
115.004            115.004
115.005            115.005
115.020            115.020
115.021            115.021
115.022            115.022
115.023            115.023
115.035            115.035
115.036            115.036
115.037            115.038
115.038            115.039
115.039            115.040
115.040            115.041
115.041            115.042
115.042            115.043
115.043            115.044
115.044            115.045
115.045            115.046
115.046            115.047
115.047            115.048
115.048            115.049
115.049            115.050
115.050            115.051
115.051            115.052
115.052            115.053
115.053            115.054
115.054            115.055
115.055            115.056
115.070            115.070
115.071            115.071
115.072            115.072
115.073            115.073
115.074            115.074
115.085            115.085
115.086            115.086
115.087            115.087
115.088            115.088
115.089            115.089
115.090            115.090
115.091            115.091
115.105            115.105
115.106            115.106
115.107            115.107
115.108            115.108
115.109            115.109
115.110            115.110
115.125            115.125
115.126            115.126
115.127            115.127
115.128            115.128
115.129            115.129
115.130            115.130
115.131            115.131
115.132            115.132
115.133            115.133
115.134            115.134
115.135            115.135
115.136            115.136
115.137            115.137
115.138            115.138
115.139            115.139
115.140            115.140
115.141            115.141
115.142            115.142
115.143            115.143
115.144            115.144
115.145            115.145
115.146            115.146
115.147            115.147
115.160            115.160
115.161            115.161
115.162            115.162
115.163            115.163
115.164            115.164
115.165            115.165
115.166            115.166
115.180            115.180
115.181            115.181
115.182            115.182
115.183            115.183
115.184            115.184
115.195            115.195
115.196            115.196
115.197            115.197
115.999            115.999
116.01             116.01
116.02             116.02
116.03             116.03
116.15             116.15
116.16             116.16
116.17             116.17
116.18             116.18
116.19             116.19
116.20             116.20
116.21             116.21
116.22             116.22
116.23             116.23
116.24             116.24
116.25             116.25
116.26             116.26
116.27             116.27
116.28             116.28
116.29             116.29
116.99             116.99
117.001            117.001
117.002            117.002
117.003            117.003
117.004            117.004
117.015            117.015
117.016            117.016
117.017            117.017
117.018            117.018
117.019            117.019
117.020            117.020
117.021            117.021
117.022            117.022
117.023            117.023
117.024            117.024
117.025            117.025
117.040            117.040
117.041            117.041
117.042            117.042
117.043            117.043
117.044            117.044
117.055            117.055
117.056            117.056
117.057            117.057
117.058            117.058
117.070            117.070
117.071            117.071
117.072            117.072
117.073            117.073
117.074            117.074
117.075            117.075
118.001            118.001
118.002            118.002
118.003            118.003
118.015            118.015
118.016            118.016
118.017            118.017
118.018            118.018
118.030            118.030
118.031            118.031
118.032            118.032
118.033            118.033
118.045            118.045
118.046            118.046
118.047            118.047
118.060            118.060
118.061            118.061
118.062            118.062
118.063            118.063
118.075            118.075
118.076            118.076
118.077            118.077
118.078            118.078
119.001            119.001
119.002            119.002
119.003            119.003
119.004            119.004
119.005            119.005
119.006            119.006
119.007            119.007
119.008            119.008
119.009            119.009
119.010            119.010
119.011            119.011
119.025            119.025
119.026            119.026
119.027            119.027
119.028            119.028
119.029            119.029
119.030            119.030
119.031            119.031
119.032            119.032
119.033            119.033
119.034            119.034
119.045            119.045
119.046            119.046
119.047            119.047
119.048            119.048
119.049            119.049
119.060            119.060
119.061            119.061
119.062            119.062
119.063            119.063
119.064            119.064
119.065            119.065
119.080            119.080
119.081            119.081
119.082            119.082
120.01             120.01
120.02             120.02
120.15             120.15
120.16             120.16
120.17             120.17
120.18             120.18
120.19             120.19
120.20             120.20
120.21             120.21
120.22             120.22
120.23             120.23
120.24             120.24
120.25             120.25
120.26             120.26
120.27             120.27
120.28             120.28
120.29             120.29
120.40             120.40
120.41             120.41
120.42             120.42
120.43             120.43
120.44             120.44
120.45             120.45
120.46             120.46
120.47             120.47
120.48             120.48
120.99             120.99
121.01             121.01
121.02             121.02
121.03             121.03
121.04             121.04
121.05             121.05
121.20             121.20
121.21             121.21
121.22             121.22
121.23             121.23
121.24             121.24
121.25             121.25
121.26             121.26
121.27             121.27
121.28             121.28
121.29             121.29
121.40             121.40
121.41             121.41
121.42             121.42
121.43             121.43
121.99             121.99
122.001            122.001
122.002            122.002
122.003            122.003
122.004            122.004
122.005            122.005
122.020            122.020
122.021            122.021
122.022            122.022
122.023            122.023
122.024            122.024
122.025            122.025
122.026            122.026
122.027            122.027
122.028            122.028
122.040            122.040
122.041            122.041
122.042            122.042
122.043            122.043
122.044            122.044
122.045            122.045
122.046            122.046
122.047            122.047
122.048            122.048
122.049            122.049
122.050            122.050
122.051            122.051
122.052            122.052
122.053            122.053
122.054            122.054
122.055            122.055
122.056            122.056
122.057            122.057
122.058            122.058
122.059            122.059
122.060            122.060
122.061            122.061
122.062            122.062
122.063            122.063
122.064            122.064
122.065            122.065
122.066            122.066
122.067            122.067
122.068            122.068
122.069            122.069
122.070            122.070
122.071            122.071
122.072            122.072
122.073            122.073
122.074            122.074
122.075            122.075
122.076            122.076
122.077            122.077
122.078            122.078
122.079            122.079
122.080            122.080
122.081            122.081
122.082            122.082
122.083            122.083
122.084            122.084
122.085            122.085
122.086            122.086
122.087            122.087
122.088            122.088
122.089            122.089
122.090            122.090
122.091            122.091
122.092            122.092
122.093            122.093
122.094            122.094
122.095            122.095
122.999            122.999
123.01             123.001
123.02             123.002
123.03             123.003
123.04             123.004
123.15             123.015
123.16             123.016
123.17             123.017
123.18             123.018
123.30             123.030
123.31             123.031
123.32             123.032
123.33             123.033
123.45             123.045
123.46             123.046
123.47             123.047
123.48             123.048
123.49             123.049
123.60             123.060
130.01             130.01
130.02             130.02
130.03             130.03
130.04             130.04
130.05             130.05
130.99             130.99
131.01             131.01
131.02             131.02
131.03             131.03
131.99             131.99
132.01             132.01
133.01             133.01
133.02             133.02
133.03             133.03
133.04             133.04
133.05             133.05
133.20             133.20
133.21             133.21
133.22             133.22
133.23             133.23
133.24             133.24
133.25             133.25
133.40             133.40
133.41             133.41
133.42             133.42
133.43             133.43
133.44             133.44
133.99             133.99
150.001            150.001
150.002            150.002
150.003            150.003
150.015            150.015
150.016            150.016
150.017            150.017
150.018            150.018
150.019            150.019
150.020            150.020
150.021            150.021
150.022            150.022
150.023            150.023
150.024            150.024
150.025            150.025
150.026            150.026
150.027            150.027
150.028            150.028
150.029            150.029
150.031            150.030
150.032            150.031
150.033            150.032
150.034            150.033
150.045            150.045
150.046            150.046
150.047            150.047
150.048            150.048
150.049            150.049
150.050            150.050
150.051            150.051
150.065            150.065
150.066            150.066
150.067            150.067
150.068            150.068
150.069            150.069
150.080            150.080
150.081            150.081
150.082            150.082
150.083            150.083
150.084            150.084
150.085            150.085
150.100            150.100
150.101            150.101
150.102            150.102
150.103            150.103
150.104            150.104
150.115            150.115
150.116            150.116
150.117            150.117
150.130            150.130
150.131            150.131
150.145            150.145
150.146            150.146
150.160            150.160
150.161            150.161
150.162            150.162
150.999            150.999
154.01             153.01
155.01             154.01
156.01             155.01
156.02             155.02
156.03             155.03
156.04             155.04
156.15             155.15
156.16             155.16
156.17             155.17
156.18             155.18
156.19             155.19
156.20             155.20
156.21             155.21
156.22             155.22
156.23             155.23
156.24             155.24
156.25             155.25
156.40             155.40
156.41             155.41
156.42             155.42
156.99             155.99
157.001            156.001
157.002            156.002
157.003            156.003
157.004            156.004
157.005            156.005
157.006            156.006
157.007            156.007
157.008            156.008
157.009            156.009
157.020            156.020
157.021            156.021
157.022            156.022
157.023            156.023
157.024            156.024
157.025            156.025
157.026            156.026
157.027            156.027
157.028            156.028
157.029            156.029
157.030            156.030
157.031            156.031
157.045            156.045
157.046            156.046
157.047            156.047
157.060            156.060
157.061            156.061
157.062            156.062
157.075            156.075
157.076            156.076
157.077            156.077
157.090            156.090
157.091            156.091
157.092            156.092
157.093            156.093
157.999            156.999
158.01             157.01
158.02             157.02
158.03             157.03
158.04             157.04
158.05             157.05
158.06             157.06
158.07             157.07
158.08             157.08
158.09             157.09
158.10             157.10
158.11             157.11
158.25             157.25
158.26             157.26
158.27             157.27
158.28             157.28
158.29             157.29
158.30             157.30
158.31             157.31
158.99             157.99
159.01             158.01
159.02             158.02
160.01             159.01
160.02             159.02
160.15             159.15
160.16             159.16
160.17             159.17
160.18             159.18
160.30             159.30
160.31             159.31
160.32             159.32
160.33             159.33
160.34             159.34
160.35             159.35
160.36             159.36
160.37             159.37
160.38             159.38
160.39             159.39
160.40             159.40
160.41             159.41
160.42             159.42
160.99             159.99
161.01             160.01
161.02             160.02
161.03             160.03
161.04             160.04
161.05             160.05
162.01             161.01
162.02             161.02
162.03             161.03
162.04             161.04
162.05             161.05
162.06             161.06
162.07             161.07
162.08             161.08
162.09             161.09
162.10             161.10
162.11             161.11
162.12             161.12
162.13             161.13
162.14             161.14
162.15             161.15
163.01             162.01
163.02             162.02
163.03             162.03
163.04             162.04
163.05             162.05
163.06             162.06
163.07             162.07
163.08             162.08
163.09             162.09
163.10             162.10
163.11             162.11
163.12             162.12
163.13             162.13
163.14             162.14
163.15             162.15
163.16             162.16
163.17             162.17
163.18             162.18
163.99             162.99
164.01             163.01
164.02             163.02
164.03             163.03
164.04             163.04
164.05             163.05
164.06             163.06
164.07             163.07
164.08             163.08
164.09             163.09
164.10             163.10
164.11             163.11
164.12             163.12
164.13             163.13
164.14             163.14
164.15             163.15
164.16             163.16
164.17             163.17
164.18             163.18
164.19             163.19
164.20             163.20
164.21             163.21
164.22             163.22
164.99             163.99
165.01             164.01
165.02             164.02
165.03             164.03
165.04             164.04
165.05             164.05
165.06             164.06
165.07             164.07
165.08             164.08
165.09             164.09
165.10             164.10
165.11             164.11
165.12             164.12
165.25             164.25
165.26             164.26
165.27             164.27
165.28             164.28
165.29             164.29
165.30             164.30
165.45             164.45
165.46             164.46
165.47             164.47
165.48             164.48
165.49             164.49
165.60             164.60
165.61             164.61
165.62             164.62
165.63             164.63
165.99             164.99
166.001            165.001
166.002            165.002
166.003            165.003
166.004            165.004
166.005            165.005
166.006            165.006
166.007            165.007
166.020            165.020
166.021            165.021
166.022            165.022
166.023            165.023
166.024            165.024
166.025            165.025
166.026            165.026
166.027            165.027
166.028            165.028
166.029            165.029
166.030            165.030
166.031            165.031
166.032            165.032
166.033            165.033
166.034            165.034
166.050            165.045
166.051            165.046
166.052            165.047
166.053            165.048
166.054            165.049
166.055            165.050
166.070            165.065
166.071            165.066
166.072            165.067
166.085            165.080
166.086            165.081
166.087            165.082
166.089            165.083
166.090            165.084
166.091            165.085
166.092            165.086
166.093            165.087
166.094            165.088
166.095            165.089
166.096            165.090
166.105            165.105
166.106            165.106
166.107            165.107
166.108            165.108
166.109            165.109
166.110            165.110
166.111            165.111
166.112            165.112
166.113            165.113
166.114            165.114
166.115            165.115
166.116            165.116
166.117            165.117
166.119            165.119
166.120            165.120
166.121            165.121
166.122            165.122
166.123            165.123
166.124            165.124
166.125            165.125
166.126            165.126
166.127            165.127
166.128            165.128
166.129            165.129
166.130            165.130
166.131            165.131
166.199            165.999
                   
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.  Date Passed Code Section
2019-023  - -         72.01
2019-046  - -         72.01
1669      4-14-1932   113.023
1508      10-27-1941  117.070—
                      117.075
1517      3-23-1942   74.01—
                      74.03
1519      4-13-1942   95.057
1524      9-29-1942   70.004—
                      70.008
1525      11-9-1942   119.001—
                      119.011
1536      11-18-1943  119.004
1538      1-10-1944   119.005
1842      7-24-1944   95.058
1988      1-28-1946   95.006
                      119.026,
1551      3-11-1946   119.032,
                      119.033
                      120.01,
                      120.02,
                      120.15,
                      120.16,
1552      3-11-1946   120.19—
                      120.29,
                      120.40—
                      120.48,
                      120.99
1565      2-10-1947   120.19
1528      6-23-1947   113.140
1578      6-23-1947   113.141,
                      113.142
1583      7-14-1947   71.01
1949      1-28-1948   95.021
1591      2-23-1948   118.030—
                      118.033
1635      12-11-1950  71.01
1667      4-14-1952   118.060—
                      118.063
1668      4-14-1952   119.045—
                      119.049
                      113.003,
                      113.082,
                      113.141,
                      115.022,
                      115.038,
                      115.108,
1669      4-14-1952   116.16,
                      118.018,
                      118.031,
                      118.047,
                      119.004,
                      121.43,
                      123.047
                      123.030,
1673      4-28-1952   123.032,
                      123.033
1699      12-28-1953  51.070,
                      51.071
1714      5-10-1954   123.048,
                      123.049
1735      7-11-1955   71.32
1748      1-3-1956    115.085—
                      115.087
1761      6-25-1956   71.32
1763      7-23-1956   51.002
1781      4-22-1957   51.050—
                      51.039
                      150.001,
                      150.003,
                      150.045—
                      150.051,
1837      7-13-1959   150.068,
                      150.081—
                      150.085,
                      150.100—
                      150.104,
                      150.145
1862      11-28-1960  117.001—
                      117.003
1864      12-20-1960  150.146
1880      6-12-1961   113.095—
                      113.112
                      50.01—
1889      9-11-1961   50.04,
                      50.07,
                      50.08
1919      11-12-1962  117.040—
                      117.044
1988      9-27-1965   94.56
20-10     10-10-1966  72.01—
                      72.07
2013      10-10-1966  70.009,
                      70.999
2021      1-9-1967    36.02
2026      2-27-1967   150.100—
                      150.104
                      115.087,
1748      6-12-1967   115.089—
                      115.091
2035      6-12-1967   115.071—
                      115.074
                      120.16,
2046      9-27-1967   120.18,
                      120.41,
                      120.99
2051      10-9-1967   35.04
2054      10-23-1967  50.25—
                      50.29
                      150.065,
2062      1-22-1968   150.066,
                      150.069
2089      12-23-1968  150.045—
                      150.050
2090      1-6-1969    31.04
2108      9-3-1969    37.030—
                      37.033
2109      9-3-1969    37.045—
                      37.049
2119      2-9-1970    72.12
2120      2-23-1970   150.001
2134      9-28-1970   150.001
2150      6-14-1971   96.045—
                      96.049
                      165.001—
                      165.006,
                      165.020—
                      165.034,
                      165.045—
                      165.050,
2151      6-28-1971   165.065—
                      165.067,
                      165.080—
                      165.084,
                      165.086—
                      165.090,
                      165.999
2163      11-22-1971  72.05
                      159.01,
                      159.02,
                      159.15—
2169      12-20-1971  159.18,
                      159.30—
                      159.42,
                      159.99
2176      5-8-1972    150.130,
                      150.131
2226      2-25-1974   119.026
2343      6-24-1974   51.091
2244      7-8-1974    120.41
2249      10-14-1974  150.100—
                      150.104
2252      11-25-1974  30.01
                      93.26,
                      93.28—
2257      1-14-1975   93.30,
                      93.32,
                      93.33
                      119.025,
                      119.027,
2275      7-8-1975    119.028,
                      119.030,
                      119.034
2290      11-11-1975  119.029,
                      119.031
2293      11-25-1975  150.001
2038      3-23-1976   117.022
2303      3-23-1976   113.023,
                      113.024
2304      3-23-1976   150.146
2305      3-23-1976   115.108
2306      3-23-1976   115.038
2307      3-23-1976   123.018
2311      3-23-1976   123.047
2315      3-23-1976   115.197
2319      3-23-1976   123.031
2320      3-23-1976   115.022
2321      3-23-1976   118.003
2322      3-23-1976   117.004
2325      3-23-1976   113.003
2337      3-27-1976   115.088
2329      4-13-1976   165.120
2330      4-27-1976   150.045—
                      150.050
2331      4-27-1976   150.080
2332      4-27-1976   150.045—
                      150.050
2333      4-27-1976   51.035,
                      51.037
2336      4-27-1976   91.01—
                      91.12
2344      6-22-1976   52.001
2353      10-12-1976  113.172
2340      11-25-1976  150.067
2371      7-12-1977   150.115,
                      150.116
2385      1-10-1978   120.41
                      93.21,
                      93.23,
2257      1-14-1978   93.24,
                      93.27,
                      93.31
2287      1-14-1978   93.25
2393      3-14-1978   72.08
2395      3-28-1978   51.001
2396      4-11-1978   165.022
2397      4-11-1978   165.022
2400      5-9-1978    72.08
2413      8-8-1978    52.004
                      155.01—
                      155.04,
2419      10-24-1978  155.15—
                      155.25,
                      155.40—
                      155.42
2431      12-12-1978  33.017
2436      1-23-1979   72.11
2455      1-23-1979   158.01,
                      158.02
2442      2-27-1979   72.11
2452      4-10-1979   52.004
2404      10-9-1979   165.022
                      159.01,
                      159.02,
                      159.15—
2479      10-9-1979   159.18,
                      159.30—
                      159.42,
                      159.99
                      120.17,
2480      10-9-1979   120.41,
                      120.99
2482      10-9-1979   165.089,
                      165.999
2492      11-27-1979  72.12
2515      6-24-1980   115.147
                      159.01,
                      159.02,
                      159.15—
2522      9-9-1980    159.18,
                      159.30—
                      159.42,
                      159.99
2526      9-23-1980   150.115
2531      11-11-1980  52.004
2535      11-25-1980  34.04
2558      7-28-1981   52.001
2587      7-29-1982   35.09
2594      9-28-1982   33.016
2636      10-11-1983  50.10
2650      3-27-1984   121.20—
                      121.29
2653      3-27-1984   160.01—
                      160.05
2675      12-26-1984  154.01
2677      1-8-1985    150.160—
                      150.162
2683      3-26-1985   72.12
2693      6-11-1985   160.01—
                      160.05
2696      6-11-1985   33.080—
                      33.082
2706      7-9-1985    37.075—
                      37.082
2710      7-23-1985   33.060—
                      33.067
2741      12-10-1985  35.06
2744      12-30-1985  33.080
86-08     2-11-1986   150.115—
                      150.117
86-19     4-30-1986   35.10
86-21     5-13-1986   50.02
88-29     6-10-1986   92.23
86-52     11-25-1986  93.22
87-71     3-10-1987   118.018
1781      4-22-1987   51.054
87-100    11-24-1987  35.04
87-104    12-8-1987   50.10
88-110    1-26-1988   72.12
88-143    10-11-1988  116.01—
                      116.03
                      33.001—
88-144    10-25-1988  33.015,
                      34.01
88-145    10-25-1988  33.020
88-152    12-13-1988  94.50—
                      94.56
89-76     9-12-1989   91.25—
                      91.31
89-184    10-10-1989  154.01
90-201    1-23-1990   154.01
90-202    1-23-1990   120.41
90-205    3-15-1990   154.01
90-220    5-22-1990   31.02
90-229    7-10-1990   113.040—
                      113.046
91-268    5-28-1991   93.99
91-284    9-10-1991   70.002,
                      70.999
91-296    11-26-1991  92.06
92-317    7-14-1992   154.01
92-944    12-22-1992  33.019
93-204    1-26-1993   52.004
93-210    3-9-1993    35.03
93-211    3-9-1993    35.03
93-215    4-13-1993   165.023
93-234    10-26-1993  130.03,
                      130.99
93-240    12-14-1993  32.04
94-246    1-11-1994   33.004
94-262    2-22-1994   35.03
94-277    5-10-1994   93.99
94-294    7-26-1994   131.03,
                      131.99
94-300    8-9-1994    131.02,
                      131.99
                      98.001—
                      98.004,
                      98.006—
                      98.013,
94-301    8-9-1994    98.060—
                      98.062,
                      98.064,
                      98.065,
                      98.075—
                      98.079
94-305    8-23-1994   32.03
95-323    1-24-1995   33.020
95-342    8-8-1995    165.085
                      52.050—
95-366    11-28-1995  52.054,
                      52.072
96-374    2-27-1996   113.155—
                      113.159
96-382    3-26-1996   33.018
96-383    3-26-1996   165.023
96-394    5-28-1996   36.01
96-408    9-10-1996   52.004
97-137    3-11-1997   165.085
97-152    6-24-1997   93.34
97-186    12-9-1997   37.076
98-196    2-24-1998   165.003,
                      165.999
98-201    5-12-1998   35.02
98-218    9-8-1998    52.004
99-239    1-26-1999   52.004
99-247    4-6-1999    150.002,
                      150.999
99-251    4-27-1999   133.40—
                      133.44
99-252    4-27-1999   73.01—
                      73.09
99-256    5-25-1999   165.003,
                      165.023
99-286    12-14-1999  38.01—
                      38.17
                      111.01—
                      111.07,
                      111.20—
                      111.39,
99-287    12-14-1999  111.50—
                      111.57,
                      111.59—
                      111.65,
                      111.99
                      52.030—
2000-295  2-8-2000    52.032,
                      52.999
2000-297  2-22-2000   33.019
2000-298  2-22-2000   93.99
00-332    9-26-2000   115.180—
                      115.184
00-340    12-2-2000   37.001—
                      37.019
2001-353  6-26-2001   72.13
2001-370  10-9-2001   50.10
                      122.040—
2001-377  11-13-2001  122.095,
                      122.999
02-401    6-25-2002   96.030—
                      96.032
03-437    5-27-2003   73.03
03-455    10-14-2003  52.004
                      115.160—
03-470    12-9-2003   115.166,
                      115.999
04-476    3-9-2004    165.023
04-483    4-27-2004   93.20
04-486    5-11-2004   34.02
05-536    2-8-2005    165.003
05-565    9-13-2005   35.01
05-569    11-8-2005   130.04,
                      130.99
                      52.001—
                      52.013,
                      52.015—
06-007    1-24-2006   52.017,
                      52.023,
                      52.024,
                      52.999,
                      150.052
06-015    3-14-2006   33.048
06-019    3-28-2006   11.01—
                      11.13
                      93.01—
06-035    6-27-2006   93.07,
                      93.99
                      98.062,
06-042    7-25-2006   98.076,
                      98.077
07-053    1-9-2007    94.52
                      70.060—
                      70.063,
07-060    2-27-2007   70.068—
                      70.071,
                      70.999
07-068    4-10-2007   114.001—
                      114.008
07-074    4-24-2007   52.004
07-078    5-8-2007    161.01—
                      161.15
07-087    6-26-2007   96.015—
                      96.018
                      163.01—
07-103    10-9-2007   163.22,
                      163.99
                      122.001—
07-104    10-9-2007   122.005,
                      122.095
07-105    10-9-2007   122.020—
                      122.028
08-007    2-26-2008   93.35,
                      93.99
08-016    6-10-2008   112.01—
                      112.03
                      156.001—
                      156.009,
                      156.020—
                      156.031,
                      156.045—
                      156.047,
08-023    7-22-2008   156.060—
                      156.062,
                      156.075—
                      156.077,
                      156.090—
                      156.093,
                      156.999
09-047    1-13-2009   96.001—
                      96.003
09-048    1-27-2009   92.06,
                      92.22
09-075    8-25-2009   92.01—
                      92.06
10-096    4-13-2010   32.03
10-099    4-27-2010   32.02
10-109    9-14-2010   92.21
11-122    1-25-2011   133.20—
                      133.25
11-128    4-12-2011   30.20—
                      30.23
11-134    7-12-2011   51.015—
                      51.022
11-135    7-26-2011   33.018
                      164.01—
                      164.12,
                      164.25—
                      164.30,
11-141    8-23-2011   164.45—
                      164.49,
                      164.60—
                      164.63,
                      164.99
                      157.01—
                      157.11,
11-144    10-11-2011  157.25—
                      157.31,
                      157.99
11-152    12-13-2011  121.25
12-162    2-28-2012   52.004
12-164    2-28-2012   32.01
                      121.01—
12-165    2-28-2012   121.05,
                      121.99
                      150.015—
                      150.022,
12-168    3-13-2012   150.024—
                      150.033,
                      150.999
                      162.01—
12-172    3-27-2012   162.18,
                      162.99
12-185    6-12-2012   165.007,
                      165.023
12-186    6-12-2012   111.36
12-190    6-26-2012   153.01
12-207    9-25-2012   31.03
13-233    6-25-2013   34.01
2013-238  7-23-2013   70.025—
                      70.028
                      33.035—
2013-253  11-26-2013  33.041,
                      33.043—
                      33.047
                      110.01—
                      110.07,
                      110.20—
2014-001  1-14-2014   110.33,
                      110.45—
                      110.50,
                      110.99
2014-002  1-14-2014   33.018
2014-003  1-14-2014   70.001,
                      70.999
                      52.001—
                      52.013,
2014-007  2-11-2014   52.015—
                      52.024,
                      52.999,
                      150.052
2014-015  3-25-2014   39.01
2014-016  4-8-2014    111.26
2014-018  4-22-2014   30.05
                      165.003,
                      165.105—
2014-040  7-8-2014    165.117,
                      165.119—
                      165.131,
                      165.999
2014-047  10-28-2014  119.095—
                      119.105
                      70.061,
                      70.063,
2014-052  11-11-2014  70.065,
                      70.067—
                      70.070
2015-002  1-13-2015   91.01—
                      91.12
2015-003  1-13-2015   33.042
2015-009  2-24-2015   72.01
2015-013  3-24-2015   72.08
                      70.065,
2015-022  7-28-2015   70.068,
                      70.070,
                      70.999
2015-021  8-25-2015   39.01
                      165.003,
2015-029  9-22-2015   165.023,
                      165.025
                      10.12,
                      10.99,
                      30.01 ,
                      30.20,
                      31.02,
                      32.02,
                      33.002,
                      33.048,
                      34.01,
                      35.03,
                      35.04,
                      35.09,
                      36.01,
                      50.01—
                      50.04,
                      50.10,
                      50.26,
                      51.001—
                      51.003,
                      51.015—
                      51.020,
2015-033  11-10-2015  51.022,
                      51.035—
                      51.039,
                      51.050—
                      51.055,
                      51.070—
                      51.074,
                      51.085—
                      51.091,
                      51.105—
                      51.109,
                      52.001—
                      52.013,
                      52.015—
                      52.024,
                      52.030—
                      52.032,
                      52.050—
                      52.054,
                      52.065—
                      52.072,
                      52.999
                      52.014,
                      150.002,
                      150.020,
                      150.025,
2015-040  12-8-2015   150.032,
                      150.052,
                      151.01,
                      151.02,
                      151.99
                      70.001—
                      70.009,
                      70.025—
                      70.028,
                      70.060—
                      70.071,
                      70.085—
                      70.095,
                      70.999,
                      71.01—
2016-001  1-12-2016   71.19,
                      71.30—
                      71.34,
                      72.03,
                      72.08—
                      72.10,
                      72.13,
                      73.01—
                      73.09,
                      74.01—
                      74.03
                      11.02,
                      11.03,
2016-002  2-9-2016    11.05,
                      11.07,
                      11.08,
                      11.10
2016-003  2-9-2016    36.01
2016-004  2-23-2016   164.26
2016-006  2-23-2016   72.13
2016-017  5-24-2016   150.023
2017-003  2-14-2017   35.11
                      90.001,
                      90.015—
                      90.025,
                      90.040—
                      90.048,
                      90.060—
                      90.065,
                      90.080—
                      90.083,
                      90.095—
                      90.104,
                      90.115—
                      90.121,
                      91.01—
                      91.12,
                      91.25—
                      91.31,
                      92.01—
                      92.06,
                      92.21—
                      92.23,
                      93.01—
                      93.07,
                      93.20—
                      93.35,
                      93.99,
                      94.01—
2017-005  2-27-2017   94.05,
                      94.20—
                      94.38,
                      94.50—
                      94.56,
                      95.001—
                      95.006,
                      95.020,
                      96.001—
                      96.003,
                      96.015—
                      96.018,
                      96.030—
                      96.032,
                      96.045—
                      96.049,
                      97.01—
                      97.13,
                      97.99,
                      98.001—
                      98.004,
                      98.006—
                      98.013,
                      98.060—
                      98.062,
                      98.064,
                      98.065,
                      98.075—
                      98.079
2017-027  6-27-2017   110.08
2018-001  1-9-2018    34.07
2018-009  2-13-2018   130.20,
                      130.27
2018-013  2-27-2018   70.010
2018-021  3-27-2018   39.01
2018-027  4-24-2018   111.66
2018-029  5-8-2018    110.49,
                      110.50
2018-032  5-22-2018   99.01—
                      99.03
2018-037  7-24-2018   152.01—
                      152.07
                      39.01,
                      111.36,
                      113.185—
                      113.189,
2018-049  9-25-2018   113.200—
                      113.208,
                      113.999,
                      130.02,
                      132.02
2019-015  5-28-2019   30.21
2019-016  5-28-2019   30.06,
                      31.02
2019-029  7-16-2019   30.07,
                      30.08
                      150.053,
2019-042  8-27-2019   150.054,
                      Ch. 150, App. A
2019-043  8-27-2019   30.07,
                      30.08
2019-045  9-30-2019   37.060—
                      37.064
2019-048  10-22-2019  50.02,
                      50.08
2020-003  1-28-2020   72.01
2020-007  2-25-2020   34.07
                      112.01,
2020-008  2-25-2020   112.02,
                      112.04,
                      112.99
                      165.003,
2020-010  2-25-2020   165.007,
                      165.023,
                      165.025
2020-012  3-10-2020   37.125
2020-019  5-26-2020   130.21—
                      130.26
2020-022  7-16-2020   35.12
2020-030  8-25-2020   124.01—
                      124.12
                      90.001,
2020-031  8-25-2020   90.135—
                      90.138
2020-036  9-22-2020   73.02,
                      73.03
                      30.01 ,
2021-013A 6-8-2021    30.20—
                      30.22
2021-013B 6-8-2021    30.05—
                      31.07
2021-015  6-22-2021   115.037
                      165.003,
2021-019  6-22-2021   165.007,
                      165.023,
                      165.086
2021-020  6-22-2021   72.01
                      32.05,
2021-024  7-13-2021   51.020—
                      51.022,
                      162.15
2021-25   7-27-2021   123.075—
                      123.082
2021-29   8-24-2021   95.070—
                      95.083
                      72.01,
2021-030  8-24-2021   72.08,
                      72.14,
                      72.15
2021-031  8-24-2021   72.13
2021-032  8-24-2021   11.05,
                      11.10
2021-034  9-14-2021   50.02
2021-036  9-14-2021   90.062,
                      90.065
2021-038  9-14-2021   92.20,
                      92.22
                      150.117,
                      165.003,
                      165.007,
                      165.022,
                      165.029,
                      165.032,
                      165.033,
2021-043  9-14-2021   165.048,
                      165.080—
                      165.082,
                      165.085—
                      165.089,
                      165.127,
                      165.129,
                      165.130
2021-052  10-26-2021  72.02
2021-053  10-26-2021  50.01,
                      50.04
2021-054  11-9-2021   111.58
2021-055  11-23-2021  30.01
2021-056  11-23-2021  72.13
                      165.003,
                      165.007,
2021-062  12-14-2021  165.023,
                      165.033,
                      165.089,
                      165.113
2021-063  12-14-2021  75.01—
                      75.06
2022-002  1-11-2022   30.01
2022-003  1-11-2022   165.027
2022-007  1-25-2022   39.01
2022-010  2-22-2022   90.100
                      110.45,
2022-011  2-22-2022   110.47,
                      110.49
2022-013  2-22-2022   72.01
2022-014  2-22-2022   Ch. 76, Schd. I
                      96.060—
2022-022  3-22-2022   96.075,
                      96.999
2022-023  3-22-2022   33.040,
                      33.041
2022-024  3-22-2022   111.22,
                      111.58
2022-021  4-12-2022   92.20
2022-030  4-26-2022   115.210—
                      115.213
2022-031  4-26-2022   150.026
2022-032  4-26-2022   95.035—
                      95.041
                      39.01,
                      73.02,
                      73.03,
2022-033  4-26-2022   73.06,
                      73.07,
                      73.09,
                      73.99
2022-034  5-10-2022   52.024
2022-035  5-24-2022   Ch. 77, Schd. I
2022-039  6-29-2022   33.018
2022-043  7-26-2022   165.025
                      52.020,
2022-046  8-23-2022   52.021,
                      52.023
2022-047  9-13-2022   52.024
2022-049  10-11-2022  165.023,
                      165.025
2022-054  10-11-2022  33.018
2022-058  10-25-2022  Ch. 77, Schd. II
2022-062  10-25-2022  165.003,
                      165.023
2022-064  12-13-2022  50.08
2022-065  12-13-2022  150.101
2023-003  1-10-2023   97.06,
                      97.99
2023-004  1-10-2023   Ch. 76, Sch. II
2023-006  1-24-2023   111.40,
                      111.41
2023-007  1-24-2023   130.06
                      39.01,
                      50.01 -
                      50.04,
2023-008  1-24-2023   50.07,
                      50.08,
                      50.10,
                      50.99
2023-009  2-14-2023   Ch. 76, Sch. II
2023-011  2-28-2023   150.025
2023-020  3-30-2023   95.059
2023-021  4-25-2023   39.01
2023-022  3-30-2023   52.005
2023-023  3-30-2023   111.58
2023-026  4-25-2023   Ch. 77, Sch. I
                      165.109,
                      165.110,
                      165.112,
2023-030  5-23-2023   165.116,
                      165.117,
                      165.120,
                      165.121
2023-033  7-20-2023   72.03
                      121.20 -
                      121.24,
2023-034  6-27-2023   121.26 -
                      121.29,
                      121.99
                      100.01 -
2023-035  8-22-2023   100.04,
                      100.99
2023-036  8-22-2023   71.01
2023-037  8-22-2023   52.011
2023-038  9-12-2023   Ch. 76, Sch. II
                      98.001 -
                      98.014,
2023-039  9-26-2023   98.060 -
                      98.065,
                      98.075 -
                      98.079
2023-040  10-24-2023  34.05
                      90.137,
                      94.01,
2023-041  10-24-2023  94.39,
                      96.063,
                      96.073,
                      110.21
2023-043  12-12-2023  34.06
                      165.003,
2024-001  1-23-2024   165.023,
                      165.029
2024-005  1-23-2024   119.125 -
                      119.133
2024-006  1-23-2024   32.060
2024-007  1-23-2024   Ch. 77, Sch. I 
2024-009  3-12-2024   165.025
2024-013  4-9-2024    72.14
2024-015  4-9-2024    71.20
2024-016  4-9-2024    111.58
2024-020  4-23-2024   Ch. 77, Sch. I
2024-021  4-23-2024   72.16,
                      72.17
2024-022  4-23-2024   30.01
2024-023  4-23-2024   92.20
2024-030  5-28-2024   39.01
2024-031  6-25-2024   Ch. 77, Sch. I
2024-032  6-25-2024   150.116,
                      150.117
                      110.01,
2024-033  8-13-2024   110.02,
                      110.09
2024-034  8-27-2024   165.035
2024-035  8-27-2024   95.090 -
                      95.098
2024-036  8-27-2024   75.08
                      165.046,
2024-037  8-27-2024   165.047,
                      165.089
2024-038  8-27-2024   72.18
2024-040  10-8-2024   111.26,
                      111.58
2024-041  10-8-2024   Ch. 77, Sch. II
2024-042  10-22-2024  51.004
2024-043  10-22-2024  Ch. 76, Sch. II
2024-044  10-22-2024  Ch. 76, Sch. II
2024-046  10-22-2024  150.117
2024-048  11-26-2024  Ch. 76, Sch. II
2025-001  1-28-2025   37.135
2025-002  1-28-2025   37.145
2025-009  1-28-2025   150.116,
                      150.117
2025-015  3-11-2025   72.01
2025-017  4-22-2025   165.023,
                      165.025
                      92.01,
2025-018  6-24-2025   92.02,
                      92.20
2025-019  4-22-2025   116.40 -
                      116.48
2025-020  4-22-2025   150.068
2025-021  5-27-2025   123.079
2025-022  5-27-2025   165.023
2025-025  5-27-2025   165.023
2025-026  5-27-2025   39.01
2025-027  5-27-2025   162.11
2025-028  5-27-2025   93.36
2025-029  6-24-2025   72.08
2025-030  6-24-2025   118.018,
                      118.019
2025-031  6-24-2025   110.22
                      150.021 -
2025-032  6-24-2025   150.026,
                      150.028 -
                      150.030
2025-033  6-24-2025   151.01
2025-034  6-24-2025   165.023
2025-036  6-24-2025   165.003,
                      165.023
2025-040  9-23-2025   150.170 -
                      150.183
2025-042  8-12-2025   75.08
2025-043  8-12-2025   150.021
2025-044  8-26-2025   111.26
2025-046  8-26-2025   Ch. 76, Sch. I
2025-054  10-14-2025  Ch. 76, Sch. II
2025-063  11-25-2025  70.040 -
                      70.042
2025-064  11-25-2025  90.050 -
                      90.053
2025-070  11-25-2025  165.023
2025-075  12-16-2025  Ch. 76, Sch. I
2025-076  12-16-2025  70.040
2025-077  12-16-2025  165.023
                     
   
