VILLAGE CODE
OF
CAMPTON HILLS, IL
Code current through:
Ord. O-25-30, passed 9-16-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the Village of Campton Hills, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance O-25-30, passed September 16, 2025.
Ordinances of the Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions
of this code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
Consult the Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular
provision of the code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they have not been incorporated into
the code and they may not show the original ordinances in their entirety.
Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions concerning
the ordinances listed.
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
CAMPTON HILLS VILLAGE CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Interpretation And Application Of Provisions
1-1-4: Amendments
1-1-5: Distribution Of Copies
1-1-6: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the village board of trustees, this code is hereby
declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official village code of
Campton Hills. This code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the CAMPTON
HILLS VILLAGE CODE, or the VILLAGE CODE OF CAMPTON HILLS, or the VILLAGE CODE
and is hereby published by authority of the village board of trustees and shall
be supplemented to incorporate the most recent legislation of the village as
provided in section
1-1-4 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this code by title in any legal documents. (2013 Code §1-1-1)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the village of general and permanent effect, except
the excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (2013 Code § 1-1-2)
1-1-3: INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
In the interpretation and application of any provisions of this code, they
shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any
provision of this code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter
than the general provision imposed by this code, the provision imposing the
greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. (2013 Code
§ 1-1-3)
1-1-4: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and unless otherwise provided,
this shall constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement
pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code.
All such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to
the codifier, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion
in its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall
be properly identified and distributed as set forth in section
1-1-5 of this chapter. (2013 Code § 1-1-4; amd. 2016 Code)
1-1-5: DISTRIBUTION OF COPIES:
All of the printed copies of this code belonging to the village shall be
deposited with the clerk. The clerk shall deliver one copy thereof to the
president and each member of the board of trustees, and copies to such other
persons as the president may direct. (2013 Code § 1-1-5)
1-1-6: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted or which will cause
the law of the village to be misrepresented thereby. Replacement pages may be
inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
village board of trustees. The village clerk shall see that the replacement
pages are properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of
the clerk. Any person having custody of a copy of this code shall make every
effort to maintain said code current as to the most recent ordinances passed.
Such person shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages
when such are delivered or made available to such person through the office of
the village clerk. Said code books, while in actual possession of officials and
other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the village and
shall be returned to the office of the village clerk when directed so to do by
order of the village board of trustees. (2013 Code § 1-1-6)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the village passed prior to the adoption of this code
and amending this code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this
code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to
the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the
following ordinances which are not hereby repealed:
   A.   Tax levy ordinances;
   B.   Appropriation ordinances;
   C.   Ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
   D.   Franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to
persons or corporations;
   E.   Contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants;
   F.   Salary ordinances;
   G.   Ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other
public places;
   H.   Improvement ordinances;
   I.   Bond ordinances;
   J.   Ordinances relating to elections;
   K.   Ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or
from the village;
   L.   Zoning ordinances; and
   M.   All special ordinances. (2016 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue of section
1-2-1 of this chapter, excepting as this code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances with respect to such provisions only. (2016 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not,
as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act
done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued
or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect
any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either
by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making
any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Current Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the village herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the village under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this code. (2016 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
The sections, subsections, paragraphs, clauses and phrases of this code are
severable, and if any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase of this code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional, invalid, unenforceable or ineffective by a valid judgment or
decree by any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality,
invalidity, unenforceability or ineffectiveness shall not affect any of the
remaining portions of this code, or any part thereof. The village board of
trustees hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any
one or more sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be
declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (2013 Code § 1-2-1)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: General Definitions
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
   A.   Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural
number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons,
any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or
person is referred to in this code by words importing the singular number only,
or a particular gender, several matters, parties or persons and the opposite
gender and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that
these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this code
which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the
subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto.
   B.   All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in
this code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and
meaning of the board of trustees may be fully carried out. (2013 Code § 1-3-1)
1-3-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto or unless a different meaning or definition is set forth in a
particular title or chapter of this code:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
BOARD, BOARD OF TRUSTEES, VILLAGE BOARD: Unless otherwise indicated, the
president and trustees of the village of Campton Hills.
CODE: The village code of the village of Campton Hills.
COMPUTATION OF TIME: The time within which any act provided by law is to be
done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last,
unless the last day is a Saturday or Sunday or is a holiday as defined or fixed
in any statute now or hereafter in force in this state, and then it shall also
be excluded. If the day succeeding such Saturday, Sunday, or holiday is also a
holiday or a Saturday or Sunday, then such succeeding day shall also be
excluded.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The president and board of trustees.
CORPORATE LIMITS OR VILLAGE LIMITS: The legal boundaries of the village of
Campton Hills.
COUNTY: The county of Kane, state of Illinois.
DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY: Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a
department or some other village officer to do some act or perform some duty,
it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer
to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act
or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify
otherwise.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a village employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
village of Campton Hills".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the village for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation or for the issuance of any permit or acceptance of an
application for a permit.
FISCAL YEAR: Shall begin on May 1 and end on April 30 of the following year.
GENDER: A word importing either the masculine or feminine gender only shall
extend and be applied to the other gender and to persons, firms, partnerships
and corporations.
JOINT AUTHORITY: All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority
of such persons or officers unless otherwise provided by ordinance or statute.
KNOWINGLY: Imports only a knowledge that facts exist which brings the act or
omission within the provisions of this code. The term does not require any
knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense deemed a violation of the provisions of this code
which is a lesser offense than a felony as defined by state law.
MONTH: A calendar month.
NEGLIGENT, NEGLECT, NEGLIGENCE AND NEGLIGENTLY: Imports a want of such
attention to the nature or probable consequences of the act or omission as a
prudent man ordinarily bestows in acting in his own concern.
NONTECHNICAL AND TECHNICAL WORDS: Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the sensibilities of reasonable
persons, or any act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health
and welfare of inhabitants of the village, or any activity which, by its
perpetuation, can reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the
property of a person or persons within the community.
NUMBER: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to
several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
OATH: Shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by
law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the
words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and
"affirmed".
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a village officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the village
of Campton Hills".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
joint venture, limited liability company, organization, government or any other
group acting as a unit, as well as a natural person. The word "person" shall
include the singular and the plural.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
REAL PROPERTY: Shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
RETAIL: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to
the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RETAILER: Any person engaged in the sale at retail.
SIDEWALK: Any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line, intended for the use of pedestrians.
STATE: The state of Illinois.
STREET OR ROADWAY: Shall include streets, avenues, roads, boulevards, alleys,
lanes, courts, viaducts, public ways, public squares, public places and
sidewalks, and all areas between the property lines and dedicated, by common
law or otherwise, to the public use.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person
holding possession of the building or land pursuant to a written or oral lease
or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or
with others, excluding the owner of the premises.
TRUSTEE OR TRUSTEES: Elected or appointed members of the board of trustees.
VILLAGE: The village of Campton Hills, county of Kane, state of Illinois.
WHOLESALER AND WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall
be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things
to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WILFULLY: When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted,
implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the omission
referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law, or to injure
another, or to acquire an advantage.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by such
person's proper mark. (2013 Code § 1-3-2)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. (2013 Code § 1-3-3)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Nonliability Of Officers And Employees
1-4-4: Minor Offenses; Citations And Fines
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
   A.   General Penalty Imposed:
      1.   Fine; Imprisonment: Unless specifically provided elsewhere in this
code, any person found to have been in violation of any of the terms and
provisions of this code shall be fined in an amount not less than one hundred
dollars ($100) but not exceeding seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). No
imprisonment for failure to pay such fine, penalty or cost shall exceed six (6)
months for each offense. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed to
be a separate offense.
      2.   Additional Penalties: In addition to the fine described in
subsection A1 of this section, the circuit court may impose a period of
"conditional discharge", as defined in 730 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-1-4,
or "court supervision", as defined in 730 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-1-21,
for a period of up to six (6) months, an order of restitution, an order to
perform community service, an order to complete an education program and/or any
other appropriate penalties or conditions authorized in any section of this
code or stand alone ordinance or any conditions for conditional discharge set
forth in 730 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-6-3 or for court supervision in 730
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5-6-3.1, as the foregoing are amended from time to
time.
      3.   Costs And Fees: Any person violating the terms or provisions of this
code shall be subject, in addition to the penalties set out in this subsection
A, to the payment of court costs and reasonable attorney fees.
      4.   Default In Payment: A default in the payment of a fine or any
installment of a fine may be collected by any means authorized for the
collection of monetary judgments. The village may retain attorneys and private
collection agents for the purpose of collecting any default in payment of any
fine or installment of that fine. Any fees or costs incurred by the village
with respect to attorneys or private collection agents retained by the village
under this subsection shall be charged to the offender.
   B.   Acts Consistent With Criminal Laws Of State: If, by the terms of this
code or any ordinance, an act that would be consistent with the criminal laws
of the state, is declared to be a misdemeanor, the penalty therefor shall be
for a period of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary
not to exceed six (6) months, and the matter shall be prosecuted under the
rules of criminal procedure of the state, and the village shall be required to
establish guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. This subsection shall not apply to
village code provisions adopted pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-
5-1, 5/11-5-2, 5/11-5-3, 5/11-5-4, 5/11-5-5, 5/11-5-6, 5/11-40-1, 5/11-40-2, 5/
11-40-3, 5/11-80-9 and 5/11-80-16.
   C.   Limitation; Compliance With Statute: The provisions of subsection A of
this section notwithstanding, no penalty shall be greater than that established
by state statute for the same offense.(2013 Code § 1-4-1; amd. 2016 Code; Ord.
O-23-05, 2- -2023)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application Of Penalty: The penalty provided in this chapter shall be
applicable to every section of this code which does not provide for a specific
penalty as though it were a part of each and every separate section.
   B.   Acts Punishable Under Different Sections: In all cases where the same
offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of
this code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not
more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same
offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be
considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
   C.   Breach Of Provisions: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to
do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code and
there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply. (2013 Code § 1-4-2)
1-4-3: NONLIABILITY OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the village board of trustees to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the
duty. (2013 Code § 1-4-3)
1-4-4: MINOR OFFENSES; CITATIONS AND FINES:
   A.   Citation Instead Of Complaint:
      1.   Authority: Whenever a police officer is authorized to arrest a
person without a warrant because of a violation of an ordinance or this code,
he may, in lieu of filing a complaint in court, in the first instance, issue to
the violator a citation.
      2.   Contents: Citations issued pursuant to subsection A1 of this section
shall contain language:
         a.   Advising said person that he has violated a specified section of
this code or specified ordinance;
         b.   Requesting him to make payment in an amount applicable to said
alleged violation as set forth in subsection D of this section as settlement of
said violation claim; and
         c.   Informing him that upon failure to so settle, a complaint will be
filed in the circuit court of the 16th judicial circuit charging him with such
violation, and such citation constitutes a notice to appear to answer such
complaint.
   B.   Payment In Lieu Of Fine Authorized:
      1.   Pursuant to a citation issued as set forth in this section, the
person so accused of said violation may settle and compromise the violation
claim by paying to the village the applicable amount as shown in the schedule
set forth in subsection D of this section within a period to be specified in
said citation but not more than fourteen (14) days from the time said alleged
offense was committed.
      2.   Such payment shall be made in accordance with the instructions
contained in the citation at the office of the village clerk, and a receipt
shall issue for the money so received. Such payment shall promptly be remitted
to the village treasurer.
   C.   Procedure Upon Nonpayment: In the event that the person to whom a
citation is issued pursuant to this section fails to settle and pay said
violation claim within the prescribed time or within a period of time specified
in a final notice, then the village or the village police department is
authorized to file a complaint and to prosecute the same in the 16th judicial
circuit court.
   In addition, in the event a fine or penalty is assessed pursuant any
provision of this code, a default in the payment of a fine or penalty or any
installment of a fine or penalty may be collected by any means authorized for
the collection of monetary judgments. The village and the village attorney or
the finance director or their designees may retain attorneys and private
collection agents for the purpose of collecting any default in payment of any
fine or penalty imposed by this code, or any installment of a fine or penalty.
The village shall add a thirty five percent (35%) cost of collections to any
outstanding balance that requires the village to retain the services of a
collection agency. This thirty five percent (35%) cost includes any default in
a fine or penalty or any installment of a fine or penalty that was previously
referred to an attorney or private collection agency and the payment of which
remains outstanding.
   D.   Amounts Of Payments:
      1.   The violation claim described in a citation issued pursuant to the
terms of this section may be settled, compromised and paid in the respective
amounts set forth in the following schedule:
         a.   In the event that said payment is made within fourteen (14) days
after the delivery of the citation, the following amounts shall be accepted as
settlement:
Violation Of This Code Relative To: Fine
Violation Of This Code Relative To:                          Fine
Parking                                                      $ 25.00
Curfew                                                       100.00
Possession of non-cannabis related drug paraphernalia        250.00
Possession of cannabis in excess of the limits imposed by    250.00
410 ILCS 705/10-10
Underage possession or consumption of alcohol                250.00
Underage possession or consumption of cannabis               250.00
All other citations (unless provided otherwise in a specific $100.00 to $750.00
code provision)
For all other citations, fines double for the second and subsequent offenses up
to a maximum of $750.00
 
         b.   In the event that payment has not been made within fourteen (14)
days after delivery of the citation and a final notice has been delivered, the
following amounts shall be accepted as settlement:
Violation Of This Code Relative To: Fine
Violation Of This Code Relative To:                 Fine
Parking                                             $ 50.00
Curfew                                              200.00
Possession of non-cannabis related drug             500.00
paraphernalia
Possession of cannabis in excess of the limits      500.00
imposed by 410 ILCS 705/10-10
Underage possession or consumption of alcohol       500.00
Underage possession or consumption of cannabis      500.00
All other citations (unless provided otherwise in a Fine doubles after 14 days
specific code provision)
For all other citations, fines double for the second and subsequent offenses
up to a maximum of $750.00
 
      2.   In the event that payment is not made within the time prescribed in
the final notice and a complaint is filed in the circuit court or in
administrative adjudication, payment of any fine and costs shall be in such
amounts as may be determined and established by the circuit court or the
administrative adjudication hearing officer.
   E.   Method Of Delivery: Any citation, notice or complaint referred to in
this section may be delivered by personal service or mailed by first class mail
addressed to the last known address of the person named in the document being
served; if mailed, the document is presumed to have been delivered on the third
day after mailing.
   F.   Presumption Of Traffic Violation: The fact that an automobile or motor
vehicle which is illegally operated or parked is then currently registered with
the secretary of state of the state of Illinois in the name of a person shall
be considered prima facie proof that said person was in control of, or had
authorized the use of, or was the operator of the automobile or motor vehicle
at the time of such alleged violation. (2016 Code; amd. Ord. O-19-21, 12-17-
2019; Ord. O-20-01, 1-7-2020; Ord. O-23-05, 2- -2023)
ARTICLE A. ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION PROCEDURES
SECTION:
1-4A-1: Statute Authority; Procedures Established; Not Exclusive
1-4A-2: Definitions
1-4A-3: Code Hearing Division
1-4A-4: Violation Notices
1-4A-5: Hearings
1-4A-6: Rights Of Occupants Regarding Building Code Violations
1-4A-7: Defenses To Building Code Violations
1-4A-8: Findings, Decision And Order
1-4A-9: Sanctions Applicable To Owner
1-4A-10: Rental Property Owners
1-4A-11: Judicial Review
1-4A-12: Enforcement Of Judgment
1-4A-13: Application For Grants To Defray Costs
1-4A-14: Impact On Existing Administrative Adjudication Systems
1-4A-1: STATUTE AUTHORITY; PROCEDURES ESTABLISHED; NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The village, pursuant to the authority of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-
2.2-1 et seq., and 5/11-31.1-1 et seq., hereby establishes the procedure of a
system of administrative adjudication for the adjudication of the village code
violations, including building code violations, to the extent permitted by the
Illinois constitution. As used in this article, a "system of administrative
adjudication" means the adjudication of any violation found in this code,
including building code violations, except for any offense under the Illinois
vehicle code, or any similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the
movement of vehicles, and except for any reportable offenses under 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/6-204. The adoption by the village of a system of
administrative adjudication procedures does not preclude the village from using
other methods to enforce village ordinances including, but not limited to,
relief in the circuit court for the 16th judicial circuit, Kane County,
Illinois. (2013 Code §§ 8-1-1,
8-1-3)
1-4A-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, words or terms shall have the following meanings
unless the context or usage clearly indicates that another meaning is intended:
BUILDING CODE: Any village ordinance, law, housing or building code or zoning
ordinance that establishes construction, plumbing, heating, electrical, fire
prevention, sanitation or other health and safety standards that are applicable
to structures in the village or any village ordinance that requires, after
notice, the cutting of weeds, the removal of garbage and debris, the removal of
inoperable vehicles or the abatement of nuisances from private property.
CODE: Unless the context requires otherwise, any village code or ordinance,
including any "building code" violation, as defined in this section, except for
any offense under the Illinois vehicle code or a similar offense that is a
traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles and except for a
reportable offense under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-204.
PROPERTY OWNER: The legal or beneficial owner of a property and/or structure.
SEPARATE OFFENSE or VIOLATION: A violation of a specific code section, and/or
each day that the violation exists after due notice is provided. (2013 Code §
8-1-2; amd. Ord. O-23-05, 2- -2023) 
1-4A-3: CODE HEARING DIVISION:
   A.   Established; Jurisdiction: There is hereby established a code hearing
division in the village. The code hearing division shall have the jurisdiction
to adjudicate any violation of any village code provision, previously and
hereinafter referred to as "code violations", including building code
violations, except for any offense under the Illinois vehicle code or any
similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of
vehicles, and except for any reportable offenses under 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/6-204.
   B.   Hearing Officer:
      1.   Adjudicatory hearings shall be presided over by a hearing officer.
The powers and duties of the hearing officer shall include:
         a.   Hearing testimony and accepting evidence that is relevant to the
existence of the code violations;
         b.   Issuing subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give relevant
testimony at the hearing, upon request of the parties or their representatives;
         c.   Preserving and authenticating the record of the hearing and all
the exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;
         d.   Issuing a determination, based on the evidence presented at the
hearing, of whether a code violation exists. The determination shall be in
writing and shall include a written finding of fact, decision and order,
including the fine, penalty, or action with which the defendant must comply;
and
         e.   Imposing penalties consistent with the applicable code provisions
and assessing costs upon finding a party liable for the charged violation;
except, however, that in no event shall the hearing officer have the authority
to: 1) impose a penalty of incarceration; or 2) impose a fine in excess of
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each separate violation.
      2.   Prior to conducting the administrative adjudication proceedings, the
hearing officer shall have successfully completed a formal training program,
which includes the following:
         a.   Instructions on rules of procedure of the administrative hearings
which he or she will conduct;
         b.   Orientation to each subject area of the code violations that he
or she will adjudicate;
         c.   Observation of administrative hearings; and
         d.   Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence
and issuing final orders.
      3.   In addition, the hearing officer must be an attorney who has been
licensed to practice law in the state of Illinois for at least three (3) years.
(2013 Code § 8-1-4)
1-4A-4: VIOLATION NOTICES:
   A.   When the village building and zoning officer, village code compliance
officer or other individual authorized to issue a code violation makes a
determination of a code violation, he or she shall note the violation on a
multiple copy violation notice and report form that indicates:
      1.   The name and address of the defendant;
      2.   The type and nature of the violation;
      3.   The particular ordinance or ordinances violated;
      4.   The date and time the violation was observed;
      5.   The names of witnesses to the violation;
      6.   In the case of a building code violation, the address of the
property where the violation was observed;
      7.   The fines and any penalties that may be assessed;
      8.   The legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing is
being held;
      9.   The date of issuance of the violation notice; and,
      10.   The date, time and location of the Administrative Adjudication
hearing.
   The violation report form shall be forwarded to the code hearing division
where a docket number shall be stamped on all copies of the report and a
hearing date shall be noted in the blank spaces provided for that purpose on
the form. The hearing date shall not be less than thirty (30) nor more than
forty (40) days after the notice is served. However, if the code violation
involves a village ordinance regulating truants, the hearing date shall not be
less than seven (7) nor more than forty (40) days after the violation is
reported. One copy of the violation notice and report form shall be maintained
in the files of the code hearing division and shall be part of the record of
the hearing, one copy of the report form shall be returned to the individual
representing the village in the case so that he or she may prepare evidence of
the code violation for presentation at the hearing on the date indicated, and
one copy of the report form shall be served either in person or by first class
mail to the defendant along with a summons commanding the defendant to appear
at the hearing. In regard to a building code violation, if the name of the
property owner cannot be ascertained or if the service cannot be made by mail,
service may be made on the owner by posting or nailing a copy of the violation
report form on the front door of the structure where the violation is found,
not less than twenty (20) days before the hearing is scheduled.(2013 Code § 8-
1-5; amd. 2016 Code; Ord. O-23-05, 2- -2023)
1-4A-5: HEARINGS:
   A.   Rights Of Parties: Parties shall be provided with an opportunity to
give testimony at the adjudicatory hearing and may be represented by counsel,
present witnesses, and cross examine opposing witnesses. Parties may request
the hearing officer to issue subpoenas to direct attendance and testimony of
relevant witnesses and the production of relevant documents. (2013 Code § 8-1-
5)
   B.   Rules Of Evidence Shall Not Govern: The formal and technical rules of
evidence do not apply in the adjudicatory hearing permitted under this article.
Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted only if it is a type commonly
relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs.
(2013 Code § 8-1-6)
   C.   Subpoenas And Defaults: At any time prior to the hearing date, the
hearing officer assigned to hear the case may, at the request of either party,
direct witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing. If, on the date
set for hearing, the defendant or his or her attorney fails to appear, the
hearing officer may find the defendant in default and shall proceed with the
hearing and accept evidence relevant to the existence of a code violation.
(2013 Code § 8-1-7)
   D.   Continuances: No continuance shall be authorized by the hearing officer
in proceedings under this article except in cases where a continuance is
absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the parties. Lack of preparation
shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance authorized by a hearing
officer under this article shall not exceed twenty five (25) days. (2013 Code §
8-1-8)
1-4A-6: RIGHTS OF OCCUPANTS REGARDING BUILDING CODE VIOLATIONS:
In the case of a building code violation only, no action for eviction,
abatement of a nuisance, forcible entry and detainer or other similar
proceeding shall be threatened or instituted against an occupant of a dwelling
solely because such occupant agrees to testify or testifies at a code violation
hearing. (2013 Code § 8-1-9)
1-4A-7: DEFENSES TO BUILDING CODE VIOLATIONS:
It shall be a defense to a building code violation charged under this article
if the owner, his or her attorney, or any other agent or representative proves
to the hearing officer's satisfaction that:
   A.   The code violation alleged in the notice does not in fact exist, or at
the time of the hearing, the violation has been remedied or removed;
   B.   The code violation has been caused by the current property occupants
and that in spite of reasonable attempts by the owner to maintain the dwelling
free of such violations, the current occupants continue to cause the
violations; and
   C.   An occupant or resident of the dwelling has refused entry to the owner
or his or her agent to all or part of the dwelling for the purpose of
correcting the code violation. (2013 Code § 8-1-10)
1-4A-8: FINDINGS, DECISION AND ORDER:
   A.   At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a
determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing whether or
not a code violation exists. The determination shall be in writing and shall be
designated as findings, decision, and order. The findings, decision, and order
shall include the following:
      1.   The hearing officer’s findings of fact;
      2.   A decision whether or not a code violation exists based on the
findings of fact;
      3.   Inclusion of court costs if the hearing officer’s findings of fact
indicate that a violation exists; and
      4.   An order that states the sanction which may include an order to
correct the violation, or dismisses the case if a violation is not proved.
   B.   In the case of a code violation other than a building code violation,
if a violation is proved, a monetary sanction shall be imposed. Said sanction
shall be a minimum of one hundred dollars ($100) but shall not exceed the
amount provided in section 1-2-1 of the Illinois municipal code1, currently
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each separate offense and/or
violation. In the case of a building code violation, if a code violation is
proved, the order may also impose the sanctions that are provided in the code
for the violation proved. A copy of the findings, decision and order shall be
served on the owner or defendant within five (5) days after they are issued.
Service shall be made by first class mail. (2013 Code § 8-1-11; amd. Ord. O-23-
05, 2- -2023)
1-4A-9: SANCTIONS APPLICABLE TO OWNER:
Any monetary sanction shall be considered a debt owed to the Village. The order
to correct a code violation and the sanctions imposed by the village as a
result of a finding of a code violation under this article shall attach to the
property as well as to the owner of the property, so that a finding of a code
violation against one owner cannot be avoided by conveying or transferring the
property to another owner. Any subsequent transferee or owner of property
takes, subject to the findings, decision and order of a hearing officer under
this article. (2013 Code § 8-1-12; amd. Ord. O-23-05, 2- -2023)
1-4A-10: RENTAL PROPERTY OWNERS:
   A.   For the purposes of this section, the following words and terms shall
have the meanings ascribed in this subsection:
   FAMILY UNIT: A room or group of rooms used or intended to be used as a
housekeeping unit for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. The fact that any
such family unit is used or intended to be used for cooking or eating
accommodations in common with another family unit in any such building does not
preclude liability hereunder.
   OWNER: The legal or beneficial owner of a building.
   B.   The owner of a building located in the village who, directly or
indirectly, had collected, or caused to be collected, rentals from an occupant
of that building during a period in which the number of apartments or family
units in that building exceeded the number permitted for that building by an
ordinance of the village, is liable to any such occupant in an amount equal to
not more than three (3) times the amount of any rentals paid by any such
occupant, or in his or her behalf, together with court costs and reasonable
attorney fees. If the occupant is a recipient of public aid under article III,
IV, or VI of the "Illinois public aid code", approved April 11, 1967, as
amended, in whose behalf vendor payment of the rental was made by the Illinois
department of public aid, the department of human services (acting as successor
to the department of public aid under the department of human services act), or
a local governmental unit, as the case may be, the liability as herein provided
is to the Illinois department of public aid, the department of human services
(acting as successor to the department of public aid under the department of
human services act), or the local governmental unit making the vendor payment
of the rental.
   C.   No liability accrues under this section until thirty (30) days after
the owner of record of a building has been notified in writing that such owner
is in violation of any such village ordinance. Such notice shall be personally
served upon such owner of record or sent by registered mail to the last known
address of such owner. (2013 Code § 8-1-13)
1-4A-11: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Any final decision by a hearing officer that a code violation does or does not
exist shall constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial review
and shall be subject to review under the Illinois administrative review law and
all amendments and modifications thereto. (2013 Code § 8-1-14)
1-4A-12: ENFORCEMENT OF JUDGMENT:
   A.   Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other
sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of or the
failure to exhaust judicial review procedures under the Illinois administrative
review law are a debt due and owing the village and may be collected in
accordance with applicable law.
   B.   After expiration of the period within which judicial review under the
administrative review law may be sought for a final determination of the code
violation, the village may commence a proceeding in the circuit court of the
16th judicial circuit, Kane County, Illinois, for the purpose of obtaining a
judgment on the findings, decision and order. Nothing in this section shall
prevent the village from the consolidation of multiple findings, decision and
order against a person in such a proceeding.
   C.   Upon commencement of an action to obtain a judgment on the findings,
decision and order, the village shall file a certified copy of the findings,
decision and order, which shall be accompanied by a certification that recites
facts sufficient to show that the findings, decision and order was issued in
accordance with this article and the applicable village ordinances. (2013 Code
§ 8-1-15)
   D.   Service of the summons and a copy of the petition may be by any method
provided in section 2-203 of the code of civil procedure 1 , or by certified
mail, return receipt requested; provided, that the total amount of fines, other
sanctions, and costs imposed by the findings, decision and order in any one
proceeding does not exceed that set out in section
1-4-1 of this chapter. (2013 Code § 8-1-15; amd. 2016 Code)
   E.   If the court is satisfied that the findings, decision and order was
entered in accordance with the requirements of this section and the applicable
village ordinances and that the defendant had an opportunity for a hearing
under this section and for judicial review as provided in this article:
      1.   The court shall render judgment in favor of the village and against
the defendant for the amount indicated in the findings, decision and order,
plus costs. The judgment shall have the same effect and may be enforced in the
same manner as other judgments for the recovery of money.
      2.   The court may also issue any other orders and injunctions that are
requested by the village to enforce the order of the hearing officer to correct
a code violation. (2013 Code § 8-1-15)
 
Notes
1 1. 735 ILCS 5/2-203.
1-4A-13: APPLICATION FOR GRANTS TO DEFRAY COSTS:
The village may make application to the department of commerce and economic
opportunity for grants to help defray the costs of establishing and maintaining
a code hearing division as provided in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1-
14. (2013 Code § 8-1-16)
1-4A-14: IMPACT ON EXISTING ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION SYSTEMS:
This article shall not affect the validity of systems of administrative
adjudication that were authorized by state law, including the village
ordinances, and in existence prior to the effective date hereof. (2013 Code §
8-1-17)
CHAPTER 5
VILLAGE PRESIDENT
SECTION:
1-5-1: Bond; Oath; Compensation
1-5-2: Powers And Duties
1-5-3: Voting Authority
1-5-4: President Pro Tem; Temporary Chair
1-5-1: BOND; OATH; COMPENSATION:
Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, the president shall give
a bond with sureties to be approved by the board of trustees, conditioned upon
his or her faithful performance of his or her duties, in the sum set out in
section
1-7-3 of this title. He or she shall take the oath of office as prescribed by
statute and shall receive such compensation as may be set from time to time by
the board as provided by law. (Ord. O-15-05, 3-26-2015)
1-5-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
Generally: The village president is the chief executive officer of the village,
with duties and rights and powers prescribed by the laws of the state, by this
code, or by "Robert's Rules Of Order" (when not in conflict with state law or
this code). (2013 Code § 1-5-2; amd. Ord. O-19-18, 10-15-2019)
1-5-3: VOTING AUTHORITY:
The president of the board of trustees shall not vote except in the following
situations:
   A.   The vote of the trustees has resulted in a tie; or (2013 Code § 1-6-5)
   B.   When one-half (1/2) of the trustees have voted in favor of any
ordinance, motion or resolution for the expenditure, or any ordinance even
though there is no tie vote; or (2013 Code § 1-6-5; amd. 2016 Code)
   C.   When a vote greater than a majority of the corporate authorities is
required by state statute or local ordinance to adopt an ordinance, resolution
or motion. (2013 Code § 1-6-5)
1-5-4: PRESIDENT PRO TEM; TEMPORARY CHAIR:
   A.   President Pro Tem: If a temporary absence from the village or
disability of the president incapacitates him or her from the performance of
his or her duties but does not create a vacancy in the office, the board of
trustees shall elect one of its members to act as the president pro tem. The
president pro tem, during the absence or disability of the president, shall
perform the duties and possess all the rights and powers of the president.
Nothing in this subsection shall deprive the president pro tem from voting in
his capacity as trustee, but he shall not be entitled to another vote in his
capacity as president pro tem.
   B.   Temporary Chair: If the president or president pro tem is unable or
fails to attend a meeting of the board of trustees, the board shall elect a
temporary chair who shall have the power of the presiding officer and the right
to vote in his or her capacity as trustee. (2013 Code § 1-5-4)
CHAPTER 6
VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SECTION:
1-6-1: Elected Officials; Qualifications; Term
1-6-2: Meetings
1-6-3: Quorum
1-6-4: Order Of Business; Agendas
1-6-5: Rules Of Order
1-6-6: Liaison To Commissions And Boards
1-6-7: Additional Assignments
1-6-7-1: Finance Trustees
1-6-8: Special Or Ad Hoc Committees
1-6-1: ELECTED OFFICIALS; QUALIFICATIONS; TERM:
The board of trustees shall consist of the village president and six (6)
trustees, who shall be citizens of the United States, qualified electors and
shall have resided in the village at least one year next preceding the
election. They shall hold office for four (4) years. Three (3) trustees shall
be elected every two (2) years, and until their successors are elected and
qualify, unless otherwise provided by law. (2013 Code § 1-6-1)
1-6-2: MEETINGS:
   A.   Committee Of The Whole And Regular Meetings: The committee of the whole
and regular meetings of the board of trustees shall be held on the first and
third Tuesdays of each month at the times and on the dates specified in the
calendar of board meetings for each fiscal year adopted annually prior to the
beginning of each fiscal year. The regular meeting place shall be the Campton
Hills Village Hall, 40W270 LaFox Road, Suite B, Campton Hills, IL 60175 unless
otherwise ordered by the board.
   B.   Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called by the village
president or any three (3) trustees. Public notice of any special meeting,
except a meeting held in the event of a bona fide emergency, shall be given at
least forty eight (48) hours before such meeting, which notice shall also
include the agenda for the special meeting. Notice shall be given to the
president and the trustees and otherwise as then required by statute.
   C.   Time Limit For Meetings: Regular, special and committee meetings of the
village board shall not extend beyond nine thirty o'clock (9:30) P.M. (Central
time), except closed sessions, unless authorized by a majority vote of the
board of trustees or committee members.
   D.   Open Meetings: All meetings of the village board of trustees shall be
open to the public unless otherwise excepted by law. (2013 Code § 1-6-2)
   E.   Disturbing Meetings: It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any
meeting of the board of trustees or of any committee thereof. (2013 Code §§ 1-
6-2, 1-6-5; amd. Ord. O-23-16, 11-7-2023)
1-6-3: QUORUM:
A majority of the president and trustees then holding office shall constitute a
quorum to do business, but no ordinance shall be passed except upon the
favorable vote of a majority of the corporate authorities then holding office,
as provided by statute. (2013 Code § 1-6-3)
1-6-4: ORDER OF BUSINESS; AGENDAS:
   A.   Established: The order of business of the board of trustees shall be as
follows:
      1.   Roll call.
      2.   Approval of minutes of the preceding meeting.
      3.   Other matters in the order set forth on the agenda.
      4.   Adjournment.
   B.   Changes: The president, or the corporate authorities, by majority vote,
may change the order of business. (2013 Code § 1-6-4)
   C.   Agendas:
      1.   Regular Meetings Of Village Board And Committee Of The Whole: The
agendas for any regular meeting of the village board or committee of the whole
shall be prepared as follows:
         a.   The village president, village administrator, or any two (2)
trustees, collectively, are authorized to have items placed on the agenda. All
agenda items must be submitted to the village administrator in writing and may
be sent personally or electronically including e-mail, fax, or other means. Any
written submittal made to the village administrator at least seven (7) business
days prior to the date of the meeting shall be honored and placed on the
agenda. If a question regarding the proposed agenda item exists, the village
administrator will contact the requesting party or parties not less than forty
eight (48) hours before the meeting to clarify the submittal. If the trustees
or village president, as the case may be, cannot be reached, the item will be
placed on the agenda in the form proposed.
         b.   In the event the administrator does not honor a submission by the
trustees or the village president, as the case may be, and a written objection
is made by the trustees or village president whose submittal was not honored,
the corporate authorities may, by a motion and a majority vote thereof, appoint
a sitting trustee to take over the duties of creating the agenda for all
regular board meetings and committee of the whole meetings. If a sitting
trustee is appointed to create and post the agenda, that sitting trustee must
also comply with subsection C1a of this section, and such authority shall
continue to reside with an appointed trustee until and unless a motion is
passed by a majority of the corporate authorities restoring that authority to
the administrator.
      2.   Special Meetings Of Village Board And Committee Of The Whole: The
agenda for any special meeting of the village board or the committee of the
whole shall be prepared by the official or officials calling the special
meeting, in accordance with subsection
1-6-2B of this chapter. (Ord. O-15-14, 9-1-2015)
1-6-5: RULES OF ORDER:
   A.   Robert's Rules Of Order: Insofar as the procedures for the conduct of
meetings and actions of the corporate authorities or any commission, committee
or officer are not regulated by state statutes, this code or any other
ordinance or resolution of the village, "Robert's Rules Of Order" shall govern.
   B.   Suspension Of Rules: The rules of order, other than those prescribed by
statute, may be suspended at any time by the consent of a majority of the
members present at any meeting. (2013 Code § 1-6-5)
1-6-6: LIAISON TO COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS:
   A.   Liaison Appointed: One or more trustees may be appointed by the village
president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, as liaisons to
commissions and boards of the village as the same shall exist from time to
time.
   B.   Notice Of Meetings: The assigned trustee liaison shall be notified of
such meeting of the commission or board at least forty eight (48) hours in
advance thereof. (2013 Code § 1-6-6)
1-6-7: ADDITIONAL ASSIGNMENTS:
In addition to liaisons to commissions and boards, there are responsibilities
within the village which may be assigned to trustees for areas of concentrated
diligence. These assignments are made by the village president, with the advice
and consent of the board of trustees. (2013 Code § 1-6-7)
1-6-7-1: FINANCE TRUSTEES:
   A.   The corporate authorities, at the first regular meeting thereof
occurring after the effective date hereof on which the matter is on the agenda,
shall elect two (2) members of the board of trustees as finance trustees for
the purpose of signing the warrants and checks, one of whom shall serve until
the first regular meeting of the corporate authorities in March 2015 and the
other of whom, whose term of office as trustee shall not expire until the
election of April 2017, shall serve until the first regular meeting in March
2016. Thereafter, at the first regular meeting in March of each year, the
corporate authorities shall elect one member thereof whose term of office as a
trustee shall not expire until on or after the election of April of the year
following the year of such election as finance trustee, to serve until the
first regular meeting in March next following the year of such election as
finance trustee.
   B.   For the purposes of this section, the term "regular meeting" shall
include a special meeting which is called on the date of a regularly scheduled
meeting of the corporate authorities. (Ord. O-14-21, 11-18-2014)
1-6-8: SPECIAL OR AD HOC COMMITTEES:
Special or ad hoc committees may from time to time be appointed by the board of
trustees. Said committees shall serve only until the completion of their
assignment, at which time a final written report shall be submitted to the
board of trustees. Upon the creation of any ad hoc committee, the Board shall
approve by resolution the specifics of the membership of the committee and its
chair(s), the charge and/or mission or the committee, the frequency of its
meetings, and any desired report to be prepared by the committee and delivered
to the board of trustees. (Ord. O-23-16, 11-7-2023)
CHAPTER 7
VILLAGE OFFICERS, PERSONNEL AND
BOARD AND COMMISSION MEMBERS
SECTION:
1-7-1: Application Of Provisions
1-7-2: Residency Requirements
1-7-3: Oath And Bond
1-7-4: Restrictions On Elected And Appointed Officials
1-7-5: Duties
1-7-6: Inspection Of Records
1-7-7: Indemnification Of Officers And Employees
1-7-8: Benefits (Rep. by Ord. O-18-01, 2-20-2018)
1-7-9: Conflict Of Interest; Attending Certain Closed Meetings Prohibited
1-7-10: Expiration Of Office
1-7-11: Removal Of Appointed Officers And Board, Commission And Committee
Members
1-7-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all officers, elected officials,
appointed members of the boards and commissions and employees generally. (2013
Code § 1-7-1)
1-7-2: RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS:
All elected Village officials and all members of the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall be qualified electors living in the Village. All elected
officials or persons appointed to an elective Village office shall be qualified
electors and shall have resided in the Village at least one year next preceding
their election or appointment. Any such elected official or member of the
Planning and Zoning Commission who does not regularly reside in the Village for
a period of one hundred thirty five (135) days shall forfeit the office in
question upon the passage of a resolution by the Corporate Authorities;
provided, however, that the Corporate Authorities may, in their discretion,
waive the requirement of forfeiture for good cause shown, such as, but not
limited to, temporary absence from the Village due to fire or other destruction
or substantial damage to the regular dwelling place of the individual within
the Village.
(2013 Code § 1-7-2; amd. 2016 Code; Ord. O-24-23, 12-3-2024)
1-7-3: OATH AND BOND:
   A.   Oath: Every officer of the Village shall, before entering upon his or
her duties, take the oath prescribed by statute. (2013 Code § 1-7-4)
   B.   Bond Requirements:
      1.   Every officer and employee shall, if required by the Corporate
Authorities or State Statute, prior to entering upon the duties of his or her
office, give a bond in such sum as set forth in this subsection, with sureties
to be rated AA-1 or better, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the
duties of his or her office or position, to be approved by the Corporate
Authorities. (Ord. O-15-05, 3-26-2015)
      2.   Each officer or employee of the Village specified herein shall post
a surety bond in the following sum:
Chief of Police                $25,000.00
Deputy Village Clerk           25,000.00
Finance Trustee, if applicable 50,000.00
Fire and Police Commissioners  10,000.00
Village Administrator          50,000.00
Village Clerk                  50,000.00
Village President              50,000.00
Village Treasurer              50,000.00
 
(Ord. O-15-05, 3-26-2015; amd. 2016 Code)
1-7-4: RESTRICTIONS ON ELECTED AND APPOINTED OFFICIALS:
Unless specifically waived by resolution of the Village Board:
   A.   No elected official shall serve as a member of the Village Planning and
Zoning Commission, nor shall an elected officer hold any other village office
during his or her term of office except as authorized by state law, including
65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-15-15.
   B.   No compensated appointed official of the village shall serve in any
other compensated appointed office in the village.
(Ord. O-15-10, 7-7-2015; amd. Ord. O-24-23, 12-3-2024)
1-7-5: DUTIES:
   A.   Monies To Treasurer: Every officer of the village shall turn over all
monies received by him or her in his or her official capacity to the village
treasurer with a statement showing the source from which the same was received.
(2013 Code § 1-7-6)
   B.   Property To Successor: Every officer and employee of the village, upon
the expiration of his/her term for any cause whatsoever, shall deliver to his/
her successor all books and records which may be the property of the village,
but if there is no successor, to the village clerk. Any person failing to
return such village records and documents within five (5) days shall be fined
up to that amount provided in section
1-4-1 of this title per day for every day thereafter until the village records
and documents are returned. (2013 Code § 1-7-6; amd. 2016 Code)
1-7-6: INSPECTION OF RECORDS:
All records kept by any officer of the village shall be open to inspection by
the president or, upon vote of the corporate authorities, by any member of the
board of trustees at all reasonable times, whether or not such records are
required to be kept by statute or ordinance. (2013 Code § 1-7-7)
1-7-7: INDEMNIFICATION OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES:
   A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following words
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
EMPLOYEE: Includes all employees of the village.
OFFICER: Includes any elected or appointed official of the village.
   B.   Indemnification Responsibilities Of Village:
      1.   If any claim or action is instituted against any present officer or
employee or former officer or employee of the village based on an injury or
event allegedly arising out of an act or omission occurring within the scope of
his employment or official duties as such employee or officer, the village
shall, to the extent permitted by law:
         a.   Appear and defend against the claim or action; and
         b.   Indemnify the officer or employee or former officer or employee
for his attorney fees and court costs incurred in the defense of such claim or
action; and
         c.   Indemnify the officer or employee or former officer or employee
for any judgment based on such claim or action; or
         d.   Indemnify the officer or employee or former officer or employee
for any compromise or settlement of such a claim or action if approved in
advance by the village.
      2.   Provided, however, that the village shall not indemnify any officer
or employee:
         a.   For any portion of a judgment representing an award of punitive
damages; or
         b.   Where the officer or employee is a party to litigation or any
disputed resolution proceedings in which the employee or officer is adverse to
the village; or
         c.   Where an officer or employee takes any action or refrains from
action which is contrary to legal advice from the village attorney unless the
officer or employee appeals in writing to the corporate authorities within
seven (7) days after receiving such legal advice and the corporate authorities
sustain the officer's or employee's appeal.
   C.   Interpretation And Application Of Provisions:
      1.   Nothing in this section shall be construed as waiving any defense of
the village or its employees or officers including, but not limited to, any
defense provided by the Illinois local governmental and governmental employees
tort immunity act as it may exist from time to time, in any action brought
against the village or such officer or employee.
      2.   The provisions of this section shall apply only where the Village
has been given notice of any actions brought against any Village employee or
officer, based upon any action of such employee or officer within the scope of
his authority as such. Any Village officer or employee against whom a claim or
action is instituted shall notify the Village of such claim in writing within
thirty (30) days of service of process upon said officer or employee. (2013
Code § 1-7-8)
1-7-8: BENEFITS:
(Rep. by Ord. O-18-01, 2-20-2018)
1-7-9: CONFLICT OF INTEREST; ATTENDING CERTAIN CLOSED MEETINGS PROHIBITED:
   A.   Conflict Of Interest:
      1.   Prohibited: It is in the interest of the Village and its citizens
that all officers of the Village avoid any conflict of interest and also avoid
the appearance of conflict of interest or other improprieties. (2013 Code § 1-
7-9)
      2.   Statute Provisions:
         a.   65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-55-10 provides, in applicable
part:
            (a)    A municipal officer shall not be fiscally interested,
directly, in his own name or in the name of any other person, association,
trust or corporation, in any contract, work or business of the municipality, or
in the sale of any article whenever the expense, price or consideration of the
contract, work, business or sale is paid either from the treasury or by any
assessment levied by any statute or ordinance. A municipal officer shall not be
interested, directly or indirectly, in the purchase of any property that: i)
belongs to the municipality, ii) is sold for taxes or assessments, or iii) is
sold by virtue of legal process at the suit of the municipality. (Then follow
certain exceptions).
(2013 Code § 1-7-9; amd. 2016 Code)
         b.   50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 105/3 also contains prohibitions
against persons holding any office under the laws or Constitution of the State
being interested, directly or indirectly, in contracts and the performance of
certain work.
         c.   All present elected and appointed officials of the Village shall
be provided with a copy of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-55-10 and of 50
Illinois Compiled Statutes 105/3, by the Village Clerk, and all newly elected
or appointed officials shall be provided with such copy within thirty (30) days
after their election or appointment.
      3.   Nepotism Deemed Conflict Of Interest: It shall be considered
improper and a conflict of interest by the Village if there is employed by the
Village, directly or indirectly, a relative of any elected or appointed Village
officer having the following relationship: spouse, descendent, brother or
sister, aunt or uncle, niece or nephew, or cousin. This subsection A3 shall not
apply to any contract entered into as a result of the request by the Village
for competitive bids where the person or entity awarded this contract is the
lowest responsible bidder or the employment and salary of a relative is
specifically approved by the Corporate Authorities by motion.
   B.   Prohibition Against Attending Certain Closed Meetings: No Village
officer shall attend the portion of any meeting that is closed to the public
where the officer is in a position adverse to the Village, including where the
officer is a litigant adverse to the Village or where there will be discussed
in such closed meeting litigation which has common elements of law and/or fact
to the litigation where the officer is a party adverse to the Village;
provided, however, that the Village Board may, upon finding that the attendance
of such Village officer at such closed session would not be deemed harmful or
prejudicial to the Village, allow such officer to attend such portion of the
meeting as is closed to the public. (2013 Code § 1-7-9)
1-7-10: EXPIRATION OF OFFICE:
Unless otherwise specified, all appointed officers, whether appointed for one
year or more, shall serve for terms expiring on June 30, or until their
respective successors are appointed and qualify. (2013 Code § 1-7-3)
1-7-11: REMOVAL OF APPOINTED OFFICERS AND BOARD, COMMISSION AND COMMITTEE
MEMBERS:
   A.   Subject to any specific statutory requirements, any member of any
board, commission or committee may be removed from office by the Village
President and such office declared vacant if, without excuse deemed adequate to
the Village President, such person fails to attend three (3) consecutive
meetings of the board, commission or committee, or fails to attend at least
fifty five percent (55%) or more of the meetings in a twelve (12) month period,
subject to motion approved by the Board of Trustees. (2013 Code § 1-7-10; amd.
2016 Code)
   B.   Any Village appointed member of any Village committee, or joint
committee consisting of Village appointees and members appointed by other
entities, may be removed by the President, if the President determines that
such committee member does not attend meetings regularly, does not actively
participate in the work of the committee or is not a positive force on the
committee; provided, that such removal shall be reported to the Village Board
within ten (10) days after such removal, and the Village Board may reverse such
removal at a Board meeting occurring more than ten (10) days after the removal.
   C.   Any appointed officer may be removed pursuant to the provisions of
State Statute. (2013 Code § 1-7-10)
ARTICLE A. VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR
SECTION:
1-7A-1: Position Created; Qualifications; Duties And Functions
1-7A-1: POSITION CREATED; QUALIFICATIONS; DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS:
There is hereby created a position of village administrator who shall possess
such qualifications and perform such duties and functions as may be provided
from time to time by the corporate authorities. (2013 Code § 1-8A-1)
ARTICLE B. VILLAGE CLERK
SECTION:
1-7B-1: Residency Requirement
1-7B-2: Bond
1-7B-3: Powers And Duties
1-7B-4: Deputy Village Clerk
1-7B-5: Compensation
1-7B-6: Budget For Village Clerk And Deputy Clerk
1-7B-1: RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT:
The village clerk must be a resident of the village. (2013 Code § 1-8-1)
1-7B-2: BOND:
The village clerk shall give a surety bond before entering upon the duties of
the office in the sum set forth in section
1-7-3 of this chapter, but such amount shall not be less than that required by
state statute. This bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of
the clerk's duties as the clerk, and shall be conditioned to indemnify the
village for any loss by reason of any neglect of duty or any act of the clerk.
(Ord. O-15-05, 3-26-2015; amd. 2016 Code)
1-7B-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Attend Meetings: The village clerk shall attend meetings of the board
of trustees and be responsible for the keeping of a full record of their
proceedings (minutes) and the accuracy of the record. The village clerk may be
asked to attend other governmental meetings as deemed appropriate by the
village president.
   B.   Record Of Proceedings:
      1.   The village clerk shall prepare the draft record of the proceedings
(minutes).
      2.   The minutes of each meeting of the corporate authorities shall be
arranged as nearly as may be appropriate in chronological sequence listed in
the agenda for the meeting.
      3.   The minutes shall contain:
         a.   An accurate record of the transaction of public business and
official actions, including all motions, decisions or other actions of the
corporate authorities.
         b.   A summary of reports of committees, commissions or village
officers as presented at the meeting.
         c.   Informational data needed or desirable to understand the actions
of the corporate authorities.
         d.   A summarization of all public comments from the audience.
         e.   A summarization of comments of any member of the corporate
authorities, and of any other reports, data or memoranda presented to the
meeting, at the specific request of the corporate authorities.
      4.   At the direction of the corporate authorities, the proceedings shall
be recorded by tape recorder or other appropriate means. Any person is
permitted to tape record or videotape any meeting open to the public pursuant
to state law.
      5.   The draft minutes will be presented for approval at the next meeting
of the corporate authorities, where possible. Any trustee desiring to correct
or clarify the draft minutes shall make a motion stating the matters to be
corrected or clarified, and such motion will be voted upon if seconded. The
minutes, as presented, or as corrected and clarified, will be subject to
approval by motion approved by a majority of the trustees present.
      6.   The approved minutes shall be signed by both the village clerk and
president; however, failure of either or both to sign the minutes will not
affect the validity of such minutes once approved, and the corporate
authorities may designate one of their members to sign any particular minutes
if either the president or clerk fails to do so.
      7.   The minutes shall be made available for public inspection within
seven (7) days after being approved or accepted by the corporate authorities as
the official minutes of their proceedings. The minutes shall not be available
to any person other than a village official until approved by the corporate
authorities.
   C.   Special Projects: The village clerk may be asked to work on special
projects for the village president as needed.
   D.   Authenticate/Certify Documents: The village clerk shall sign and
authenticate or certify documents when required, in accordance with state law.
This shall include the attestation or certification of all licenses issued by
the Village.
   E.   Custodian Of Documents: The village clerk shall be the custodian of all
documents belonging to the village, including all electronically held documents
or other records, other than documents relating to litigation, which shall be
in the custody of the village president, which are not assigned to the custody
of some other officer. The village clerk shall be responsible for training all
village employees in the maintenance of all files containing these documents.
The village clerk shall have a designated secure office within Village Hall to
maintain said physical documents and other electronic documents or other
records. The village clerk shall be the custodian of the following documents,
among others:
      1.   The minute book.
      2.   The ordinance book.
      3.   The resolution book.
      4.   All proclamations passed by the corporate authorities.
      5.   Election materials.
      6.   Contracts approved by the corporate authorities of the village.
      7.   Documents presented to the village clerk for further presentation to
the corporate authorities or to another officer or employee of the village.
      8.   Documents not under the custody of another village officer.
      9.   Such other documents as may be required from time to time by the
corporate authorities of the village.
   All other documents of the village shall be filed in the appropriate
administrative office by function. This includes copies as necessary of all
official documents.
   F.   Publication Of Ordinances: The village clerk shall publish all
ordinances passed by the corporate authorities imposing any fine, penalty,
imprisonment or forfeiture, or making any appropriation, in pamphlet form,
whether or not each such ordinance contains language authorizing such
publication in pamphlet form.
   G.   Submission Of Materials To Village Attorney: Unless directed otherwise
in a specific instance, all reports, certifications and other materials to be
submitted by the village clerk to any county, state or federal official or
department or agency shall first be submitted to the village attorney for
review and recommendation. If the village attorney does not make any
recommendation in writing within seven (7) days after receipt of such
certification or report, the right to make recommendations shall be deemed
waived.
   H.   Publication of Village Records or Notices on Village Website: The
village clerk shall have access to the Village website, that will allow him/her
the ability to add, remove and edit content on said website, and shall publish
all necessary Village records, meeting notices and agendas, and approved
minutes of the Village Board and other commissions, to said website, as
required from time to time, and by any law governing the publication of said
materials.
   I.   Preparation for Elections: The village clerk shall make preparations
for and supervise all Village elections.
   J.   Notice of Special Meetings: The village clerk shall give notice of all
special meetings of the board of trustees to all board members and the Village
Attorney.
   K.   Filing, Delivery or Recording of Ordinances or Resolutions: The village
clerk shall be responsible for the filing, delivery or recording of all
ordinances or resolutions that are required to be filed with, delivered to or
recorded with any other unit of government, including, but not limited to, Kane
County or Campton Township.
   L.   Administer Oaths: The village clerk shall administer all oaths of
office to all elected and appointed officials, police officers and various
staff members of the village as required.
   M.   FOIA Officer: The village clerk shall serve as the Freedom of
Information Act (FOIA) officer for the Village. (2013 Code § 1-8-2; amd. 2016
Code; Ord. O-23-14, 8-15-2023; Ord. O-23-14, 8-15-2023)
1-7B-4: DEPUTY VILLAGE CLERK:
   A.   Determination Of Need: The corporate authorities shall determine, from
time to time, whether or not a deputy village clerk shall be provided.
   B.   Appointment And Term: The deputy village clerk is appointed by the
village clerk during the month of April each year, subject to concurrence by
the corporate authorities. The term of office of the deputy village clerk shall
expire on April 30 of the year following his or her appointment.
   C.   Powers And Duties: The deputy village clerk shall have the following
powers and duties which shall be exercised only in the absence of the village
clerk from the place where the village clerk's office is maintained and only
when either written direction has been given by the village clerk to the deputy
village clerk to exercise one or more powers and duties or when the corporate
authorities have determined by resolution that the village clerk is temporarily
or permanently incapacitated to perform the particular function:
      1.   Attend meetings of the corporate authorities and prepare a draft
record of the proceedings.
      2.   Sign, seal and attest to all contracts of the village and all
licenses, permits and such other documents as require this formality.
      3.   Publish all ordinances requiring publication.
      4.   Other specific responsibilities of the village clerk. (2013 Code §
1-8-3)
1-7B-5: COMPENSATION:
   A.   Village Clerk: The village clerk shall receive such compensation as
determined by the president and board of trustees.
   B.   Deputy Village Clerk: The deputy village clerk shall receive such
compensation as determined by the president and board of trustees as
commensurate with duties and responsibilities. (2013 Code § 1-8-4)
1-7B-6: BUDGET FOR VILLAGE CLERK AND DEPUTY CLERK:
The Village Clerk and Deputy Clerk shall be provided with a reasonable budget
as commensurate with their duties and responsibilities, as determined by the
president and board of trustees. (Ord. O-23-14, 8-15-2023)
ARTICLE C. VILLAGE TREASURER
SECTION:
1-7C-1: Office Established; Appointment And Term
1-7C-2: Bond
1-7C-3: Powers And Duties
1-7C-4: Compensation
1-7C-1: OFFICE ESTABLISHED; APPOINTMENT AND TERM:
There is established the office of village treasurer, an administrative office
of the village. The village treasurer shall be appointed by the president, with
the advice and consent of the board of trustees, and shall hold office for a
term of three (3) years and until a successor has been appointed and qualified.
(2013 Code § 1-9-1)
1-7C-2: BOND:
The village treasurer shall give a surety bond, before entering upon the duties
of his office, in the sum set forth in section
1-7-3 of this chapter, but such amount shall not be less than that required by
state statute. This bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of
his/her duties as treasurer, and shall be conditioned to indemnify the village
for any loss by reason of any neglect of duty or any improper act of the
treasurer. (Ord. O-15-05, 3-26-2015)
1-7C-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   Generally: The village treasurer shall perform such lawful powers and
duties as may be prescribed for him by statute or ordinance or otherwise by the
corporate authorities, as well as provided in this article. He shall pay out
money only on vouchers, bills or orders properly approved by the village board
or approved by another village official within the authority of such official.
   B.   Custody Of Funds: The village treasurer shall deposit the village funds
in such depositories as may be selected by the corporate authorities from time
to time as provided by law, and he shall keep the deposit of the village funds
separate and distinct from his own funds, and shall not make private or
personal use of any village funds.
   C.   Monthly Reports: The village treasurer shall render an account under
oath to the board of trustees on a monthly basis. (2013 Code § 1-9-3)
1-7C-4: COMPENSATION:
The village treasurer shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the
president and board of trustees. (2013 Code § 1-9-5)
ARTICLE D. VILLAGE LEGAL OFFICIALS
SECTION:
1-7D-1: Village Attorney
1-7D-2: Village Prosecutor
1-7D-3: Legislative Counsel
1-7D-1: VILLAGE ATTORNEY:
   A.   Position Established; Appointment: There is established the position of
village attorney, which shall consist of an attorney or firm of attorneys, duly
licensed by the state, appointed by the village president, with the advice and
consent of the board of trustees. (2013 Code § 1-12-1)
   B.   Term And Termination Of Position: The term of office of the village
attorney shall be July 1 to June 30, reviewed and subject to reappointment
annually. The attorney or firm or corporate authorities may terminate such
appointment with thirty (30) days' written notice. (2013 Code § 1-12-2)
   C.   Duties:
      1.   Legal Advisor: The village attorney shall advise and represent the
village president and board of trustees and other village officials on all
matters referred to such attorney and shall perform such duties as are provided
by law or ordinance and, in addition thereto, such other duties as from time to
time may be requested by the village president or the corporate authorities.
      2.   Reports Required: The village attorney shall submit project reports
on a regular basis, and shall make such suggestions to the president or
corporate authorities regarding those matters in the areas of responsibility of
the village attorney based upon such village attorney's best judgment, and in
the best interests of the village and its residents. (2013 Code § 1-12-3)
   D.   Compensation: The village attorney shall receive compensation for hours
worked pursuant to an hourly schedule approved from time to time by the
corporate authorities. (2013 Code § 1-12-4)
1-7D-2: VILLAGE PROSECUTOR:
The village attorney, with the consent of the village president and board, may
recommend a village prosecutor to assist in prosecutions for village code and
other alleged violations. If the corporate authorities appoint a village
prosecutor in accordance herewith, the duties of such village prosecutor shall
be performed under the supervision of the village attorney. (2013 Code § 1-12-
5)
1-7D-3: LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL:
   A.   It is in the best interests of the village for the trustees to retain
legislative counsel independently to advise the trustees on matters relating to
their legislative duties which may include, but not be limited to, the drafting
of ordinances, contract documents, opinions on the powers of the legislative
branch, analyses of the validity of actions taken by the village, review of
litigation issues, representation of the corporate authorities regarding
legislative matters in litigation, and providing other advice on matters within
the purview of the legislative branch of municipal government.
   B.   The trustees shall each be authorized to direct questions related to
their legislative duties to the independent legislative counsel. Trustees may
seek legal counsel regarding any matters within the range of items specified in
subsection A of this section.
   C.   The independent legislative counsel will indicate on its invoices the
trustee who initiated the contact therewith and will also provide a general
description of the services provided.
   D.   The independent legislative counsel shall be retained as an independent
contractor at a rate authorized by the village board for a term in excess of
one year but not exceeding the term of the village president. No department or
office of independent legislative counsel is hereby created. (Ord. O-14-25, 10-
6-2014)
ARTICLE E. VILLAGE ENGINEER
SECTION:
1-7E-1: Position Established; Appointment
1-7E-2: Term And Termination Of Position
1-7E-3: Duties
1-7E-4: Compensation
1-7E-5: Contract For Special Projects
1-7E-1: POSITION ESTABLISHED; APPOINTMENT:
There is established the position of village engineer, which shall consist of
an engineer or engineering firm duly licensed by the state, appointed by the
village president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. (2013
Code § 1-13-1)
1-7E-2: TERM AND TERMINATION OF POSITION:
The term of office of the village engineer shall be May 1 to April 30, reviewed
and subject to reappointment annually. The engineer or engineering firm or
corporate authorities may terminate such appointment with thirty (30) days'
written notice. (2013 Code § 1-13-2; amd. 2016 Code)
1-7E-3: DUTIES:
The village engineer shall advise the village president and board of trustees
and other village officials on all engineering matters referred to such
engineer and shall perform such duties as are provided by law or ordinance and,
in addition thereto, such other duties as from time to time may be requested by
the village president or the corporate authorities. (2013 Code § 1-13-3; amd.
2016 Code)
1-7E-4: COMPENSATION:
The village engineer shall receive compensation for hours worked as approved
from time to time by the corporate authorities. (2013 Code § 1-13-4; amd. 2016
Code)
1-7E-5: CONTRACT FOR SPECIAL PROJECTS:
Nothing in this article shall prohibit the village from entering into a
contract with a licensed engineer for special projects and engineering work.
(2013 Code § 1-13-5)
ARTICLE F. BUILDING AND ZONING OFFICER
SECTION:
1-7F-1: Position Established; Appointment And Term; Dismissal
1-7F-2: Duties
1-7F-3: Compensation
1-7F-1: POSITION ESTABLISHED; APPOINTMENT AND TERM; DISMISSAL:
There is hereby established the position of village building and zoning
officer, appointed by the village president, with the advice and consent of the
board of trustees. The building and zoning officer shall serve at the pleasure
of the village president; provided, that any dismissal of the building and
zoning officer by the village president shall be reported to the board of
trustees as provided by the Illinois municipal code, and such dismissal may be
reversed by two-thirds (2/3) of the trustees then in office pursuant to the
Illinois municipal code. (2013 Code § 1-15-1)
1-7F-2: DUTIES:
The building and zoning officer shall be responsible for the administration and
enforcement of the building and zoning codes. The building and zoning officer
shall report to the village administrator and, when there is no administrator,
the village president. Specific duties include, but shall not be limited to:
   A.   Review of building permit applications for compliance with the building
and zoning code. If the application is found to not comply, the applicant will
be so advised and be given an opportunity to: 1) make corrections/changes; 2)
withdraw the application; or 3) appeal to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   B.   Review of building and other permit applications for compliance with
title 8, chapter 2, “Driveways”, of this code, in consultation with the Campton
Township highway supervisor where appropriate.
   C.   Issuance of notices of violations and consultation with the village
officials and professionals as appropriate.
(2013 Code § 1-15-2; amd. 2016 Code; Ord. O-24-23, 12-3-2024)
1-7F-3: COMPENSATION:
The building and zoning officer shall receive such compensation as may be
approved by the corporate authorities from time to time. (2013 Code § 1-15-3)
CHAPTER 8
VILLAGE MEETINGS
SECTION:
1-8-1: Attendance By Audio/Video Conferencing
1-8-2: Addressing Public Officials
1-8-3: Access To Closed Session Records
1-8-1: ATTENDANCE BY AUDIO/VIDEO CONFERENCING:
If any member of the Corporate Authorities or a board, commission or committee
is unable to attend a meeting of such body in person, such member may attend
such meeting by audio/video conferencing subject to the following rules and
limitations:
   A.   If a quorum of the members of such body is physically present at the
place designated in the notice of meeting, a majority of such body may adopt a
motion to allow a member of that body to attend the meeting by audio/video
conferencing if such member is prevented from physically attending because of:
      1.   Personal illness or disability;
      2.   Employment purposes or the business of the Village; or
      3.   A family or other emergency.
      4.   Unexpected childcare obligations.
   B.   Such member shall notify the Village Clerk (in the case of the
Corporate Authorities) or the Recording Secretary of the appropriate board,
commission or committee in the case of membership in a board, commission or
committee prior to the meeting unless advance notice is impractical.
   C.   In addition to the foregoing rules and regulations, the following shall
apply to any meeting where a member of the Corporate Authorities or a board,
commission or committee, as may be applicable, is attending by audio/video
conferencing:
      1.   During any meeting where such member participates by audio/video
conferencing, all votes shall be taken by roll call.
      2.   In the event that the meeting is or includes a public hearing, all
persons present at such public hearing, including the public, will be allowed
to participate in the audio/video conference.
      3.   To the extent practical, a copy of all documents being reviewed,
discussed or adopted by the Corporate Authorities or a board, commission or
committee, as may be applicable, shall be available to the member participating
by audio/video conferencing. (2013 Code § 1-19; amd. 2016 Code; Ord. O-23-16,
11-7-2023)
1-8-2: ADDRESSING PUBLIC OFFICIALS:
   A.   Application Of Provisions: The rules set forth in this section apply to
all meetings of the Corporate Authorities and all commissions, boards,
committees and subcommittees of the Village (all of which are hereinafter
referred to in this section as "public bodies"). (2013 Code § 1-20-1)
   B.   Rules: Each public body of the Village may, in its discretion, adopt
rules regulating the manner in which members of the public may address such
public bodies; provided, that such rules shall, in no case, be more restrictive
than those provided in this subsection. The following rules shall apply to all
public bodies of the Village which have not adopted specific rules:
      1.   Any person desiring to address the public body shall complete a
signup form for that purpose, if requested to do so by the public body.
      2.   Unless otherwise specified by the agenda, the rules of the public
body or by the Chairperson of the public body, the right to address the public
body shall occur during the portion of the meeting immediately following the
roll call and establishment of a quorum of the public body.
      3.   Any person addressing the public body shall do so for not more than
three (3) minutes, unless such time limit is waived by the Chairperson of the
meeting.
      4.   Any person addressing the public body should avoid remarks which are
clearly repetitious to the remarks of those of other persons having previously
addressed the public body at the same meeting, and the Chairperson may take
reasonable steps to limit clearly repetitious remarks.
      5.   No person may address the public body in the manner which is
threatening to any person (whether or not a member of the public body) or which
includes profanity after having been requested to cease such profanity.
      6.   To the extent that the provisions of this section conflict with the
provisions of any statute which specifically provides for the right to address
a public body as to specific issues such as, but not limited to, public
hearings, the more liberal provisions of this section or such specific statute
shall govern. (2013 Code § 1-20-2)
1-8-3: ACCESS TO CLOSED SESSION RECORDS:
Pursuant to and in accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act, 5 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 120/2.06, the Village establishes the following policies in
connection with access to closed session meeting minutes and verbatim
recordings that have not been approved by the Village Board of Trustees for
release to the public:
   A.   Access By The Village Clerk: The Village Clerk is designated as the
keeper of closed session meeting minutes and verbatim recordings.
   B.   Access To The Public: Pursuant to section 2.06(e) of the Illinois Open
Meetings Act, closed session meeting minutes and verbatim recordings are not
subject to public inspection unless the Village Board of Trustees has made a
determination that the minutes or recordings no longer require confidential
treatment or otherwise consents to their disclosure.
   C.   Access To Elected Officials: Pursuant to section 2.06(e) of the
Illinois Open Meetings Act, all elected officials and appointed officials
filling a vacancy in an elected office are authorized to access closed session
meeting minutes and verbatim recordings, subject to the following procedures
and limitations:
      1.   An elected official who desires access to closed session meeting
minutes or recordings should file a written request with the Village Clerk.
      2.   Access to these closed session records must take place at Village
Hall.
      3.   Access to these closed session records must be in the presence of
the Village Clerk, Deputy Clerk, Village Administrator, or another elected
official.
      4.   No closed session meeting minutes or verbatim recording may be
removed from Village Hall, except as approved by the Village Board of Trustees.
      5.   No verbatim recording may be recorded or copied, except as approved
by the Village Board of Trustees.
      6.   The restrictions contained within this section are not intended to
interfere with the Village Board of Trustee's obligation to conduct the semi-
annual review of closed session meeting minutes required by section 2.06(c)(d)
of the Open Meetings Act.
   D.   Access In Enforcement Proceedings: The limitations set forth above are
not intended to restrict access to closed session records in an enforcement
proceeding brought under section 2.06(e) or section 7.5 of the Illinois Open
Meetings Act. (Ord. O-16-17, 8-3-2016)
CHAPTER 9
IDENTITY PROTECTION POLICY
SECTION:
1-9-1: Statement Of Policy Purpose To Be Provided
1-9-2: Prohibitions And Exceptions
1-9-3: Redact Of Social Security Numbers Required
1-9-4: Village Access To Social Security Numbers
1-9-1: STATEMENT OF POLICY PURPOSE TO BE PROVIDED:
   A.   Whenever any individual is requested to provide any department or
office of the village with a social security number, the village, through its
appropriate officials and/or employees, shall provide that individual with a
copy of the statement of purpose approved from time to time by the village
board of trustees.
   B.   The village shall also provide a copy of such statement of purpose to
any other person upon request.
   C.   The statement of purpose shall identify the purpose or purposes for
which the village is collecting, maintaining and/or using social security
numbers. (2013 Code § 1-21-1)
1-9-2: PROHIBITIONS AND EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   The village shall not under any circumstances:
      1.   Publicly post or publicly display in any manner an individual's
social security number. For purposes of this section, the terms "publicly post"
or "publicly display" shall mean to intentionally communicate or otherwise
intentionally make available to the general public.
      2.   Print an individual's social security number on any card required
for the individual to access products or services provided by the person or
entity.
      3.   Require an individual to transmit a social security number over the
internet, unless the connection is secure or the social security number is
encrypted.
      4.   Print an individual's social security number on any materials that
are mailed to the individual, through the U.S. postal service, any private mail
service, electronic mail, or any similar method of delivery, unless state or
federal law requires the social security number to be on the document to be
mailed. Social security numbers may be included in applications and forms sent
by mail including, but not limited to, any material mailed in connection with
the administration of the unemployment insurance act, any material mailed in
connection with any tax administered by the department of revenue, and
documents sent as part of an application or enrollment process or to establish,
amend, or terminate an account, contract, or policy or to confirm the accuracy
of the social security number. A social security number that is permissibly
mailed will not be printed, in whole or in part, on a postcard or other mailer
that does not require an envelope or be visible on an envelope without the
envelope having been opened.
   B.   Except as described in subsection C of this section, the village shall
not perform any of the following acts:
      1.   Collect, use, or disclose a social security number from an
individual, unless:
         a.   Required to do so under state or federal law, rules, or
regulations, or the collection, use, or disclosure of the social security
number is otherwise necessary for the performance of the village duties and
responsibilities;
         b.   The need and purpose for the social security number is documented
before collection of the social security number; and
         c.   The social security number collected is relevant to the
documented need and purpose.
      2.   Require an individual to use his or her social security number to
access an internet website.
      3.   Use the social security number for any other purpose other than the
purpose for which it was collected.
      4.   Embed or encode a social security number in or on any card or
document including, but not limited to, any bar code, chip, magnetic strip,
RFID technology or other technology in place of removing the social security
number as required by this chapter.
   C.   The prohibitions set out in subsection B of this section shall not
apply in the following circumstances:
      1.   The disclosure of social security numbers to agents, employees,
contractors, or subcontractors of a governmental entity or disclosure by a
governmental entity to another governmental entity or its agents, employees,
contractors, or subcontractors if disclosure is necessary in order for the
entity to perform its duties and responsibilities; and if disclosing to a
contractor or subcontractor prior to such disclosure, the governmental entity
must first receive from the contractor or subcontractor a copy of the
contractor's or subcontractor's policy that sets forth how the requirements
imposed under the applicable statute on a governmental entity to protect an
individual's social security number will be achieved.
      2.   The disclosure of social security numbers pursuant to a court order,
warrant, or subpoena.
      3.   The collection, use, or disclosure of social security numbers in
order to ensure the safety of state and local government employees; persons
committed to correctional facilities, local jails, and other law enforcement
facilities or retention centers; wards of the state; and all persons working in
or visiting a state or local government agency facility.
      4.   The collection, use, or disclosure of social security numbers for
internal verification or administrative purposes.
      5.   The disclosure of social security numbers by a state agency to any
entity for the collection of delinquent child support or of any state debt or
to a government agency to assist with an investigation or the prevention of
fraud.
      6.   The collection or use of social security numbers to investigate or
prevent fraud, to conduct background checks, to collect a debt, to obtain a
credit report from a consumer reporting agency under the federal fair credit
reporting act, to undertake any permissible purpose that is enumerated under
the "federal Gramm Leach Bliley act", or to locate a missing person, a lost
relative, or a person who is due a benefit, such as a pension benefit or an
unclaimed property benefit. (2013 Code § 1-21-2)
1-9-3: REDACT OF SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBERS REQUIRED:
   A.   The village shall comply with the provisions of any other state law
with respect to allowing the public inspection and copying of information or
documents otherwise containing all or any portion of an individual's social
security number.
   B.   The village shall redact any social security number from the
information or documents to be inspected before allowing the public inspection
or copying of the information or documents.
   C.   The village shall take steps to make any social security number
provided to the village easily redactable from any such documents.
   D.   For purposes of these regulations, "redact" means to alter or truncate
the applicable data so that no more than five (5) sequential digits of a social
security number are accessible as part of personal information. (2013 Code § 1-
21-3)
1-9-4: VILLAGE ACCESS TO SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBERS:
   A.   Only officials and employees who are required to use or handle
information or documents that contain social security numbers will have access
to such. (2013 Code § 1-21-4)
   B.   All officials and employees who shall have access to social security
numbers shall be trained to protect the confidentiality of social security
numbers in accordance with state law, including receiving a copy of this
chapter. (2013 Code § 1-21-4; amd. 2016 Code)
CHAPTER 10
VILLAGE SEAL
SECTION:
1-10-1: Description
1-10-2: Custodian
1-10-1: DESCRIPTION:
The corporate seal of the village shall be a circular disk with the words
"Village of Campton Hills, Kane County, Illinois" on the perimeter, and the
words "Village Seal" in the center thereof. (2013 Code § 1-18-1)
1-10-2: CUSTODIAN:
The seal shall remain in the custody and control of the village clerk or deputy
clerk, to be used as required by law and the provisions of this code. (2013
Code § 1-18-2)
CHAPTER 11
VILLAGE ORGANIZATION
SECTION:
1-11-1: Organizational Chart
1-11-1: ORGANIZATIONAL CHART:
There shall be an organizational chart which shall be approved by the corporate
authorities and shall be applicable at all times unless amended by the
corporate authorities by ordinance. (Ord. O-16-02, 2-16-2016)
CHAPTER 12
PSEBA BENEFIT ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
1-12-1: Purpose
1-12-2: Policy And Procedure For Administering Applications For PSEBA Benefits
1-12-3: Policy And Procedure For Hearings For PSEBA Benefits
1-12-4: PSEBA Benefits Granted By The Village
1-12-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide a fair and efficient method of
determining the eligibility of a Village employee for the benefits enumerated
under the Public Safety Employee Benefits Act, 820 ILCS 320/1, et seq., as
amended ("PSEBA"). All benefits provided by the Village to employees pursuant
to the PSEBA shall be consistent with the PSEBA. (Ord. O-24-03, 2-6-2024)
1-12-2: POLICY AND PROCEDURE FOR ADMINISTERING APPLICATIONS FOR PSEBA BENEFITS:
   A.   Employees, or family member(s) of injured or deceased employees, who
may qualify for PSEBA benefits must file a full and complete application in
writing with the Village Administrator.
   B.   A complete application shall include the following:
      1.   The applicant's name and date of hire, detailed information
regarding the incident for which PSEBA benefits are sought, including
information relating to how the injury was sustained in the line of duty,
including the date, time, place, nature of injury, and other factual
circumstances surrounding the incident.
      2.   The applicant's firsthand knowledge explaining, to the Village's
satisfaction, how the injury directly resulted from:
         a.   Response to fresh pursuit;
         b.   Response to what is reasonably believed to be an emergency;
         c.   Response to an unlawful act perpetrated by another; or
         d.   The investigation of a criminal act.
      3.   A signed unconditional PSEBA medical authorization release which
authorizes the Village to collect information related to the incident
including, but not limited to, disability pension proceedings, worker's
compensation records, and medical records, and a complete list of the names and
addresses for all health care providers involved in the diagnosis, treatment,
review or handling of the injury for which PSEBA benefits are sought.
      4.   A signed unconditional PSEBA general information release specifying
the name and signature of the applicant or her/his authorized representative
along with legal proof of said representation and name and signature of witness
authorizing the collection of information necessary to review the application.
      5.   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of witnesses to the
incident resulting in the injury for which PSEBA benefits are sought, along
with any statements of the witnesses which the applicant either possesses, may
obtain or is aware of.
      6.   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of witnesses the
applicant intends to call at the PSEBA hearing, along with their anticipated
subjects of testimony and any opinions the witnesses are expected to give.
      7.   Information and documentation filed with the Campton Hills Police
Pension Fund Board.
      8.   Information regarding other sources of health insurance benefits
currently enrolled in, received by, or available to the applicant and/or the
applicant's family members, including the source of the benefits and the
benefits provided or available.
   C.   The PSEBA application must be sworn to by the applicant and notarized
to certify the truthfulness of the application's contents.
   D.   On the date that the PSEBA application is deemed complete by the
Village, the completed application shall then be submitted to the Village
Administrator as the preliminary record, and a copy of the same shall be date
stamped and provided to the applicant.
   E.   Upon receipt of a complete application for PSEBA benefits, the Village
Administrator shall set the matter for an administrative hearing before a
hearing officer to make a determination on whether to grant the application and
provide the applicant with benefits under the PSEBA.
   F.   The applicant shall be given written notice of the date for the
administrative hearing not less than ten (10) calendar days prior to the
commencement of the hearing. If the applicant, upon receiving written notice of
the administrative hearing, cannot attend said date, the applicant must contact
the hearing officer in writing within seven (7) calendar days after being
served. The hearing officer shall establish an alternative hearing date within
thirty (30) calendar days of the original hearing date. The applicant's failure
to appear at the administrative hearing shall result in denial of PSEBA
benefits.
   G.   The Village Administrator may delegate any of his/her authority, duties
and obligations under this Chapter 12, in whole or part, to a designee, or
designees. (Ord. O-24-03, 2-6-2024)
1-12-3: POLICY AND PROCEDURE FOR HEARINGS FOR PSEBA BENEFITS:
   A.   Hearing Officer: The Village Administrator shall be the hearing officer
for hearings on applications for PSEBA benefits. The hearing officer shall have
all of the authorities granted under statute and common law relative to the
conduct of administrative hearings, including to:
      1.   Adopt, revise and enforce rules of procedure for hearings;
      2.   Preside over hearings;
      3.   Administer oaths;
      4.   Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the issue of
eligibility under PSEBA;
      5.   Issue subpoenas to secure attendance of witnesses and the production
of relevant papers or documents upon the request of the applicant, the Village,
the hearing officer;
      6.   Rule upon objections to the admissibility of evidence;
      7.   Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all exhibits
in evidence introduced at the hearing; and
      8.   Issue a final determination on applications for PSEBA benefits based
on the evidence presented at the hearing, the determination of which shall be
in writing and shall include a written finding of fact, decision and order.
   B.   Hearings: Hearings for the determination of eligibility for benefits
under PSEBA shall be initiated by the Village after the submission of a full
and complete PSEBA application, and a determination by the hearing officer that
it is appropriate to proceed with the hearing, which determination shall
include consideration of the status of any disability pension proceeding
related to the applicant and whether the disability pension proceeding has
resulted in a final and non-appealable decision. A hearing shall be held to
adjudicate and determine whether the applicant is eligible for benefits under
the PSEBA. If the applicant is found eligible, the PSEBA benefits provided to
the applicant shall be consistent with the PSEBA.
      1.   Record: Hearings shall be attended by a certified court reporter,
and a transcript of all proceedings shall be made by said certified court
reporter.
      2.   Procedures: The Village and the applicant shall be entitled to
representation by counsel at hearings and may present witnesses, testimony and
documents, may cross-examine opposing witnesses, and may request the issuance
by the hearing officer of subpoenas to compel the appearance of relevant
witnesses or the production of relevant documents. The hearing officer may
issue subpoenas to compel the appearance of relevant witnesses or the
production of relevant documents in his/her discretion.
      3.   Evidence: The Illinois Rules of Evidence shall apply to the extent
practicable unless, by such application, the hearing officer determines that
application of the rule would be an injustice or preclude the introduction of
evidence of the type commonly relied upon by a reasonably prudent person in the
conduct of her/his affairs. Such determination shall be in the sole discretion
of the hearing officer.
      4.   Final Determination: A written determination by the hearing officer
of whether the applicant is eligible benefits under the PSEBA shall constitute
a final administrative determination for the purpose of judicial review under
the common law writ of certiorari. Motions to reconsider, set aside or
challenge the final determination of the hearing officer are not permitted.
      5.   Burden of Proof: At any administrative hearing, the applicant shall
have the obligation and burden of proof to establish that the applicant is
eligible and qualified to receive PSEBA benefits. The standard of proof in all
hearings shall be by the preponderance of the evidence. (Ord. O-24-03, 2-6-
2024)
1-12-4: PSEBA BENEFITS GRANTED BY THE VILLAGE:
   A.   Group Insurance Plan: If an applicant is determined to be eligible for
PSEBA benefits, the applicant will be eligible to receive continued health
coverage consistent with the PSEBA under the applicant's choice of the
Village's group health insurance plan offerings. The Village's group health
insurance plan may change from time to time in the Village's sole discretion.
PSEBA beneficiaries may only change from one health insurance plan to another
during the Village's open enrollment period. PSEBA benefits do not include
benefits not provided in the Village's group health insurance plan, such as,
but not limited to, dental, vision, life insurance, etc.
   B.   Reduction Or Elimination Of PSEBA Benefits By Other Health Coverage: If
an applicant or PSEBA beneficiary becomes eligible to receive health insurance
benefits from any other source, including, but not limited to, Medicare, the
PSEBA beneficiary's PSEBA coverage may be reduced or eliminated as determined
by the Village consistent with PSEBA. If there is another source, the applicant
or PSEBA beneficiary shall notify the Village of that source no later than five
(5) business days from that source becoming available to the applicant, the
applicant's beneficiaries or the PSEBA beneficiary. Applicants and PSEBA
beneficiaries have an ongoing obligation to, and shall, update the Village with
their health insurance coverage information available from any other source,
and failure to do so may result in the denial of benefits and/or reimbursement
to the Village for duplicate coverage. If duplicate coverage has been received
by a PSEBA beneficiary, further PSEBA benefits will be denied until the Village
has been fully reimbursed by the PSEBA beneficiary for what it would have been
credited if it had known about other coverage. Receipt of health insurance
benefits from other sources without notice to the Village shall require the
PSEBA beneficiary to reimburse the Village for the value of those benefits.
   C.   Affidavit Of Continued PSEBA Eligibility: All recipients of PSEBA
benefits from the Village shall complete and return to the Village
Administrator on an annual basis an affidavit verifying the recipient's
continued eligibility for PSEBA benefits. The affidavit must be completed and
returned to the Village Administrator within sixty (60) calendar days of
written notice from the Village. If the recipient does not complete and return
the affidavit within the time required, the Village Administrator shall give
the recipient an additional written notice providing an additional thirty (30)
calendar days for the recipient to complete and return the affidavit. Failure
to return the affidavit within the time required shall result in the recipient
incurring responsibility for reimbursing the Village for premiums paid during
the period the affidavit is due and not filed. (Ord. O-24-03, 2-6-2024)
TITLE 2
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1: Commission Established; Membership; Appointment
2-1-2: Term Of Office
2-1-3: Resignations And Vacancies
2-1-4: Organization
2-1-5: Quorum; Voting
2-1-6: Powers And Duties
2-1-7: Compensation
2-1-1: COMMISSION ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT:
There is established a Planning and Zoning Commission for the village as
provided by statute. The commission shall consist of a chair and six (6)
regular members, all of whom shall be appointed by the president, with the
advice and consent of the board of trustees. Members of the commission shall
reside within the Village. (2013 Code § 2-1-1; amd. Ord. O-15-09, 7-7-2015;
Ord. O-24-23, 12-3-2024)
2-1-2: TERM OF OFFICE:
Each appointed member of the commission shall serve for a term of five (5)
years, or until their successor is appointed and qualified; provided, however,
that the member of the commission who is chair shall serve for a one (1)-year
term in his or her capacity as chair. The initial members of the commission
shall be appointed with staggered terms, in the lengths as denoted in 65 ILCS
5/11-13-3(C). (Ord. O-15-09, 7-7-2015; amd. 2016 Code; Ord. O-24-23, 12-3-2024)
2-1-3: RESIGNATIONS AND VACANCIES:
The Village President may accept the resignation of any member of the
commission desiring to resign, and upon such acceptance, the office shall be
considered vacant. Vacancies occurring shall be filled by appointment by the
president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, for the
unexpired term only. A vacancy occurs upon death, removal from the village,
resignation, or action of the president for cause. (2013 Code § 2-1-4; amd.
2016 Code; Ord. O-24-23, 12-3-2024)
2-1-4: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Officers: The president, with the advice and consent of the board of
trustees, shall designate the chair and vice chair. The president, with the
advice and consent of the board of trustees, also may appoint a secretary who
need not be a member of the commission.
   B.   Rules Of Procedure: The commission may adopt rules regulating the
procedure of all meetings of the commission, which shall not conflict with the
statutes or with the provisions of this code or any ordinances of the Village.
Such rules shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk and may be amended
at any meetings, such rules to be effective upon filing in the office of the
Village Clerk.
   C.   Meetings:
      1.   Regular Meetings: The commission shall meet on the fourth Monday of
each month or other date pursuant to a schedule of meetings announced annually
prior to May 1 of each year.
      2.   Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called by the chair or by
two (2) members of the commission.
      3.   Open Meetings: All meetings of the commission shall be open to the
public unless otherwise excepted by law and in all respects shall comply with
state statutes.
      4.   The commission shall keep minutes of its meetings and proceedings
showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to
vote, indicating such fact, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such
fact. (2013 Code §§ 2-1-5 and 2-1-6; amd. Ord. O-24-23, 12-3-2024)
2-1-5: QUORUM; VOTING:
Four (4) members of the commission shall constitute a quorum, but no final
action shall be taken on any measure before it except with the concurrence of
three (3) members. The chair shall vote with the other members of the
commission. (2013 Code § 2-1-7; amd. Ord. O-24-23, 12-3-2024)
2-1-6: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The commission shall have the following powers and duties:
   A.   To prepare and to recommend to the village board a comprehensive plan
of public improvements looking to the present and future development of the
village, and to provide reasonable requirements with reference to streets,
alleys, public grounds and other improvements pursuant to law in unsubdivided
lands within the corporate limits and in contiguous territory outside and
distant not more than one and one-half (1.5) miles from the corporate limits of
the village, insofar as the same are not included in any city, village or
incorporated town. After its adoption by the village board, this shall be known
as the official comprehensive plan.
   B.   To recommend from time-to-time changes in the official comprehensive
plan.
   C.   To prepare and recommend to the village board from time-to-time plans
for specific improvements in pursuance of such official comprehensive plan.
   D.   To aid the village officials charged with the direction of projects for
improvements embraced within the official comprehensive plan, to further these
projects, and generally, to promote the objectives of the official
comprehensive plan.
   E.   To exercise such other powers as may be provided by statute or
ordinance or by this code. The chair of the commission may administer oaths and
compel the attendance of witnesses pursuant to law.
   F.   To hear and decide any appeal from any order, decision or
interpretation of the enforcing officer, or any matter referred to it or upon
which it is required to pass under the provisions of this code, the ordinances
of the village, or state statutes; provided, that a concurring vote of four (4)
members shall be necessary to reverse any decision of the enforcing officer or
to recommend a variation.
   G.   To hear all requests for zoning variation and make recommendations to
the corporate authorities, as provided in the zoning ordinance.
   F.   To keep records of its examinations and other official actions. Every
rule, regulation, amendment or repeal thereof, and every order, requirement,
decision, determination or recommendation of the Planning and Zoning
Commission, shall be filed promptly in the office of the village clerk and
shall be a public record.
(2013 Code § 2-1-8; amd. Ord. O-24-23, 12-3-2024)
2-1-7: COMPENSATION:
The members of the commission shall serve without compensation. (2013 Code § 2-
1-9; amd. Ord. O-24-23, 12-3-2024)
CHAPTER 2
TECHNOLOGY COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-2-1: Board Established; Membership; Appointment; Term
2-2-2: Quorum
2-2-3: Duties
2-2-1: BOARD ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; TERM:
There is hereby established a Technology Committee, which shall consist of five
(5) members who shall be appointed by the Village President with the advice and
consent of the Board of Trustees. The members may include one (1) member of the
Board of Trustees and the Village Administrator. Members shall serve on the
Committee for three (3) years, but the initial terms shall be staggered in
order that the terms of no more than three (3) persons shall expire in any one
year. If a member is unable to remain on the Committee, the Village President
may appoint a replacement with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees
to fill the unexpired term. All members shall be residents of the Village,
other than the Village Administrator. Members shall receive no additional
compensation for their work on the Committee, either for their attendance at
meetings of the Committee or their performance of any duty or thing connected
with the Committee. The Committee shall have a committee chair appointed by the
Village President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. (Ord.
O-25-04, 1-21-2025)
2-2-2: QUORUM:
Three (3) members of the Technology Committee shall constitute a quorum. (Ord.
O-25-04, 1-21-2025)
2-2-3: DUTIES:
The duties of the Committee are to explore ways to improve or streamline the
Village's use of technology, both in fulfilling its desire to manage the
internal operations of Village Hall, and to provide necessary services to its
residents and the general public. The Committee will review potential new uses
of technology to further these goals, while also reviewing the Village's
current technology uses and cybersecurity concerns, and make recommendations
for cost-saving measures and/or expansion of technology use that would benefit
the Village. The Committee shall submit reports on the Initiative to the
Village President and Board of Trustees for their review and consideration from
time to time. The Committee shall submit suggestions to Village President and
Board of Trustees for consideration. (Ord. O-25-04, 1-21-2025)
CHAPTER 3
BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
SECTION:
2-3-1: Board Established; Membership; Appointment; Term Of Office
2-3-2: Duties
2-3-1: BOARD ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; TERM OF OFFICE:
There shall be a board of fire and police commissioners, as provided by law,
which shall consist of three (3) members whose terms shall be staggered and for
three (3) years. Such members shall be appointed by the president, with the
advice and consent of the board of trustees. (2013 Code § 2-3-1)
2-3-2: DUTIES:
The board of fire and police commissioners shall have charge of all
appointments of full time members of the police department, excepting that of
the chief of police who shall be appointed by the village president, with the
advice and consent of the board of trustees, and said board shall conduct and
hold all entrance and promotional examinations in the manner required by its
rules and regulations as they may be established from time to time and as
required by law. If so designated by the village president, the board may have
charge of appointments of part time members of the police department. The board
of fire and police commissioners may utilize an intergovernmental cooperative
as its agent for the purpose of administering such examinations if authorized
to do so by the president and board of trustees. (2013 Code § 2-3-2)
CHAPTER 4
FINANCE COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-4-1: Appointment And Duties
2-4-2: Membership; Terms Of Office; Chair
2-4-3: Meetings
2-4-4: Quorum
2-4-1: APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES:
The Village President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees,
may appoint a five (5) person Finance Committee which shall have the following
duties:
   A.   As part of the annual budget process, to advise and provide input to
the Budget Officer in the preparation of the annual budget.
   B.   To review the proposed annual budget and make a recommendation to the
Budget Officer and Village Board.
   C.   To provide financial oversight and guidance to the Village Board.
   D.   To review staff recommendations for financial matters including budget
amendments throughout the year.
   E.   To review and recommend changes to the Village budgetary strategies and
financial policies. (Ord. O-18-25, 11-7-2018)
2-4-2: MEMBERSHIP; TERMS OF OFFICE; CHAIR:
The Finance Committee shall consist of five (5) members, not more than one of
whom may be a member of the Board of Trustees. The terms of office of members
of the committee shall be two (2) years from the date of their appointment and
acceptance of the position. One of the members of the committee shall be
appointed by the Village President as Chair, with the advice and consent of the
Board of Trustees.
The Village President then serving in office will serve as a liaison to the
committee. The liaison will not count towards the quorum of the committee and
is not a voting member. (Ord. O-18-09, 6-19-2018)
2-4-3: MEETINGS:
The Finance Committee shall meet at least two (2) times during the fiscal year,
with appropriate notice given to all members of the committee and notice in
compliance with the Open Meetings Act of the State. (Ord. O-18-09, 6-19-2018)
2-4-4: QUORUM:
Three (3) members of the Finance Committee shall constitute a quorum. (Ord. O-
18-09, 6-19-2018)
CHAPTER 5
COMMUNITY RELATIONS COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-5-1: Commission Established; Membership; Appointment; Term Of Office
2-5-2: Quorum
2-5-3: Duties
2-5-1: COMMISSION ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; TERM OF OFFICE:
There is hereby established a Community Relations Commission, which shall
consist of seven (7) members, each appointed by the Village President, with the
advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. One member will be appointed by
the Village President to serve as Chair, with the advice and consent of the
Board of Trustees. The terms of such members shall be for three (3) years, but
the initial terms shall be staggered in order that the terms of no more than
three (3) persons shall expire in any one year.
The Village President may appoint a Village Trustee Liaison. The liaison will
not count towards the quorum of the commission and is not a voting member.
(Ord. O-18-07, 6-19-2018)
2-5-2: QUORUM:
Four (4) members of the Community Relations Commission shall constitute a
quorum. (Ord. O-18-07, 6-19-2018)
2-5-3: DUTIES:
The duties of the commission shall be to aid in the dissemination of
information to the citizens of the Village and to develop and recommend
programs for community involvement in the activities and events of the Village.
(Ord. O-18-07, 6-19-2018)
CHAPTER 6
PUBLIC WORKS COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-6-1: Committee Established; Membership; Appointment; Term Of Office
2-6-2: Quorum
2-6-3: Duties
2-6-1: COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; TERM OF OFFICE:
There is hereby established a Public Works Committee, consisting of five (5)
members. The committee members will be appointed by the Village President, with
the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. One member will be appointed
by the Village President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees,
to serve as Chair. The terms of such members shall be for two (2) years, with
the terms staggered in order that the terms of no more than three (3) persons
shall expire in any one year.
The Village President may appoint a Village Trustee Liaison. The liaison will
not count towards the quorum of the committee and is not a voting member. (Ord.
O-18-14, 8-8-2018)
2-6-2: QUORUM:
Three (3) members of the Public Works Committee shall constitute a quorum.
(Ord. O-18-14, 8-8-2018)
2-6-3: DUTIES:
The Public Works Committee will have the following duties:
   A.   Advise the Corporate Authorities as to the existing and potential
public works projects;
   B.   Review bidding where bids are solicited;
   C.   Be responsible for making recommendations as to matters of road
maintenance, snowplowing, and other public works projects that are not the
subject of decisions and determinations made by others pursuant to an
intergovernmental agreement;
   D.   Undertake other responsibilities in the area of public works as may be
assigned by the Corporate Authorities. (Ord. O-18-14, 8-8-2018)
CHAPTER 7
POLICE PENSION FUND
SECTION:
2-7-1: Established
2-7-2: Board Of Trustees; Composition, Appointment And Election Of Members;
Term
2-7-3: Meetings
2-7-4: Quorum
2-7-5: Duties
2-7-1: ESTABLISHED:
There shall be a Police Pension Fund established in the Village, as provided by
law. (Ord. O-18-10, 6-19-2018)
2-7-2: BOARD OF TRUSTEES; COMPOSITION, APPOINTMENT AND ELECTION OF MEMBERS;
TERM:
The Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund shall consist of five (5)
members, two (2) appointed by the Village President, two (2) elected by the
members of the Police Department, and one elected by the beneficiaries of the
Pension Fund. The elections shall be held in accordance with State Statute, and
the term of each member shall be two (2) years. (Ord. O-18-10, 6-19-2018)
2-7-3: MEETINGS:
The Pension Board shall meet at least quarterly as provided by law, and shall
hold such additional meetings as may be called by the President of the Pension
Board. (Ord. O-18-10, 6-19-2018)
2-7-4: QUORUM:
Three (3) members of the Police Pension Fund Board shall constitute a quorum.
(Ord. O-18-10, 6-19-2018)
2-7-5: DUTIES:
The board has the duty to manage, invest, and control the Police Pension Fund
and all monies pertaining thereto in the manner provided by statute and to pay
the beneficiaries as provided by law. (Ord. O-18-10, 6-19-2018)
TITLE 3
FINANCE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL FINANCE PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Budget Officer
3-1-2: Annual Budget
3-1-3: Surety Bonds
3-1-4: Minimum Amount Of Liability Insurance
3-1-5: Purchasing Procedures And Bidding
3-1-6: Fees For Accident Reports And Fingerprinting
3-1-7: Warrants And Checks
3-1-8: Disposal Of Village Property
3-1-1: BUDGET OFFICER:
   A.   Appointment And Term: The village president shall designate a budget
officer, with approval of the board of trustees. The budget officer's term
shall not exceed the term of the current village president. Removal from office
shall be in accordance with applicable state law and applicable contractual
provisions, if any. The budget officer may concurrently hold another
nonconflicting municipal office, either elected or appointed.
   B.   Bond: The budget officer, before entering upon the duties of his/her
office, shall execute a bond to the village in such sum as provided in the
Illinois Compiled Statutes with such sureties as the president and board of
trustees shall condition for the faithful performance of the duties of the
budget officer.
   C.   Powers And Duties: The budget officer shall have such powers and duties
as provided pursuant to the Illinois municipal code, as amended from time to
time.
   D.   Compensation: The budget officer shall receive such compensation as may
be fixed by the president and board of trustees from time to time. (Ord. O-15-
18, 10-6-2015)
3-1-2: ANNUAL BUDGET:
   A.   Preparation: In accordance with the Illinois Compiled Statutes, the
budget officer shall compile a budget, such budget to contain estimates of
revenues available to the village for the fiscal year for which the budget is
drafted, together with recommended expenditures for all of the village
departments, committees, commissions, and boards. The budget shall contain
actual or estimated revenues and expenditures for the two (2) years immediately
preceding the fiscal year for which the budget is prepared. The budget shall be
presented to the finance committee for their opportunity to make a
recommendation to the budget officer and village board.
   B.   Finance Committee Recommendation: The finance committee shall: 1)
advise and provide input to the budget officer in the preparation of the annual
budget; and 2) review the proposed annual budget and make a recommendation to
the budget officer and the village board.
   C.   Approval: The final budget shall be adopted by the village board before
April 30 of each year.
   D.   Village Financial Plan: The budget approved by the village board shall
be the financial plan for conducting affairs of the village for the following
fiscal year.
   E.   Budget Amendments: Pursuant to the Illinois municipal code, as amended
from time to time, heads of village departments may delete, add to, change or
create subclasses within object classes budgeted previously to the department,
upon approval of the budget officer or village president. By a vote of two-
thirds (2/3) of the members of the corporate authorities then holding office,
the budget may be revised by deleting, adding to, changing or creating
subclasses within object classes and object classes themselves. No revision of
the budget shall be made increasing the budget in the event funds are not
available to effectuate the purpose of the revision. (Ord. O-15-18, 10-6-2015)
3-1-3: SURETY BONDS:
   A.   Whenever a surety bond to indemnify the village is required as a
prerequisite to exercising the duties of any office or position, or to the
issuance of a license or permit, or for the exercise of any special privilege,
the surety on such bond shall be a corporation licensed and authorized to do
business in the state as a surety company, in the absence of specific provision
to the contrary by ordinance. The Corporate Authorities have the right to
reject a proposed surety if they determine the financial rating of the proposed
surety is not adequate.
   B.   Whenever, in its opinion, additional sureties or an additional surety
may be needed on any bond to indemnify the Village against loss or liability
because of the insolvency of the existing surety or sureties or for any other
reason, the Village may order a new surety for such bond. If such new surety or
sureties are not procured within ten (10) days from the time such order is
transmitted to the principal on the bond, or his assignee, the board may, at
its option, declare the bond to be void, and thereupon such principal or
assignee shall be deemed to have surrendered the privilege or position as
condition of which the bond was required. (2013 Code § 1-17-4)
3-1-4: MINIMUM AMOUNT OF LIABILITY INSURANCE:
All liability insurance policies and certificates of liability insurance which
any person or entity is required to provide to the Village naming the Village
as an insured or as an additional insured shall provide for minimum coverage of
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence unless a different amount of
coverage is specified in some other section of this Code or unless a different
amount of coverage is provided for in a specific instance by the Corporate
Authorities. (Ord. O-13-22, 10-15-2013)
3-1-5: PURCHASING PROCEDURES AND BIDDING:
   A.   Preauthorized Expenditures:
      1.   The Village Administrator, Department Heads, and Committee Chairs
are authorized to make or approve the expenditure of Village funds on behalf of
the Village without prior approval of the Village Board, not to exceed the
authorized amounts set forth below. This authority is limited to expenditures
which have been itemized within the current budget adopted by the Corporate
Authorities and have been approved by the Village official responsible for
overseeing that portion of the budget.
 
Village President     5,000.00
Village Administrator 5,000.00
Department Head       1,000.00
Committee Chair       500.00
 
      2.   Any expenditure that does not fall within an expenditure that is
authorized by subsection A1 of this section shall require the approval of the
Corporate Authorities.
      3.   No Village officer or employee, except as expressly provided in this
Code, is authorized to make purchases for the Village or to incur other
obligations, including contacting professionals serving the Village.
      4.   The prohibitions of subsections A1 through A3 of this section shall
not apply in the case of a bona fide emergency except such expenditures must
follow the requirements of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-10-5.
      5.   If the Village receives an invoice by reason of a violation of this
section, the Village officer or employee whose action resulted in such invoice
shall be responsible for reimbursing the Village for the amount thereof.
      6.   The disbursement of petty cash shall be restricted to those Village
officials authorized as check signatories pursuant to section
3-1-7 of this chapter. The use of Village credit and debit cards by any Village
official shall be subject to the prior approval of the Village President,
Village Administrator, or a department head subject to the preauthorized
expenditure limits contained within subsection A1 of this section.
      7.   Expenditures shall not be split or staggered in an attempt to
circumvent any provision of this Code.
      8.   Preauthorized expenditures do not include purchases made from a
contingency account specifically designated within the current budget adopted
by the Corporate Authorities. All such purchases shall require approval by the
Corporate Authorities.
   B.   Bids Required; Procedures:
      1.   Except in the case of emergency, all public works contracts must
follow the requirements of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-9-1. Emergency
expenditures must follow the requirements of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-
10-5.
      2.   No purchase of any article or commodity expected to cost more than
ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall be made, incurred or committed to
unless bids or quotations are solicited from two (2) or more vendors of such
article or commodity, except in case of emergency or with specific approval of
the board of trustees and except for personal property, supplies and services
purchased through the department of central management services of the state of
Illinois pursuant to the governmental joint purchasing  act 1 . (Ord. O-15-15,
9-15-2015; amd. Ord. Ord. O-16-05, 4-19-2016; O-16-16, 6-21-2016; Ord. O-19-
18, 10-15-2019; Ord. O-23-08, 10-3-2023)  
 
Notes
1 1. 30 ILCS 525/0.01 et seq.
3-1-6: FEES FOR ACCIDENT REPORTS AND FINGERPRINTING:
   A.   The village shall receive a fee of five dollars ($5.00) for furnishing
a copy of a traffic accident report prepared by the village or any other police
agency.
   B.   There shall be a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) for an accident
reconstruction report.
   C.   Fingerprinting upon request of a resident of the village shall be
performed without charge, however, there shall be a fee of twenty five dollars
($25.00) for fingerprinting requested by a nonresident. (2013 Code § 1-17-8)
3-1-7: WARRANTS AND CHECKS:
   A.   Warrants:
      1.   Definition: "Warrants" are authorizations to the village treasurer
to disburse village funds. (2013 Code § 1-9-4)
      2.   Signatures Required; Contents: No funds shall be disbursed unless
the treasurer first receives a warrant signed by the village president or one
of the finance trustees elected pursuant to section
1-6-7-1 of this code and countersigned by the village clerk or the deputy
village clerk, unless there is a vacancy in both, as having been approved by
the board of trustees, excluding petty cash and payroll. Each warrant shall
state the particular fund or appropriation to which the same is chargeable and
the person to whom payable. (Ord. O-14-21, 11-18-2014)
   B.   Checks: All checks, excluding payroll and the disbursement of petty
cash, shall require the signature of any two (2) of the following: village
president, village administrator, unless the village administrator is then the
acting treasurer, and one of the finance trustees elected pursuant to section
1-6-7-1 of this code; provided, however, that no such village official shall be
an authorized signatory on any account who is an employee or member of the
board of directors of the bank on which the check is drawn, and no village
official shall be an authorized signatory on any check reimbursing oneself.
(Ord. O-15-15, 9-15-2015)
3-1-8: DISPOSAL OF VILLAGE PROPERTY:
The disposal of village property must comply with the requirements of state law
and the following procedures:
   A.   Property Valued At Five Hundred Dollars Or Less: The village president
has authority to dispose of village property having an estimated fair market
value of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less where such property is no
longer required for village purposes. Disposal may be by sale, donation to
another public body or to a charitable, not for profit organization, or
discarding such property as substantially worthless.
   B.   Property Valued In Excess Of Five Hundred Dollars: Any village property
having an estimated fair market value in excess of five hundred dollars
($500.00) may only be disposed of by approval of the corporate authorities.
Disposal must be by sale unless otherwise expressly authorized by the corporate
authorities. (Ord. O-15-15, 9-15-2015)
CHAPTER 2
PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT COSTS
SECTION:
3-2-1: Findings
3-2-2: Trust And Agency Account
3-2-3: Deposit Requirements
3-2-4: Invoices
3-2-5: Refunds
3-2-6: Copy Of Provisions To Petitioner
3-2-1: FINDINGS:
   A.   Certain costs are necessarily incurred by the village in processing
petitions for annexation, rezoning, planned unit developments, subdivisions,
site plans and other land use matters (the development petition), including,
but not limited to, staff costs and fees of planning consultants, engineers,
attorneys, building officials, environmental consultants, and other
consultants, as well as out of pocket costs of the village such as mailing,
photocopying, telephone, publication, recording and other out of pocket costs
(collectively "development costs"); and (2013 Code § 1-17-5; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   The village board has determined that development costs should be borne
by the person filing a development petition ("petitioner") rather than the
taxpayers of the village. (2013 Code § 1-17-5)
3-2-2: TRUST AND AGENCY ACCOUNT:
The village shall establish a trust and agency account (also known as an escrow
account): a) for the purpose of accounting for development costs and
reimbursement for such costs with subaccounts for each separate petitioner; and
b) for the purpose of accounting for other deposits being held in trust from
time to time. Such trust and agency account shall be subject to audit as in the
case of all other accounts and funds of the village but shall not be part of
the budget process of the village. (Ord. O-15-18, 10-6-2015)
3-2-3: DEPOSIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Initial Deposit: Whenever the village is asked to consider a
development petition, the village administrator, or the designee of the
administrator, shall, prior to the time when the village incurs any significant
expense for staff or consultants, establish the amount of the petitioner's
initial deposit in the trust and agency account of the village (the "initial
deposit"). Before any expenses for consultant and out of pocket costs are
incurred by the village, the petitioner shall pay to the village treasurer the
amount of such initial deposit.
   B.   Second And Subsequent Deposits: Prior to the time when the accrued fees
and costs equal the amount of said initial deposit, the village administrator,
or the designee of the administrator, shall establish the amount, if any, of a
second deposit to the trust and agency account (the "second deposit").
Likewise, prior to the time when the accrued fees and costs equal the amount of
said second deposit (and any subsequent deposits), the village administrator,
or the designee of the administrator, shall establish the amount of subsequent
deposits (the "subsequent deposits") to the trust and agency account. (2013
Code § 1-17-5; amd. 2016 Code)
   C.   Failure To Make Deposits: In the event that the petitioner fails to
promptly make the required payments of the initial deposit, the second deposit
or any subsequent deposit, the village may advise all consultants to the
village to cease performing any services and incurring any costs relative to
the development petition, and the village may postpone or cancel any scheduled
hearings, meetings or considerations of the pending development petition. (2013
Code § 1-17-5)
3-2-4: INVOICES:
Copies of all invoices submitted to the village by its consultants shall be
provided to the petitioner. Any questions as to such invoices must be raised by
the petitioner within fourteen (14) days after transmittal of the invoices to
the petitioner, and in the absence of such questions within such time, the
invoices shall be conclusively deemed acceptable to the petitioner. (2013 Code
§ 1-17-5)
3-2-5: REFUNDS:
Whenever it appears that there will not be further development costs incurred
relative to a petitioner, the balance in such petitioner's trust and agency
account will be refunded to the petitioner. (2013 Code § 1-17-5)
3-2-6: COPY OF PROVISIONS TO PETITIONER:
At the time that the amount of initial deposit is established, the petitioner
shall be provided with a copy of this chapter and shall deliver to the village
the following statement signed by the petitioner: (2013 Code § 1-17-5)
To: Village of Campton Hills
The undersigned, having filed or expecting to file, a development petition with
the Village of Campton Hills, certify that I have received a copy of Title 3,
Chapter 2 of the Village of Campton Hills Code, have read and understand the
same and agree to make the deposits as provided in said Code Chapter, including
the following:
Escrow deposit of $                                     
Check #                                                    
Dated:                                        
Type of Project:
                                                                               
Project Name:
                                                                                 
Project Address:
                                                                               
PIN(s):
                                                                                             
Owner's Name:
                                                                                 
Owner's Address:
                                                                               
Petitioner's Name:
                                                                               
Petitioner's Address:
                                                                               
Owner's Signature:
                                                                               
Petitioner's Signature:
                                                                               
Office Use:
                                                                                               
Received By:                              Date:                             
Permit #:
                                                                               
(2013 Code § 1-17-5; amd. 2016 Code)
CHAPTER 3
FEE SCHEDULES FOR CERTAIN ACTIVITIES
SECTION:
3-3-1: Building And Related Activities
3-3-2: Variation Requests
3-3-3: Zoning Amendments And Special Use Permits
3-3-1: BUILDING AND RELATED ACTIVITIES:
Fees shall be charged as hereinafter set forth for review of building permit
applications by the Building and Zoning Officer for compliance with the Village
zoning ordinance, for the review of applications for permits and for the
issuance of permits, with such fees to be paid by the applicant at the time of
filing of the application for such review with the Building and Zoning Officer,
except for the portion of the building permit fee determined after plan review
is complete:
Access permits:  
Access permits:                             
 Driveway access permit fee               $1,450.00
 Temporary access permit valid for 180    150.00
  days
Accessory structures:                       
                                           $200.00 plan review fee/deposit,
                                           plus remaining fee, determined when
                                          the plan review is complete based
                                           upon Village costs. Total fee shall
                                           be 140% of the cost to the Village
                                           $200.00 minimum plan review fee/
                                           deposit, plus remaining costs,
Addition to residence                      determined when the plan review is
                                           complete based upon Village costs.
                                           Total fee shall be 140% of the cost
                                           to the Village1
Cellular towers including associated        
equipment structures:
 Modification of existing towers/monopole $1,200.00 fee
 New towers                               $25.00 per each foot of tower height
                                           $200.00 plan review fee, plus
Decks and concrete/asphalt/pavers          remaining costs, determined when the
driveways, patios, and public or private   plan review is complete based upon
walks                                      Village costs. Total fee shall be
                                           $200.00 or 140% of the cost to the
                                           Village, whichever is greater1
Demolition:                                 
 Commercial structure                     $200.00 fee
 Residential structure:                    
  Complete demolition                    150.00 fee
  Interior demolition only               100.00 fee
 All other structures                     $100.00 fee, except sheds under 200
                                           sq. ft., no charge
Establishment of use (business/commercial  $125.00 fee
uses)
Fences                                     85.00 fee
Inspections:                                
 All inspections not listed               55.00 fee
  Reinspections: Inspections that fail
 require a reinspection fee; the fee must  
  be paid prior to the reinspection:
  First reinspection                     75.00 fee
  Second reinspection                    100.00 fee
Moving a structure                         300.00 fee
New construction:                           
 New commercial buildings                 $10,000.00 permit administration
                                           fee.
 New single-family homes                  $10,000.00 permit administration
                                           fee.
                                           $200.00 plan review fee/deposit,
                                           plus remaining fee, determined when
New parking lot                            the plan review is complete based
                                           upon Village costs. Total fee shall
                                           be 140% of the cost to the Village1
Permit extension                           $50.00 fee
Remodeling or build-out:
                                           $200.00 minimum plan review fee/
                                           deposit, plus remaining fee,
 Commercial                               determined when the plan review is
                                           complete based upon Village costs.
                                           Total fee shall be 140% of the cost
                                           to the Village1
                                           $200.00 minimum plan review fee/
                                           deposit, plus remaining fee,
 Residential                              determined when the plan review is
                                           complete based upon Village costs.
                                           Total fee shall be 140% of the cost
                                           to the Village1
                                           Total fee shall be $150.00 or 140%
Right-of-way permit                        of the cost to the Village,
                                           whichever is greater1
Signs:                                      
                                           $100.00 plan review fee/deposit,
                                           plus remaining costs, determined
  All signs greater than 3 sq. ft., except when the plan review is complete
 temporary/promotional signs              based upon Village costs. Total fee
                                           shall be $100.00 or 140% of the cost
                                           to the Village, whichever is
                                           greater1
 Political signs                          No charge
 Religious and other nonprofit            No charge
  organization signs
 Temporary/promotional signs              $20.00 fee
                                           Based on Village Stormwater
Stormwater permit                          Engineer's fees. Total fee shall be
                                           140% of the cost to the Village1
Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs:
                                           $200.00 minimum plan review fee/
  Aboveground pools, spas and hot tubs     deposit, plus remaining costs
 (excludes temporary, plastic kiddie      determined when the plan review is
  pools)                                   complete based upon Village costs.
                                           Total fee shall be 140% of the cost
                                           to the Village1
                                           $200.00 minimum plan review fee/
                                           deposit, plus remaining costs
 In ground pools                          determined when the plan review is
                                           complete based upon Village costs.
                                           Total fee shall be 140% of the cost
                                           to the Village1
 Temporary aboveground pools less than 24 No permit required
  inches deep
                                           A penalty of 100% of the permit fee.
Work started without a permit or necessary This fee may be waived by the
zoning approval                            Village Administrator for such cases
                                           not involving wilful and wanton
                                           conduct
Miscellaneous building permits:             
 Installation and/or replacement of:       
  Air conditioning and/or furnace units  $100.00 fee
                                           $100.00 plan review fee/deposit,
                                           plus remaining costs, determined
                                           when the plan review is complete
  Electric service/panel upgrade         based upon Village costs. Total fee
                                           shall be $100.00 or 140% of the cost
                                           to the Village, whichever is
                                           greater1
                                           $100.00 plan review fee/deposit,
                                           plus remaining costs, determined
                                           when the plan review is complete
  Gas line/fire pits - new fee           based upon Village costs. Total fee
                                           shall be $100.00 or 140% of the cost
                                           to the Village, whichever is
                                           greater1
                                           $100.00 plan review fee/deposit,
                                           plus remaining costs, determined
                                           when the plan review is complete
  Irrigation system                      based upon Village costs. Total fee
                                           shall be $100.00 or 140% of the cost
                                           to the Village, whichever is
                                           greater1
  Reroofing                              $135.00 fee
    Siding, gutters, window replacement,
  exterior door replacement, other minor  
    alterations: Determined based on the
    estimated project cost:
   For the first $1,000.00 of project   50.00
      cost
   For each additional $1,000.00 of     12.00
      project cost
  Generators                             $215.00 fee (includes a plan review)
                                           $375.00 minimum plan review fee/
                                           deposit, plus remaining costs
  Solar panels                           determined when the plan review is
                                           complete based upon Village costs.
                                           Total fee shall be 140% of the cost
                                           to the Village1
 
Note:
   1.    When a fee is established at 140% of the Village's costs, that fee is
based on 100% of the costs actually incurred by the Village in retaining
outside consultants, plus an additional 40% of that cost to cover the Village's
in-house administrative costs.
(Ord. O-18-20, 10-16-2018; amd. Ord. O-19-09, 5-21-2019; Ord. O-23-19, - -2023)
3-3-2: VARIATION REQUESTS:
   A.   Filing Fee: A filing fee in the amount of five hundred fifty dollars
($550.00), payable to the Village, shall accompany each application for a
zoning variation. If two (2) or more variations are requested for the same
property in one application, only one fee is due.
   B.   Additional Charges: Pursuant to
chapter 2 of this title, the applicant shall be responsible to reimburse the
Village for all expenses incurred by the Village relative to each application.
(2013 Code § 1-17-7; amd. 2016 Code)
3-3-3: ZONING AMENDMENTS AND SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
   A.   Generally:
      1.   Filing Fees:
         a.   Residential use: Eight hundred dollars ($800.00) for areas of
less than two (2) acres; nine hundred dollars ($900.00) for two (2) acres but
less than five (5) acres; one thousand one hundred twenty five dollars
($1,125.00) for five (5) acres but less than ten (10) acres; one thousand two
hundred dollars ($1,200.00) for ten (10) acres or more, plus fifty dollars
($50.00) per acre or portion thereof over ten (10) acres.
         b.   Nonresidential use: One thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00)
for areas of less than two (2) acres; one thousand eight hundred dollars
($1,800.00) for two (2) acres but less than five (5) acres; two thousand two
hundred fifty dollars ($2,250.00) for five (5) acres but less than ten (10)
acres; two thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($2,250.00) for ten (10) acres or
more, plus seventy five dollars ($75.00) per acre, or portion thereof, over ten
(10) acres.
Also, each request for a variation as part of a rezoning or special use
petition shall be assessed a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). Said fee
must accompany the application for rezoning or special use. Request for a
variance on existing zoning shall require a fee of five hundred fifty dollars
($550.00).
      2.   Additional Charges: Pursuant to chapter 2 of this title, the
applicant shall be responsible to reimburse the Village for all expenses
incurred by the Village relative to each application. (2016 Code)
   B.   Special Use Requests For Boarding Stables:
      1.   Filing Fee: A filing fee in the amount of five hundred fifty dollars
($550.00), payable to the Village, shall accompany each application for a
special use for a boarding stable. (Ord. O-14-14, 7-15-2014)
      2.   Additional Charges: Pursuant to chapter 2 of this title, the
applicant shall be responsible to reimburse the Village for all expenses
incurred by the Village relative to each application. (Ord. O-14-14, 7-15-2014;
amd. 2016 Code)
CHAPTER 4
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INCIDENT EXPENSE RECOVERY
SECTION:
3-4-1: Definitions
3-4-2: General Liability For Expenses
3-4-3: Procedure For Expense Recovery
3-4-4: Enforcement Of Provisions
3-4-5: Nonliability Of Village
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL: Any substance, material or mixture of substances which is
toxic, corrosive, an irritant, strong sensitizer, radioactive, flammable or
combustible or which generates pressure through decomposition, heat or other
means, which may cause injury or illness to humans, domestic livestock or
wildlife, or protected natural areas and/or natural resources or other material
defined as hazardous by the Illinois environmental protection act or any state
or federal law.
THIRD PARTY: Any person, persons, company, corporation or business entity
specifically brought in to investigate or mitigate an incident. (Ord. O-13-19,
9-17-2013)
3-4-2: GENERAL LIABILITY FOR EXPENSES:
The recipients, benefactors, administrators, personal representatives,
executors, successors, heirs or assigns thereof ("persons") who are determined
by the village to be recipients of emergency assistance or emergency services
which imposed financial liability or responsibility on the village or any other
persons as a result of an incident involving known or potentially hazardous
materials shall reimburse the village for any expenses or supplies and
equipment expended or contracted for as a result of services or assistance
provided. In addition, the parties set forth in this section shall reimburse
any third parties for services rendered or supplies and equipment expended as a
result of their involvement in the incident. Said reimbursement to the village
or any other person and all appropriate parties shall also include the cost of
all related medical monitoring or medical treatment of any representatives who,
as a part of their association with the incident, may have come in contact with
known or potentially hazardous materials. (Ord. O-13-19, 9-17-2013)
3-4-3: PROCEDURE FOR EXPENSE RECOVERY:
   A.   A person causing or permitting a hazardous materials incident shall be
responsible, jointly or severally, for all of the following:
      1.   Reimbursement in full for any and all costs incurred by the village
in responding to such hazardous materials incident at the rate of one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00) per hour per vehicle (or any fraction of an hour) and
the hourly pay, including overhead costs, and the prorated cost of employee
benefits, for each employee who participates in such response to a hazardous
materials incident, and administrative expenses.
      2.   Reimbursement in full for any and all costs incurred by the village
for equipment and materials damaged, lost, spent, destroyed or rendered
irreparable in connection with a hazardous materials incident, including costs
of time of employees spent in replacing said equipment and materials.
      3.   Reimbursement of and full liability for any and all costs of cleanup
and removal resulting from a hazardous materials incident, including, but not
limited to, expenses charged by any "third party", as defined in section
3-4-1 of this chapter, which may be necessitated by such hazardous materials
incident.
   B.   The village shall prepare and forward to the person or persons causing
or permitting a hazardous materials incident a bill for the total costs and
expenses incurred for which said person or persons are responsible pursuant to
this chapter; provided, however, any costs in connection with any third party
may be billed directly by such third party. Payment of the total bill shall be
made within thirty (30) days of receipt. Any bill or portion of a bill
remaining unpaid after thirty (30) days of receipt shall accrue interest on the
unpaid balance at the rate of one and one-half percent (11/2%) per month, or
fraction of a month. (Ord. O-13-19, 9-17-2013)
3-4-4: ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS:
Enforcement of this chapter may be pursued in administrative adjudication or
other appropriate means. (Ord. O-13-19, 9-17-2013)
3-4-5: NONLIABILITY OF VILLAGE:
The village, its agents, its officers or employees, shall have no liability or
responsibility for any claim, injury or damage of any kind resulting from a
potentially hazardous materials incident to which the village or any of its
departments, officers, agents, or employees respond.
(Ord. O-13-19, 9-17-2013)
CHAPTER 5
LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXPAYERS’ BILL OF RIGHTS ACT
SECTION:
3-5-1: Definitions
3-5-2: Application Of Payments
3-5-3: Interest On Overdue Payments
3-5-4: Determination Of Tax Liability
3-5-5: Appeals
3-5-6: Credits And Refunds
3-5-7: Voluntary Disclosure
3-5-8: Liens
3-5-9: Penalties
3-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CODE: The Campton Hills Village Code.
TAX: Any pecuniary burden imposed by the Village on individuals or entities to
support Village government that is not a permit or other fee (excepting the
Municipal Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee), is not collected
or administered by a department or agency of the State of Illinois, and is not
a tax on real property under the Illinois Property Tax Code (35 ILCS 200/1-1 et
seq.), including, but not limited to, any of the following taxes that may now,
or in the future be collected or administered by the Village:
   1.   Amusement Tax (Title 3, Chapter 7 of the Code)
   2.   Electric Utility Tax (Title 3, Chapter 8 of the Code)
   3.   Municipal Utility Tax - Gas (Title 3, Chapter 9 of the Code)
TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The Village Administrator of the Village or the Village
Administrator’s designee.
(Ord. O-25-22, 6-5-2025)
3-5-2: APPLICATION OF PAYMENTS:
   Notwithstanding any provision in this Code to the contrary, any payment
designated by a taxpayer as payment of a particular tax liability shall be
applied to that taxpayer’s liabilities pertaining to the particular tax as
follows: first to the interest accrued on outstanding tax liabilities; second
to the outstanding tax liability; third to any penalties due on outstanding tax
liabilities; and fourth to current tax liabilities.
(Ord. O-25-22, 6-5-2025)
3-5-3: INTEREST ON OVERDUE PAYMENTS:
   Notwithstanding any provision in this Code to the contrary, any tax not paid
on the date due shall accrue interest at the rate of 2.0% of the amount due for
each month or part of a month the tax remains unpaid.
(Ord. O-25-22, 6-5-2025)
3-5-4: DETERMINATION OF TAX LIABILITY:
   To collect overdue taxes, a determination of tax liability notice shall be
sent to the taxpayer by registered or certified mail no more than four (4)
years after the end of the calendar year when the tax was due; however, if less
than 75% of the tax due was paid, a determination of tax liability notice may
be sent no more than six (6) years after the end of the calendar year when the
tax was due. All determination of tax liability notices shall include the
following information:
   A.   The reason for the tax liability;
   B.   The amount of tax, interest and penalty due on the date of the
determination and information on how interest and penalties accrue;
   C.   The procedure for appeal; and
   D.   Information regarding the right of the Village to audit the taxpayer’s
books and records for a particular period and the Village’s obligation to
refund overpayments.
(Ord. O-25-22, 6-5-2025)
3-5-5: APPEALS:
   Any taxpayer may, within forty-five (45) days of the date of receipt of a
determination of tax liability notice or at any time before a current tax
becomes due, seek a hearing before the Tax Administrator to appeal the tax
liability. For reasonable cause shown in writing by the taxpayer and full
payment of the amount of tax protested plus accrued interest due, the Tax
Administrator shall extend the forty-five (45) day period for appeal after a
determination has been issued for up to an additional forty-five (45) days.
(Ord. O-25-22, 6-5-2025)
3-5-6: CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
   Notwithstanding any provision in this Code to the contrary, taxpayers may,
in writing, claim a credit or refund for payment of taxes, interest or
penalties paid in error for up to four (4) years after the end of the calendar
year in which the payment was made. Claims must include dates, amount paid, and
an explanation of the error that occurred. The Tax Administrator shall
determine whether a credit or refund is justified and shall respond to the
taxpayer in writing within thirty (30) days of receipt of the claim. Tax
amounts paid in error shall be returned plus interest at the annual rate of 5%.
(Ord. O-25-22, 6-5-2025)
3-5-7: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
   A taxpayer who has not received a written notice of an audit or
determination of tax liability may seek disclosure of tax liability by applying
to the Tax Administrator in writing for voluntary disclosure of the taxpayer’s
liability pertaining to a particular tax and agreeing to pay, within ninety
(90) days of the date of the application, the tax due plus 1% interest per
month for all periods prior to filing the application, but not more than four
(4) years prior thereto. The taxpayer shall be liable for any underpaid taxes
and accrued interest during the four (4) year time period but, except for the
taxes and interest due under this Section, the taxpayer shall not be liable for
any taxes imposed prior to the date of the application for voluntary
disclosure.
(Ord. O-25-22, 6-5-2025)
3-5-8: LIENS:
   In the first month of each calendar year, the Tax Administrator shall cause
all liens against taxpayers to be reviewed. The Village shall, in regard to
liens found to be improper, at its sole expense, release said liens, correct
the taxpayer’s credit record and correct any public disclosure of said liens.
(Ord. O-25-22, 6-5-2025)
3-5-9: PENALTIES:
   A.   A penalty of 5% of the amount of tax due shall be charged against any
taxpayer whose tax payment is not made on or before the date the tax is due.
   B.   A penalty of 5% of the amount of tax due shall be charged against any
taxpayer whose tax report or return is not filed on or before the date said tax
report or return is due.
   C.   A penalty of 25% of the amount of tax due for the period in relation to
which a tax report or return is required to be filed shall be charged against
any taxpayer who fails to file, before the date that a determination of tax
liability notice is issued, a report or return for that period.
   D.   The penalties set forth in subsections A and B above shall not apply in
the event the Village imposes the penalty set forth in subsection C above.
   E.   Any penalty may be abated by the Tax Administrator if reasonable cause
for nonpayment or failure to file is shown.
(Ord. O-25-22, 6-5-2025)
CHAPTER 6
SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
SECTION:
3-6-1: Definitions
3-6-2: Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Imposed
3-6-3: Collection Of Tax By Retailers
3-6-4: Returns To Department
3-6-5: Resellers
3-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
AMOUNT PAID: The amount charged to the taxpayer’s service address in this
municipality regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
DEPARTMENT: The Illinois Department of Revenue.
GROSS CHARGE: The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications in this municipality and for all services and
equipment provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money
whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and
property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction
on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials
used, labor or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is
extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. Gross
charges for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel
termination point within this municipality and charges for the portion of the
inter-office channels provided within this municipality. Charges for that
portion of the inter-office channel connecting two or more channel termination
points, one or more of which is located within the jurisdictional boundary of
this municipality, shall be determined by the retailer by multiplying an amount
equal to the total charge for the inter-office channel by a fraction, the
numerator of which is the number of channel termination points that are located
within the jurisdictional boundary of the municipality and the denominator of
which is the total number of channel termination points connected by the inter-
office channel. However, gross charge shall not include any of the following:
   1.   Any amounts added to a purchaser’s bill because of a charge made
pursuant to: (i) the tax imposed by this Ordinance; (ii) the tax imposed by the
Telecommunications Excise Tax Act; (iii) the tax imposed by Section 4251 of the
Internal Revenue Code; (iv) 9-1-1 surcharges; or, (v) charges added to
customers’ bills pursuant to the provisions of Section 9-221 or 9-222 of the
Public Utilities Act, as amended, or any similar charges added to customers’
bills by retailers who are not subject to rate regulation by the Illinois
Commerce Commission for the purpose of recovering any of the tax liabilities or
other amounts specified in those provisions of the Public Utilities Act.
   2.   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of such
municipality.
   3.   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data
or information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement.
   4.   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased
or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges.
   5.   Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under Section 9-
222.1 of the Public Utilities Act to the extent of such exemption and during
the period of time specified by the Department of Commerce and Economic
Opportunity.
   6.   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed under
this Ordinance has already been paid to a retailer and only to the extent that
the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or
between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering
such service.
   7.   “Bad debt” means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at
retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable that
has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable federal
income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to be bad is
subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion
during the reporting period in which the payment is made.
   8.   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunication
devices.
   9.   Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the
Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.
   10.   Charges for nontaxable services or telecommunications if: (i) those
charges are aggregated with other charges for telecommunications that are
taxable; (ii) those charges are not separately stated on the customer bill or
invoice; and, (iii) the retailer can reasonably identify the nontaxable charges
on the retailer’s books and records kept in the regular course of business. If
the nontaxable charges cannot reasonably be identified, the gross charge from
the sale of both taxable and nontaxable services of telecommunications billed
on a combined basis shall be attributed to the taxable services or
telecommunications. The burden of proving nontaxable charges shall be on the
retailer of the telecommunications.
INTERSTATE TELE-COMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that either originate or
terminate outside this state.
INTRASTATE TELE-COMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that originate and
terminate within this state.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, or
a receiver, trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by order of any
court, the federal and state governments, including state universities created
by statute, or any city, town, county or other political subdivision of this
state.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: The acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications
through a sale at retail.
RETAILER: Every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail as
defined in this Section. The Department may, in its discretion, upon
application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any retailer
not maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to the satisfaction
of the Department, furnishes adequate security to insure collection and payment
of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without charge, a permit to collect
such tax. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to collect
the tax upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in this state in
the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining
a place of business within this state. The permit may be revoked by the
Department at its discretion.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (or any like term): Any
retailer having or maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary,
an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office,
warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or other representative
operating within this state under the authority of the retailer or its
subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other
representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether such
retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state.
SALE AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications
and all services and equipment provided in connection therewith for a
consideration, to persons other than the federal and state governments, and
state universities created by statute and other than between a parent
corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received by a taxpayer. In the event this may not be a defined
location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems and maritime systems,
service address means the customer’s place of primary use as defined in the
Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Conformity Act. For air-to-ground systems
and the like, service address shall mean the location of a taxpayer’s primary
use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by telephone number,
authorization code or location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TAXPAYER: A person who individually or through his or her agents, employees or
permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in a municipality and who incurs a tax liability as
authorized by the Ordinance.
TELE-COMMUNICATIONS: In addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly
ascribed to it, includes, without limitation, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone service, private
line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter, computer
exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service, specialized
mobile radio, stationary two-way radio, paging service or any other form of
mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or any other
transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between
or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite or similar facilities. As used in this chapter, “private line” means
a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer, that entitles
the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group
of channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other
specified locations. The definition of telecommunications shall not include
value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act
on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other
than transmission. Telecommunications shall not include purchases of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end-to-end communications.
Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of inter-
company facilities and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent
provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into end-to-end
telecommunications service shall be non-taxable as sales for resale. Prepaid
telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered telecommunications
subject to the tax imposed under this Ordinance. For purposes of this Section,
“prepaid telephone calling arrangements” means that term as defined in Section
2-27 of the Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act.
(Ord. O-25-18, 5-20-2025)
3-6-2: SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX IMPOSED:
   A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all the following acts or privileges:
   A.   The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in
the municipality intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of 6% of
the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a
retailer. To prevent actual multi-municipal taxation of the act or privilege
that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof
that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another municipality on that event, shall
be allowed a credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this
Section to the extent of the amount of the tax properly due and paid in the
municipality that was not previously allowed as a credit against any other
municipal tax.
   B.   The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in
the municipality interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of 6% of
the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a
retailer. To prevent actual multi-state or multi-municipal taxation of the act
or privilege that is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer,
upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state or municipality in
this state on such event, shall be allowed a credit against any tax enacted
pursuant to or authorized by this Section to the extent of the amount of such
tax properly due and paid in such other state or such tax properly due and paid
in another municipality in this state which was not previously allowed as a
credit against any other state or local tax in this state.
   C.   The tax imposed by this Ordinance is not imposed on such act or
privilege to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the Constitution
and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the
municipality.
(Ord. O-25-18, 5-20-2025)
3-6-3: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS:
   A.   The tax authorized by this Ordinance shall be collected from the
taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this state and shall
be remitted by such retailer to the Department. Any tax required to be
collected pursuant to or as authorized by this Ordinance and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall
constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the state. Retailers shall collect
the tax from the taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or
privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in
the manner prescribed by the Department. The tax authorized by this Ordinance
shall constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid, and, if
unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for
such sale at retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the
taxpayer, then the taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the
Department in the manner provided by the Department.
   B.   Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this Ordinance shall, when
collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross
charge for telecommunications.
(Ord. O-25-18, 5-20-2025)
3-6-4: RETURNS TO DEPARTMENT:
   On or before the last day of February, and on or before the last day of
every month thereafter, the tax imposed under this Ordinance on
telecommunications retailers for the preceding calendar month shall be returned
with appropriate forms and information as required by the Department pursuant
to the Illinois Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act (35 ILCS 636/5-
50) and any accompanying rules and regulations created by the Department to
implement the Act.
(Ord. O-25-18, 5-20-2025)
3-6-5: RESELLERS:
   A.   If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be
a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply to the
Department for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which will
show the Department why such applicant is not liable for the tax authorized by
this Article on any of such purchases and shall furnish such additional
information as the Department may reasonably require.
   B.   Upon approval of the application, the Department shall assign a resale
number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant. The
Department may cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation,
or which is used to send or receive such telecommunication tax-free when such
actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the
person’s having discontinued the making of resales.
   C.   Except as provided hereinabove in this Section, the act or privilege of
originating or receiving telecommunications in this state shall not be made
tax-free on the ground of being a sale for resale unless the person has an
active resale number from the Department and furnishes that number to the
retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such
person is non-taxable because of being a sale for resale.
(Ord. O-25-18, 5-20-2025)
CHAPTER 7
AMUSEMENTS
SECTION:
3-7-1: Applicability Of Provisions
3-7-2: Definitions
3-7-3: Amusement Tax Imposed
3-7-4: Tax Additional
3-7-5: Registration
3-7-6: Collection, Payment And Accounting
3-7-7: Rules And Regulations; Authorized
3-7-8: Application Of Village Code
3-7-9: Violations; Penalties
3-7-1: APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
   The provisions of this Chapter, except as otherwise provided, shall apply to
all amusements as hereinafter defined, whether specifically licensed or
regulated under other provisions of this code or other ordinances, or not.
(Ord. O-25-17, 5-20-2025)
3-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
AMUSEMENT:
   1.   Any paid television programming, whether transmitted by wire, cable,
fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar means.
   2.   Any video streaming, audio streaming or remotely-accessed online games
made available or delivered electronically to patrons on a rental or
subscription basis. The term “amusement” shall not include cable service or
video service on a commercial basis offered by a holder subject to a service
provider fee pursuant to Section 5/21-801 of the Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS
5/21-801) or such service offered by an incumbent cable operator subject to a
fee paid to the local unit of government as described in 47 U.S.C. § 542.
CABLE SERVICE: Shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 5/21-201(e)
of the Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/21-201(e)).
CHARGES PAID: The gross amount of consideration paid for the privilege to
enter, to witness, to view or to participate in an amusement, including amounts
paid for the right to access an amusement, valued in money, whether received in
money or otherwise, including cash, credits, property and services, determined
without any deduction for costs or expenses whatsoever. The term “charges paid”
includes any and all charges that the patron pays incidental to obtaining the
privilege to enter, to witness, to view or to participate in an amusement,
including but not limited to any and all related markups, service fees,
convenience fees, facilitation fees, cancellation fees and other such charges,
regardless of terminology. The term “charges paid” does not include charges
that are added on account of the tax imposed by this chapter or on account of
any other tax imposed on the charge.
HOLDER: Shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 5/21-201(k) of the
Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/21-201(k)).
INCUMBENT CABLE OPERATOR: Shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section
5/21-201(m) of the Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/21-201(m)).
OWNER OR OPERATOR:
   1.   Any person who sells or resells a ticket or other license to an
amusement for consideration or who, directly or indirectly, receives or
collects the charges paid for the sale or resale of a ticket or other license
to the amusement. The term includes, but is not limited to, persons engaged in
the business of selling or reselling tickets or other licenses to amusements,
whether online, in person or otherwise;
   2.   With respect to the owner of an amusement, any person which has an
ownership or leasehold interest in such amusement or any person who has a
proprietary interest in the amusement so as to entitle such person to all or a
portion of the proceeds, after payment of reasonable expenses, from the
operation, conduct or presentation of such amusement, excluding proceeds from
non-amusement services and from sales of tangible personal property;
   3.   Any person or entity operating a community antenna television system or
wireless cable television system, or any person or entity receiving
consideration from the patron for furnishing, transmitting, or otherwise
providing access to paid television programming;
   4.   A person or entity operating a system, or any person or entity
receiving consideration from the patron, for providing access to or
electronically delivering video streaming, audio streaming or online games to
patrons.
PAID TELEVISION: Programming that can be viewed on a television or other
screen, and is transmitted by cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite or similar means to members of the public for consideration.
PATRON: Any person who acquires the privilege to enter, to witness, to view or
to participate in an amusement; any person who has a primary place of use
within the Village who purchases the right to access an electronic amusement.
PERSON: Any natural individual that participates in an amusement, including a
firm, organization, society, foundation, institution, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint venture, limited liability company, public or
private corporation, receiver, executor, trustee or other representative
appointed by order of any court, or any other entity recognized by law.
VIDEO SERVICE: Shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 5/21-201(v)
of the Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/21-201(v)).
(Ord. O-25-17, 5-20-2025)
3-7-3: AMUSEMENT TAX IMPOSED:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided by this Chapter, beginning on January 1,
2026, an amusement tax is imposed upon any person who participates in the
privilege to witness, view or participate in an amusement. This includes not
only charges paid for the privilege to witness, view or participate in
amusements in person but also charges paid for the privilege to witness, view
or participate in electronic amusements including, but not limited to, shows,
movies, videos, music or online games, that take place within the Village, or
are delivered to a patron with a primary place of use within the jurisdictional
boundaries of the Village. This tax is not imposed on transactions where the
patron pays for the rights of the permanent use of an electronic amusement.
   B.   The rate of the tax shall be equal to 5% of the charges paid for such
service.
   C.   In the case of amusements that are delivered electronically, as in the
case of video streaming, audio streaming and online games, the rules set forth
in the Illinois Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Conformity Act, 35 ILCS 638,
as amended, may be utilized for the purpose of determining which customers and
charges are presumed to be subject to the tax imposed by this Chapter. If those
rules indicate that the tax applies, it shall be presumed that the tax does
apply unless the contrary is established by books, records or other documentary
evidence.
   D.   The tax described in subsection B above shall not be applicable to any
amusement shown, exhibited or staged by:
      1.   A not-for-profit organization which is exempt from taxation pursuant
to Section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended;
      2.   Any school district;
      3.   Any governmental entity;
      4.   Any entity that charges a fee for admission to an amusement on less
than 50% of the days the entity is open and operating its business during each
quarter of the calendar year; and
      5.   Any entity that generates a majority of its revenue through charging
an admission fee for an instructional class or the participation by a person in
the creation of any type of artwork.
(Ord. O-25-17, 5-20-2025)
3-7-4: TAX ADDITIONAL:
   The tax imposed in this Chapter is in addition to all other taxes imposed by
the State of Illinois or any municipal corporation or political subdivision
thereof.
(Ord. O-25-17, 5-20-2025)
3-7-5: REGISTRATION:
   A.   Every Owner or Operator providing services to customers subject to this
tax within the Village shall apply for registration as a tax collector with the
Village no later than thirty (30) days after commencing such business or thirty
(30) days after the effective date of this Ordinance imposing the Streaming
Tax, whichever occurs later.
   B.   The application shall be submitted to the Village on the forms provided
by the Village and contain such information as reasonably required by the
Village to impose, collect and audit all amounts related to the Streaming Tax.
(Ord. O-25-17, 5-20-2025)
3-7-6: COLLECTION, PAYMENT AND ACCOUNTING:
   A.   It shall be the joint and several duty of every Owner or Operator of an
amusement under this Chapter to secure from each patron or buyer the tax
imposed by this Chapter.
   B.   For purposes of this Chapter, it shall be presumed that the amount of
the Streaming Tax imposed on each Person, unless the taxpayer or tax collector
provides otherwise with books, records, or other documentary evidence, has been
collected from the Person by the Owner or Operator.
   C.   Streaming Tax payments, accompanied by tax returns prescribed by the
Village, shall be remitted to the Village not later than the 20th day of the
month following the month in which payment for the Streaming Tax was made.
   D.   Every Owner or Operator who is required to collect the Streaming Tax
imposed by this Chapter shall be considered a tax collector for the city. All
Streaming Tax collected shall be held by such tax collector as trustee for and
on behalf of the Village. The failure of the tax collector to collect the tax
shall not excuse or release the patron from the obligation to pay the tax.
   E.   The ultimate incidence of the Streaming Tax shall remain on the Person
and shall never be shifted to the Owner or Operator.
   F.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, in order to permit
sound fiscal planning and budgeting by the Village, no Person shall be entitled
to a refund of, or credit for, the Streaming Tax imposed by this Chapter unless
the Person files a claim for refund or credit within one (1) year after the
date on which the Streaming Tax was paid or remitted to the Village.
   G.   The Owner or Operator shall be subject to audit, inspection and record
keeping provisions of this Code.
   H.   It shall be unlawful for any Owner or Operator and/or Person to
prevent, hinder, or interfere with the Village’s officials, employees, and/or
agents designated to discharge their respective duties in the performance and
enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter.
   I.   It is the duty of every Owner or Operator to keep accurate and complete
books and records to which the Village’s officials, employees, and/or agents
will at all times have full access to said books or records.
   J.   In the event that the Village adopts or repeals an amusement tax,
changes the tax rate, or extends this tax to any video streaming, audio
streaming or remotely-accessed online games made available or delivered
electronically to Patrons on a rental or subscription basis, or the Village’s
jurisdictional boundaries change, it shall publish the resolution or ordinance
or post a notification, which may include on its website, 90 days prior to the
effective date of such adoption or repeal of, or amendment to, this tax.
(Ord. O-25-17, 5-20-2025)
3-7-7: RULES AND REGULATIONS; AUTHORIZED:
   The Village is authorized to adopt, promulgate and enforce any additional
rules and regulations pertaining to the interpretation, collection,
administration and enforcement of this Chapter.
(Ord. O-25-17, 5-20-2025)
3-7-8: APPLICATION OF VILLAGE CODE:
   Any citation under this Chapter may be in addition to any other citations
issued by the Village under any and all applicable sections of the Village
Code.
(Ord. O-25-17, 5-20-2025)
3-7-9: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   It shall be a violation of this Chapter for an Owner or Operator to fail to
file a report within the time prescribed in this Chapter.
   A.   Report Required: An Owner or Operator who falsely reports or fails to
report the amount of Streaming Tax due as required by this Chapter shall be in
violation of this Chapter and is subject to the penalties in this Section. All
payments not remitted when due shall be paid together with a penalty assessment
on the unpaid balance at a rate of 1.5% per month.
   B.   Fine Imposed: Any Owner or Operator violating the provisions of this
Chapter shall be subject to a fine of $250.00 for the first offense, $500.00
for the second offense and $750.00 for a third offense.
   C.   Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
   D.   It shall be deemed a violation of this Chapter for any Person to
knowingly furnish false or inaccurate information to the Village.
(Ord. O-25-17, 5-20-2025)
CHAPTER 8
ELECTRIC UTILITY TAX
SECTION:
3-8-1: Definitions
3-8-2: Tax Imposed
3-8-3: Exceptions
3-8-4: Additional Taxes
3-8-5: Date Of Imposition Of Tax
3-8-6: Collection
3-8-7: Reports To Village
3-8-8: Resales
3-8-9: Books And Records
3-8-10:    Credit For Overpayment
3-8-11:    Penalty
3-8-12:    Severability
3-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
EXEMPT PURCHASER: Any school district or unit of local government lying either
in whole or in part within the Village.
GROSS RECEIPTS: The consideration received for the distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling electricity for use or consumption and not for resale, as
the case may be; and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued
in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit,
services and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered
therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost
of this service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used,
labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever. Gross receipts shall
not include receipts from the Village of Campton Hills for the sale to that
Village of any utility products or services.
PERSON: Any natural, individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited liability company,
municipal corporation, the state or any of its political subdivisions, any
state university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or
other representative appointed by order of any court.
PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE: Any person having or
maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate,
an office, generation facility, distribution facility, transmission facility,
sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent, or other
representative operating within this state under the authority of the person or
its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of
business or agent or other representative is located in this state permanently
or temporarily or whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is
licensed or qualified to do business in this state.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for purposes
of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the use of
electricity by a public utility, as defined in Section 8-11-2 of the Illinois
Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2), directly in the generation, production,
transmission, delivery or sale of electricity.
PURCHASER: Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of the
village, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail other than an Exempt
Purchaser except that, if the designation of Exempt Purchaser is found
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the amount of tax due as a consequence
of such holding shall be limited to the amount that the taxpayer is authorized
to charge and collect from the aforementioned governmental entities pursuant to
the provisions of Section 9-221 of the Public Utilities (220 ILCS 5/9-221) or
any successor thereto.
(Ord. O-25-19, 5-20-2025)
3-8-2: TAX IMPOSED:
   A.   Pursuant to Section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-
11-2) and any and all other applicable authority, a tax is imposed upon the
privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail
and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the village at the
following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser:
      1.   For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.61
cents per kilowatt-hour;
      2.   For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.40
cents per kilowatt-hour;
      3.   For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.36
cents per kilowatt-hour;
      4.   For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.35 cents per kilowatt-hour;
      5.   For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.34 cents per kilowatt-hour;
      6.   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.32 cents per kilowatt-hour;
      7.   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.315 cents per kilowatt-hour;
      8.   For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.31 cents per kilowatt-hour;
      9.   For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.305 cents per kilowatt-hour; and
      10.   For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000
kilowatt-hours in a month, 0.30 cents per kilowatt-hour.
(Ord. O-25-19, 5-20-2025)
3-8-3: EXCEPTIONS:
   None of the taxes authorized by this chapter may be imposed with respect to
any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which the
business or privilege may not, under the Constitution and statutes of the
United States, be made the subject of taxation by the State of Illinois or any
political subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the business of
distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling or transmitting gas, water, or
electricity, or engaged in the business of transmitting messages, or using or
consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail, be subject to taxation
under the provisions of this chapter for those transactions that are or may
become subject to taxation under the provisions of the “Municipal Retailers’
Occupation Tax Act” authorized by 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1; nor shall any tax
authorized by this chapter be imposed upon any person engaged in a business or
on any privilege unless the tax is imposed in like manner and at the same rate
upon all persons engaged in businesses of the same class in the Village,
whether private or municipally owned or operated, or exercising the same
privilege within the Village.
(Ord. O-25-19, 5-20-2025)
3-8-4: ADDITIONAL TAXES:
   Such tax shall be in addition to other taxes levied upon the taxpayer or its
business.
(Ord. O-25-19, 5-20-2025)
3-8-5: DATE OF IMPOSITION OF TAX:
   The tax shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of
electricity by residential customers beginning with the first bill issued on or
after January 1, 2026; and with respect to the use or consumption of
electricity by non-residential customers beginning with the first bill issued
to such customers for delivery services in accordance with Section 16-104 of
the Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/16-104), or the first bill issued to such
customers on or after January 1, 2026, whichever issuance occurs sooner.
(Ord. O-25-19, 5-20-2025)
3-8-6: COLLECTION:
   The tax authorized by this chapter shall be collected from the purchaser by
the person maintaining a place of business in this state who delivers the
electricity to the purchaser. This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser
to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and, if unpaid, is
recoverable in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the
electricity. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this chapter and any
such tax collected by a person delivering electricity shall constitute a debt
owed to the Village by such person delivering the electricity, provided that
the person delivering electricity shall be allowed a credit for such tax
related to deliveries of electricity the charges for which are written off as
uncollectible, and provided further, that if such charges are thereafter
collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to remit such tax.
Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser by
adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity. Persons
delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an
amount equal to three percent of the tax to reimburse the person delivering
electricity for the expense incurred in keeping records, billing customers,
preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the city
upon request. If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax
from the purchaser, then the purchaser shall be required to pay the tax
directly to the Village in the manner prescribed by the Village. Persons
delivering electricity that file returns pursuant to this section shall, at the
time of filing such return, pay the Village the amount of the tax collected
pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. O-25-19, 5-20-2025)
3-8-7: REPORTS TO VILLAGE:
   On or before the last day of each month, each taxpayer shall make a return
to the Village’s Treasurer for the preceding month stating:
   A.   Taxpayer name.
   B.   Taxpayer principal place of business.
   C.   Taxpayer gross receipts and kilowatt-hours usage during the month upon
the basis of which the tax is imposed.
   D.   Amount of tax.
   E.   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
   The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of
making such return, pay to the Village, the amount of tax herein imposed;
provided that in connection with any return, the taxpayer may, if the taxpayer
so elects, report and pay an amount based upon total billing of business
subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of
any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based
upon any differences between such billing, and the taxable gross receipts.
(Ord. O-25-19, 5-20-2025)
3-8-8: RESALES:
   A.   Electricity that is delivered to a person in this Village shall be
considered to be for use and consumption by that person unless the person
receiving the electricity has an active resale number issued by the Village and
furnishes that number to the person who delivers the electricity, and certifies
to that person that the sale is either entirely or partially nontaxable as a
sale for resale.
   B.   If a person who receives electricity in the Village claims to be an
authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to Village for a
resale number. The applicant shall state facts showing why it is not liable for
the tax imposed by this Chapter on any purchases of electricity and shall
furnish such additional information as the Village may reasonably require.
   C.   Upon approval of the application, the Village shall assign a resale
number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant.
   D.   The Village may cancel the resale number of any person if the person
fails to pay any tax payable under this Chapter for electricity used or
consumed by the person, or if the number: (1) was obtained through
misrepresentation; or (2) is no longer necessary because the person has
discontinued making resales.
   E.   1.   If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or
consumption and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by
this Chapter directly to the Village pursuant to Section 7 herein on the amount
of electricity that the reseller uses or consumes, and shall collect the tax
pursuant to Section 6 herein and remit the tax pursuant to Section 7 herein on
the amount of electricity delivered by the reseller to a purchaser.
      2.   Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active
resale number and complying with all other conditions of this section shall be
excused from collecting and remitting the tax on an portion of the electricity
delivered to the reseller, provided that the person reports to the village the
total amount of electricity delivered to the reseller, and such other
information that the village may reasonably require.
(Ord. O-25-19, 5-20-2025)
3-8-9: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
   Every tax collector, and every taxpayer required to pay the tax imposed by
this Chapter shall keep accurate books and records of its business or activity,
including contemporaneous books and records denoting the transactions that gave
rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability under this Chapter. The
books and records shall be subject to and available for inspection at all times
during business hours of the day.
(Ord. O-25-19, 5-20-2025)
3-8-10: CREDIT FOR OVERPAYMENT:
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, in order to permit
sound fiscal planning and budgeting by the Village, no person shall be entitled
to a refund of, or credit for, a tax imposed under this Chapter unless the
person files a claim for refund or credit within one year after the date on
which the tax was paid or remitted.
(Ord. O-25-19, 5-20-2025)
3-8-11: PENALTY:
   Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return,
or who willfully violates any other provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $100.00
nor more than $750.00, and in addition, shall be liable in a civil action for
the amount of tax due together with reasonable attorney’s fees and court costs
incurred by the Village in enforcing this chapter.
(Ord. O-25-19, 5-20-2025)
3-8-12: SEVERABILITY:
   If any provision of this chapter, or the application of any provision of
this chapter, is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such holding shall
not affect any other provision of this chapter, or its application, that can be
given effect without the unconstitutional or invalid provision or its
application. Each unconstitutional or invalid provision, or application of such
provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by this chapter.
(Ord. O-25-19, 5-20-2025)
CHAPTER 9
MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX - GAS
SECTION:
3-9-1: Definitions
3-9-2: Tax Imposed
3-9-3: Date Of Imposition Of Tax
3-9-4: Exemptions
3-9-5: In Addition To Other Consideration
3-9-6: Returns
3-9-7: Credit For Erroneous Tax Paid
3-9-8: Limitations
3-9-9: Violations
3-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply.
GROSS RECEIPTS: The consideration received for the distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption and not for resale, as the
case may be; and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in
money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services
and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered
therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost
of this service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used,
labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever. Gross Receipts shall
not include any amounts specifically excluded from the definition of Gross
Receipts in Section 8-11-2(d) of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2
(d)).
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited liability company,
municipal corporation, the state or any political subdivision of this state,
any state university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or
other representative appointed by order of any court.
(Ord. O-25-20, 6-5-2025)
3-9-2: TAX IMPOSED:
   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the business of distributing,
supplying, furnishing, or selling gas for use or consumption within the
corporate limits of the Village and not for resale, at the rate of five percent
(5%) of the Gross Receipts therefrom.
(Ord. O-25-20, 6-5-2025)
3-9-3: DATE OF IMPOSITION OF TAX:
   The tax shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of gas by
residential customers beginning with the first bill issued on or after January
1, 2026; and with respect to the use or consumption of gas by non-residential
customers beginning with the first bill issued to such customers for delivery
services in accordance with Section 16-104 of the Public Utilities Act (220
ILCS 5/16-104), or the first bill issued to such customers on or after January
1, 2026, whichever issuance occurs sooner.
(Ord. O-25-20, 6-5-2025)
3-9-4: EXEMPTIONS:
   No tax is imposed by this chapter with respect to any transaction in
interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may not,
under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to
taxation by the State of Illinois or any political subdivision thereof; nor
shall any persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas be subject to taxation under this chapter for such
transactions are or may become subject to taxation under the Municipal
Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act authorized by Section 8-11-1 of the Illinois
Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1).
(Ord. O-25-20, 6-5-2025)
3-9-5: IN ADDITION TO OTHER CONSIDERATION:
   The tax established by this chapter shall be in addition to the payment of
money, or value of products or services furnished to this municipality by the
taxpayer as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public
places, or installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of
poles, wires, pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer’s
business.
(Ord. O-25-20, 6-5-2025)
3-9-6: RETURNS:
   On or before the last day of February 2026, each taxpayer shall make a tax
return to the Village Treasurer for the month of January 2025, stating:
   A.   Taxpayer name.
   B.   Taxpayer’s principal place of business.
   C.   Taxpayer’s Gross Receipts during the month upon the basis of which the
tax is imposed.
   D.   Amount of tax.
   E.   Such other reasonable and related information as the Corporate
Authorities of the Village may require.
   On or before the last day of every month thereafter, each taxpayer shall
make a like return to the Village Treasurer for a corresponding month period.
The taxpayer making the return shall, at the time of making such return, pay to
the Village Treasurer, the amount of tax herein imposed. In connection with any
return the taxpayer may, if the taxpayer so elects, report and pay an amount
based upon total billings of business subject to the tax during the period for
which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with
prompt adjustments of later payments based upon any differences between such
billings and the taxable Gross Receipts.
(Ord. O-25-20, 6-5-2025)
3-9-7: CREDIT FOR ERRONEOUS TAX PAID:
   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due
under this, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then
such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this
chapter from the taxpayer who made the erroneous payment. However, no amounts
erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim
therefore shall be so credited.
(Ord. O-25-20, 6-5-2025)
3-9-8: LIMITATIONS:
   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this
chapter shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of such
amount.
(Ord. O-25-20, 6-5-2025)
3-9-9: VIOLATIONS:
   Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return,
or who willfully, violates any other provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not
less than $100.00 and not more than $750.00 for each violation, and in addition
shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due.
(Ord. O-25-20, 6-5-2025)
CHAPTER 10
MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX
SECTION:
3-10-1: Tax Imposed; Collection And Enforcement
3-10-1: TAX IMPOSED; COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Beginning January 1, 2026, a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons
engaged in the business of selling groceries at retail in the Village at the
rate of 1% of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such
business while this Ordinance is in effect.
   B.   The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the
provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-
24).
   C.   The tax imposed by this Section, and all civil penalties that may be
assessed as an incident thereto, shall be remitted to, collected by and
enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue in accordance with the
provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-
24), as amended. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this Section.
(Ord. O-25-30, 9-16-2025)
CHAPTER 11
MUNICIPAL GROCERY SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
SECTION:
3-11-1: Tax Imposed; Collection And Enforcement
3-11-1: TAX IMPOSED; COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Beginning January 1, 2026, a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons
engaged in the Village in the business of making sales of service, who, as an
incident to making those sales of service, transfer groceries as an incident to
a sale of service. The tax is imposed at the rate of 1% of the gross receipts
from such sales made in the course of such business while this Ordinance is in
effect.
   B.   The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the
provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-
24).
   C.   The tax imposed by this Section, and all civil penalties that may be
assessed as an incident thereto, shall be remitted to, collected by and
enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue in accordance with the
provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-
24), as amended. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this Section. (Ord. O-25-30, 9-16-
2025)
TITLE 4
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
SECTION:
4-1-1: State Regulations Adopted
4-1-2: Definitions
4-1-3: Local Liquor Control Commissioner
4-1-4: License Required
4-1-5: Ineligibility For License
4-1-6: Application For License
4-1-7: Bond And Insurance Requirements
4-1-8: Investigation Of Applicant
4-1-9: Instructional Program For Personnel; Attendance Required
4-1-10: Classification And Term Of Licenses
4-1-11: License Fees
4-1-12: Number Of Licenses
4-1-13: Nontransferability Of License
4-1-14: Display Of License
4-1-15: Licenses Subject To Changes, Amendments, Restrictions And Conditions
4-1-16: Change Of Location Or Ownership
4-1-17: Lapse Of License For Merger Into Another Liquor Jurisdiction
4-1-18: Authority To Deny Or Not Renew Due To Discriminatory Practices
4-1-19: Prohibited Hours Of Sale And Occupancy
4-1-20: Premises Requirements
4-1-21: Sales To And Presence Of Certain Persons Prohibited
4-1-22: Minors
4-1-23: Designated Dancing Area
4-1-24: Duty To Report Disturbances, Fights And Violations
4-1-25: Additional Prohibitions
4-1-26: Revocation, Suspension And Fines
4-1-27: Hearings
4-1-28: Appeals
4-1-29: Entry Onto Premises
4-1-30: Waiver Of Requirements
4-1-31:    Cessation Of Business
4-1-32:    Sale Of Cocktails, Mixed Drinks And Single Servings Of Wine To Go
4-1-1: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
Any and all sections of the Illinois liquor control law and any amendments
thereto applicable to local liquor control commissions or to local liquor
control commissioners are the same hereby adopted and made a part of this
chapter. (2013 Code § 3-1-4)
4-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Alcohol, spirits, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid,
patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and capable of
being consumed as a beverage by a human being, but not alcohol used in the
manufacture of denatured alcohol produced in accordance with acts of congress
and regulations promulgated thereunder, and not any liquid or solid containing
one-half of one percent (1/2%) or less of alcohol by volume.
ART STUDIO, ARTS AND CRAFTS SCHOOL: A business which offers arts or crafts
classes in connection with the designing or creating of arts and crafts goods,
including, but not limited to, paintings, pottery, ceramics, jewelry and
sculptures.
BAR: An additional facility for serving liquor, located on premises which has a
valid retail liquor license in effect under this chapter or any amendment
hereto or located within the property lines of the property upon which a
licensed premises is located in effect under this chapter or any amendment
hereto.
BEER: Beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley, or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes,
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, and/or porter.
BEVERAGE CART: A motorized or nonmotorized portable cart, with or without
wheels, used for the purpose of dispensing beverages, snacks, and alcoholic
liquor.
BREWPUB: A person who manufactures beer only at a designated premises to make
sales to importing distributors, distributors, and nonlicensees for use and
consumption only, who stores beer at the designated premises, and who is
allowed to sell at retail from the licensed premises; provided, that a brewpub
licensee shall not sell for off premises consumption more than fifty thousand
(50,000) gallons per year.
CATERER: A person who serves alcoholic liquors for consumption, either on site
or off site, whether the location is licensed or unlicensed, as an incidental
part of food service. Prepared meals and alcoholic liquors are sold at a
package price agreed upon under contract.
CLUB: A corporation organized under the laws of Illinois, not for pecuniary
profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or
consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used and maintained by its members
through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring or leasing a building or
space in a building, of such extent and character as may be suitable and
adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its
members and their guests and provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and
dining room space and equipment and maintaining a sufficient number of servants
and employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for its members
and their guests; provided, that such club files with the local liquor control
commissioner at the time of its application for a license under this chapter,
two (2) copies of a list of names and residences of its members, and similarly
files within ten (10) days of the election of any additional member his or her
name and address; and provided further, that its affairs and management are
conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen
by the members at their annual meeting and that no member or any officer,
agent, or employee of the club is paid or directly or indirectly receives in
the form of salary or other compensation any profits from the distribution or
sale of alcoholic liquor to the club or the members of the club or its guests
introduced by members beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed and
voted at any annual meeting by the members or by its board of directors or
other governing body out of the general revenue of the club.
COOKING SCHOOL: A business which provides culinary instruction, both
demonstration style and hands on, to persons of all levels of cooking
experience.
DISTILLED SPIRITS: Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by
distillation, mixed with water or other substance in solution, and includes
brandy, rum, whiskey, gin, or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors when
rectified, blended or otherwise, mixed with alcohol or other substances.
GOLF COURSE: A public, quasi-public, or private recreational outdoor facility
designed and developed for golf activities consisting of nine (9) or more
standard golf holes which may include a driving range, clubhouses, pro shops,
restaurants, and other similar buildings associated with a golf course which
are generally used by the public and/or by members and guests, and which does
not include a novelty putting facility more commonly referred to as "miniature
golf" or "mini-golf".
HE AND HIM: The word "he" or "him" shall include "she" or "her" where
appropriate.
INN: Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and
held out to the public to be a place where food is served and consumed and
sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests,
whether transient, permanent or residential, in which rooms are used for the
sleeping accommodation of such guests and having one or more public dining
rooms where meals are served to such guests, such sleeping accommodations and
dining rooms being conducted in the same building or buildings in connection
therewith and such building or buildings, structure or structures being
provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and
capacity commonly identified as a hotel, motel, bed and breakfast, lodge or
resort.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE: Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead or
other receptacle or container, whatsoever, used, corked or capped, sealed and
labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to contain and to convey any
alcoholic liquor.
OUTDOOR SERVICE: Any service of alcoholic liquor occurring outside of the
premises within the property lines of the property upon which a licensed
premises is located.
PACKAGE STORE: A public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out
to the public as a place where alcoholic liquor is sold at retail in the
original package not for consumption on the premises where sold.
PREMISES: Any permanent physical structure(s) or building(s) from which
alcoholic liquors are sold.
PRIVATE FUNCTION: A prearranged private party, function, or event for a
specific social or business occasion, either by invitation or reservation and
not open to the general public, where the guests in attendance are served on
the premises or within the property lines of the premises designated and used
exclusively for the private party, function, or event.
RESTAURANT: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to
the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals are actually and
regularly served and comprise greater than fifty percent (50%) of the gross
receipts, without sleeping accommodations, such space being provided with an
adequate and sanitary kitchen and where indoor dining room seating and
equipment are maintained and having employed therein a sufficient number and
kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests.
SELL AT RETAIL, SALE AT RETAIL: Refer to and mean sales for use or consumption
and not for resale in any form.
SPECIAL EVENT RETAILER: An educational, fraternal, political, civic, religious,
or nonprofit organization which sells or offers for sale beer or wine, or both,
only for consumption at the location and on the dates designated by a special
event retail license.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits, or vegetables, containing sugar, including such beverages
when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits.
WINEMAKER: A person engaged in the making of wine. (2013 Code § 3-1-1)
All other words and phrases used herein shall have the same meanings as the
same or similar words or phrases defined by and used in "an act relating to
alcoholic liquors", approved January 31, 1934, in force February 1, 1934, as
amended. (2013 Code § 3-1-2) (2016 Code; Ord. O-21-12, 10-19-2021)
4-1-3: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
   A.   President Serve As: The village president shall be the local liquor
control commissioner, and he may appoint a person or persons to assist him in
the exercise of the powers and the performance of his duties as such
commissioner.
   B.   Powers And Duties:
      1.   The local liquor control commissioner, in addition to the powers and
duties herein given and provided, shall have all the powers and duties as
provided in the Illinois liquor control law.
      2.   The local liquor control commissioner may appoint a deputy liquor
commissioner, who shall have all the powers of the local liquor control
commissioner as specified in this Chapter, to assist the village president in
his duties as liquor control commissioner.
   C.   Rulemaking Power: The local liquor control commissioner is hereby
authorized and empowered to make such reasonable rules as may be necessary in
the performance of his duties and may prescribe the form of application which
each prospective licensee shall sign prior to receiving the license. (2013 Code
§ 3-1-4; amd. Ord. O-20-03, 2-4-2020)
4-1-4: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall sell, barter, transport, deliver, solicit or receive orders
for, keep or expose for sale, keep with intent to sell, or furnish any
alcoholic liquor for beverage purposes for sale at retail within the village
without first having a valid retail liquor license issued by the local liquor
control commissioner. Any license issued hereunder shall embrace only one place
of business. (2013 Code § 3-1-5)
4-1-5: INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
No retail liquor license shall be issued to or held by:
   A.   A person who is not a resident of the village in which the premises
covered by the license is located; except in case of railroad or boat licenses.
   B.   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the village.
   C.   A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
   D.   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state
law, unless the local liquor control commissioner determines that such person
has been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust after
considering matters set forth in such person's application and the
commissioner's investigation. The burden of proof of sufficient rehabilitation
shall be on the applicant.
   E.   A person who has been convicted of keeping a place of prostitution or
keeping a place of juvenile prostitution, promoting prostitution that involves
keeping a place of prostitution, or promoting juvenile prostitution that
involves keeping a place of juvenile prostitution.
   F.   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
   G.   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked for
cause.
   H.   A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application.
   I.   A copartnership, if any general partnership thereof, or any limited
partnership thereof, owning more than five percent (5%) of the aggregate
limited partner interest in such copartnership would not be eligible to receive
a license hereunder for any reason other than residence within the village.
   J.   A corporation or limited liability company, if any member, officer,
manager or director thereof, or any stockholder or stockholders owning in the
aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the stock of such corporation, would
not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than
citizenship and residence within the village.
   K.   A corporation or limited liability company unless it is incorporated or
organized in Illinois, or unless it is a foreign corporation or foreign limited
liability company which is qualified under the business corporation act of 1983
or the limited liability company act to transact business in Illinois. The
local liquor control commissioner shall permit and accept from an applicant for
a license under this chapter proof prepared from the secretary of state's
website that the corporation or limited liability company is in good standing
and is qualified under the business corporation act of 1983 or the limited
liability company act to transact business in Illinois.
   L.   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required by the
licensee.
   M.   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor or has
forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation.
   N.   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license
is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the
license is to be issued.
   O.   Any law enforcing public official, including the local liquor control
commissioner, the president of the village board of trustees or any member of
the village board of trustees, and no such official shall have a direct
interest in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor; except,
that a license may be granted to such official in relation to premises that is
not located in the village if the issuance of such license is approved by the
state liquor control commission; and except, that a license may be granted to
any member of the village board of trustees in relation to premises that is
located within the village if: 1) the sale of alcoholic liquor pursuant to the
license is incidental to the selling of food; 2) the issuance of the license is
approved by the state commission; 3) the issuance of the license is in
accordance with this code; and 4) the official granted a license does not vote
on alcoholic liquor issues pending before the village board. Notwithstanding
any provision of this subsection to the contrary, a member of the village board
of trustees other than the president may have a direct interest in the
manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor. To prevent any conflict
of interest, the elected official with the direct interest in the manufacture,
sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor shall not participate in any
meetings, hearings, or decisions on matters impacting the manufacture, sale, or
distribution of alcoholic liquor. Furthermore, the village president may have
an interest in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor as
long as the village board has made the local liquor control commissioner
appointment that complies with the requirements of 235 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/4-2.
   P.   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated
by the licensee.
   Q.   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed by
any of subsections (a)(3) through (a)(11) of section 28-1 of, or as proscribed
by section 28-1.1 or 28-3 of, the criminal code of 1961 or the criminal code of
2012, or as proscribed by a statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory
provisions.
   R.   A person or entity to whom a federal wagering stamp has been issued by
the federal government, unless the person or entity is eligible to be issued a
license under the raffles and poker runs act or the Illinois pull tabs and jar
games act.
   S.   A person who intends to sell alcoholic liquors for use or consumption
on his or her licensed retail premises who does not have liquor liability
insurance coverage for that premises in an amount that is at least equal to the
maximum liability amounts set out in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-21,
subsection a.
   T.   A person who is licensed by any licensing authority as a manufacturer
of beer, or any partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or trust,
or any subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof, or any other form of business
enterprise licensed as a manufacturer of beer, having any legal, equitable, or
beneficial interest, directly or indirectly, in a person licensed in this state
as a distributor or importing distributor. For purposes of this subsection, a
person who is licensed by any licensing authority as a "manufacturer of beer"
shall also mean a brewer and a nonresident dealer who is also a manufacturer of
beer, including a partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or
trust, or any subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof, or any other form of
business enterprise licensed as a manufacturer of beer.
   U.   A person who is licensed in this state as a distributor or importing
distributor, or any partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or
trust, or any subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof, or any other form of
business enterprise licensed in this state as a distributor or importing
distributor having any legal, equitable, or beneficial interest, directly or
indirectly, in a person licensed as a manufacturer of beer by any licensing
authority, or any partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or
trust, or any subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof, or any other form of
business enterprise, except for a person who owns no more than five percent
(5%) of the outstanding shares of a manufacturer of beer whose shares are
publicly traded on an exchange within the meaning of the securities exchange
act of 1934. For the purposes of this subsection, a person who is licensed by
any licensing authority as a "manufacturer of beer" shall also mean a brewer
and a nonresident dealer who is also a manufacturer of beer, including a
partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or trust, or any
subsidiary, affiliate, or agent thereof, or any other form of business
enterprise licensed as a manufacturer of beer. (2016 Code)
4-1-6: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Required Information: The application for a liquor license shall be
filed with the local liquor control commissioner, in writing, signed by the
applicant if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent thereof, if a club or
corporation, verified by oath or affidavit, and shall contain the following
statements and information. Such information shall be updated within thirty
(30) days if any of said statements or information changes during the term of
any license issued.
      1.   The name, birth date, social security number and address of the
applicant in the case of an individual; in the case of copartnership, the name,
birth date, and social security number of each partner; and in the case of a
corporation, the objects for which organized, the names, birth dates, social
security numbers and addresses of the officers and directors and if a majority
interest of the stock of such corporation is owned by one person or his
nominee, the name, address, birth date and social security number of such
person and, in the case of a limited liability company, the operating
agreement, certification of admission to transact business within the state,
the articles of organization, the names, birth dates, addresses and social
security numbers of all members of the limited liability company and the name
and address of the limited liability company's registered agent.
      2.   The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth and, if a
naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization.
      3.   The character of business of the applicant; and in the case of a
corporation, the objects for which it was formed.
      4.   The length of time said applicant has been in business of that
character; or in the case of a corporation, the date when its charter was
issued.
      5.   The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on hand at the time
application is made.
      6.   The location and legal description of the premises or place of
business and the property upon which a licensed premises is located which is to
be operated under such license. Each application shall contain a diagram of the
premises which depicts the location of any service bars, outside service areas,
and the location of one designated dancing area. A statement whether the
applicant has made application for a similar or other license on premises other
than described in this application, and the disposition of such application.
      7.   A statement that the applicant has never been convicted of a felony
and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
contained in this chapter, laws of this state, or the ordinances of the
village.
      8.   Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof, or
by the federal government has been revoked, and the reasons therefor.
      9.   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of
the state, or of the United States, or any ordinance, rule or regulation of the
village in the conduct of his place of business.
      10.   A statement that the applicant has no outstanding obligations due
the village (including, but not limited to, unpaid fines or citations) and that
all retailers' occupation taxes due the state and amounts otherwise due the
state of Illinois related to the licensed premises have been paid.
      11.   The name, address, telephone number, date of birth, and citizenship
of any supervising manager or agent required pursuant to subsection A1 of this
section. Proof that the resident manager is a United States citizen must be
submitted at the time of the application. All information regarding the
resident manager shall be updated so that the local liquor control commissioner
has, at all times, current information regarding the supervising manager or
agent.
      12.   Proof of completion of an Illinois certified BASSET program for all
persons who sell or serve alcoholic liquor, all management personnel working on
the premises, and anyone whose job description entails the checking of
identification for the purchase of alcoholic liquor. If a person has not
completed the Illinois certified BASSET program at the time of submission of
the liquor license application, the applicant must provide the name of said
applicant with the application and provide proof of completion of said program
within ninety (90) days of the application.
   B.   Signature Of Corporation: When any applicant for license is a
corporation, said application shall be signed by the president and secretary
thereof, and should the applicant be a partnership, then each and every member
of the partnership (including a silent partner if any) shall sign such
application.
   C.   Lease Of Premises: Each applicant for a license must submit a copy of a
fully executed lease of premises whenever the applicant is not the property
owner of the premises for which he is seeking a license, and such lease must
have a coverage period equal to or longer than the duration of the applicant's
liquor license. Said lease must name the applicant as lessee.
   D.   Submission Of Application; Renewals:
      1.   The application, fees, supporting documentation, and all required
information shall be delivered to the office of the local liquor control
commissioner on or before the last day of February of the year for which such
licenses are to be issued.
      2.   All applications for renewal of any license shall be made on or
before thirty (30) days prior to expiration thereof. Failure to make timely
application shall cause the license not to reissue or to renew. A license may
only be renewed by payment of the original fee, and only after the local liquor
control commissioner has actual receipt of the required application, fees,
supporting documentation, and all required information. If the application,
fees, supporting documentation, and all required information have not been
received on or before March 31, said liquor license for the prior year will
expire and the renewal application must be submitted as if the application were
for a new licensee including a new application fee, background checks,
inspections, and any other requirements. Receipt of a liquor license renewal
application received after the due date is not a guarantee that the license can
be issued prior to the expiration of the prior license.
   E.   New Application Fee: All applications for a new liquor license, other
than a change in class or addition of class of license to supplement a
currently existing license, shall be assessed a fee of five hundred dollars
($500.00), payable at the time of the submission of the license application.
(2013 Code § 3-1-6; amd. 2016 Code; Ord. O-24-01, 1-9-2024)
4-1-7: BOND AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Surety Bond:
      1.   Each applicant must submit a bond executed by the applicant, and by
good and sufficient corporate surety, in the sum of three thousand dollars
($3,000.00), and conditioned that the licensee shall faithfully observe and
conform to state law and to all of the provisions of this chapter, and any and
all amendments hereafter passed during the period of said license; and
conditioned further for the payment of any and all fines or penalties levied or
assessed against such licensee for the violation of any of the terms and
conditions of these rules and of any amendments hereto, or of state law.
      2.   The bond shall be further conditioned that the licensee will pay all
the necessary costs and charges incurred by reason of any complaint filed for
the revocation of his license by the local liquor control commissioner where
same is occasioned by any violation of the terms and provisions of these rules
or of state law by the licensee.
      3.   The bond must have a coverage period equal to or longer than the
duration of the applicant's liquor license; provided, that such requirement may
be waived if the applicant presents evidence satisfactory to the liquor control
commissioner that the applicant holds a liquor license at a location other than
the village, pays an administrative fee to the village in the amount of twenty
five dollars ($25.00) and agrees in writing to furnish the required policy of
insurance, or a renewal of the then existing policy, not less than fourteen
(14) days prior to the expiration of the policy presented with the liquor
license application; and provided further, that if the license holder fails to
produce such new policy or extended policy of insurance prior to the said
fourteen (14) day period, the license holder shall pay a penalty of fifty
dollars ($50.00) to the village. (2013 Code § 3-1-5; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Insurance Requirements: No license shall be issued to any person or
entity that cannot produce a policy of insurance by an entity against liability
for any injury or death which said parties may incur while operating under the
provisions of the Illinois liquor control act as follows:
      1.   In the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per
person and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) per occurrence for
bodily injury liability; one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for loss of
means of support; and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property
damage liability; or
      2.   A three hundred thousand dollar ($300,000.00) single limit dramshop
policy.
      3.   No license shall be issued to any person or entity that cannot
produce a policy of insurance by a solvent and responsible company authorized
to do business in the state insuring said person or entity against general
liability in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00).
      4.   Each applicant shall show, by evidence satisfactory to the local
liquor control commissioner, the existence of a policy of liquor liability
insurance, and in the event the applicant is not the owner of the premises
described in said application, that such applicant has a lawful right to
possession of the same until the expiration of the term of license for which
application is made; provided, that the requirement of a coverage period equal
to or longer than the duration of the applicant's liquor license may be waived
if the applicant presents evidence satisfactory to the liquor control
commissioner that the applicant holds a liquor license at a location other than
the village, pays an administrative fee to the village in the amount of twenty
five dollars ($25.00) and agrees in writing to furnish the required policy of
insurance, or a renewal of the then existing policy, not less than fourteen
(14) days prior to the expiration of the policy presented with the liquor
license application; and provided further, that if the license holder fails to
produce such new policy or extended policy of insurance prior to the said
fourteen (14) day period, the license holder shall pay a penalty of fifty
dollars ($50.00) to the village. In the event of cancellation of the lease or
other evidence of a lawful right to possession of the premises, the local
liquor control commissioner shall be notified immediately of such cancellation.
(2013 Code § 3-1-5)
4-1-8: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT:
No license shall be issued hereunder until the applicant shall have been
investigated by the local liquor control commissioner and a report filed in the
records of said commissioner approving the issuance of such license. As a part
of this investigation, the local liquor control commissioner shall require
fingerprints of all new applicants and shall have the right to require
fingerprints of any applicant for renewal thereof. As used in this section, the
term "applicant" or "applicants" shall mean any individual who applies for a
liquor license, all partners and officers of any partnership which applies for
a liquor license, all officers of any corporation and all members of a limited
liability company with a membership or ownership interest of five percent (5%)
or more which applies for a liquor license. For purposes of obtaining
fingerprints under this section, the local liquor control commissioner shall
collect a fee and forward the fee to the Illinois department of state police
and the federal bureau of investigation. The local liquor control commissioner
may accept an existing investigative report and/or fingerprint report of any
state, municipality or local unit of government dated within the prior three
(3) months in lieu of a report or reports from the Illinois department of state
police and the federal bureau of investigation. A copy of fingerprints shall be
held on record by the village. (2013 Code § 3-1-5)
4-1-9: INSTRUCTIONAL PROGRAM FOR PERSONNEL; ATTENDANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   All original and renewal applications for class AR, AP, AW, C, C-1, F,
G, I, M, O and S licenses shall be accompanied with proof of completion of a
state certified beverage alcohol sellers and servers education and training
(BASSET) program, as hereinafter defined, for all persons who sell or serve
alcoholic liquor, all management personnel working on the premises, and anyone
whose job description entails the checking of identification for the purchase
of alcoholic liquor, pursuant to that license. Class F and I licensees must
have a BASSET trained person on the premises during an event and must provide
the name and proof of BASSET training for that person when applying for a class
F or I license. (2013 Code § 3-1-5; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   A "state certified BASSET program" shall be defined as a BASSET program
licensed by the state of Illinois liquor control commission as required by 235
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-12(11.1). All licensed BASSET providers shall be
required to have on file all licenses and certificates to prove current
qualifications and provide a certificate of course completion and a card to
participants as proof of completion. A photocopy of certificates of completion
for all owners, managers, employees, or agents required to have BASSET training
shall be maintained on the premises in a manner that will allow inspection,
upon demand, by any designee, of both the state of Illinois and the village.
   C.   Any new owner, manager, employee or agent requiring BASSET training
shall, within ninety (90) days from the beginning of his employment with that
licensee, complete an Illinois liquor control commission BASSET approved
seller/server training program and shall, until completion of the BASSET
program, work under the supervision of a person who has completed BASSET
training. (2013 Code § 3-1-5)
4-1-10: CLASSIFICATION AND TERM OF LICENSES:
Pursuant to this chapter, the local liquor control commissioner shall have the
power to grant retail liquor licenses for the selling at retail of alcoholic
liquor and not for resale in any form for the period beginning on May 1 of any
year and ending on April 30 of the next succeeding year. Such licenses shall be
as follows: (2013 Code § 3-1-5)
   A.   Class AR License (Restaurants): Class AR licenses shall authorize the
retail sale of all kinds of alcoholic liquor in a restaurant for consumption on
the premises.
   B.   Class AR-1 License (Additional Bar Within 200 Feet): Class AR-
1 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for
consumption within two hundred feet (200') of the property lines of property
which holds a valid AR license from one or more additional bars. Said class AR-
1 license shall be available as determined in the discretion of the local
liquor control commissioner. Said class AR-1 license shall be issued on the
same qualifications and terms and conditions required for the original license
under which the class AR license was granted and shall be valid for not more
than ten (10) consecutive days.
   C.   Class AP License (Package Store): Class AP licenses shall authorize the
retail sale, on the premises specified, by original package for consumption off
the premises by package stores as defined in section
4-1-2 of this chapter, and shall not authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor for
consumption on the premises.
   D.   Class AB And W License (Beer And Wine Package Sales): Class AB and W
licenses shall authorize the retail sale by stores and gasoline stations of
beer and wine in the original package on the premises specified in the license
for consumption off the premises and shall not authorize the sale of alcoholic
liquor for consumption on the premises. (2013 Code § 3-1-5)
   E.   Class ARPQ License (Packaged Sales In Restaurants): Class ARPQ licenses
shall authorize the retail sale of all types of alcoholic liquor for
consumption off the premises only when a class Q-2 license has been issued and
the alcoholic liquor being offered for sale is the alcoholic liquor being
offered for product sampling and is sold only during the time of the tasting
event. Such license shall only be available to class AR licensees.
   F.   Class AW License: Class AW licenses shall authorize the retail sale of
beer within the premises specified, for consumption on the premises, and retail
sales of beer by original package for consumption off the premises; provided,
however, that a brewpub licensee shall not sell for off premises consumption
more than fifty thousand (50,000) gallons per year. Such license shall also
authorize the retail sale of wine by a winemaker within the premises specified,
for consumption on the premises, and retail sales of wine by a "winemaker" as
defined in section
4-1-2 of this chapter in the original package for consumption off the premises.
If product sampling will be conducted on the premises or within the property
lines of the property upon which the premises is located, the licensee must
obtain an additional class P and/or a class Q-1 or class Q-2 license. (2013
Code § 3-1-5)
   G.   Class C License (Clubs): Class C licenses shall authorize the retail
sale, on the premises specified, of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the
premises, and retail sales of alcoholic liquor by original package for
consumption off the premises. This license shall be issued only to "clubs", as
defined in section
4-1-2 of this chapter. (2013 Code § 3-1-5)
   H.   Class C-1 License (Small Clubs): Class C-1 licenses shall authorize the
retail sale, on the premises specified, of alcoholic liquor for consumption on
the premises, and shall be issued only to those clubs otherwise eligible for a
class C liquor license but whose membership does not exceed one hundred (100)
paid members as substantiated by a complete list of names and addresses of said
members, which list shall be sworn and attested to by the licensee under
penalties of perjury; and provided further, that if at any time the membership
exceeds one hundred (100) in number, the licensee must immediately advise the
local liquor control commissioner.
   I.   Class F License (24 Hour Special Event): Class F licenses shall
authorize the retail sale, on the premises specified, of alcoholic liquor for
consumption on the premises, and which are subject to the following conditions,
notwithstanding provisions pertaining to other classes of license:
      1.   Shall be issued only to established clubs and organizations.
      2.   Shall be valid for a twenty four (24) hour period as specified on
the license.
      3.   Are not renewable.
      4.   No more than seven (7) class F licenses shall be issued to the same
applicant in any one calendar year. Such licenses shall be issued in the
discretion of the local liquor control commissioner who may waive technical
compliance with the requirements for the issuance of liquor licenses where the
liquor control commissioner determines that the circumstances require such
waiver.
   J.   Class G License (Golf Courses): Class G licenses shall authorize the
retail sale, within the premises specified, of alcoholic liquor for consumption
on the premises and retail sale of alcohol by original package for consumption
beyond the confines of the premises but within the property lines of the
property upon which the premises is located. Such license shall also authorize
the retail sale by original package for consumption from an additional bar(s)
or a beverage cart during daylight hours on the golf course only when the golf
course is open and in use. A separate class J license must be obtained for each
beverage cart and additional bar(s), but a separate class P license does not
have to be obtained.
   K.   Class I License (Temporary Special Event Retail): Class I licenses
shall authorize the retail sale, on the premises specified, for consumption on
the premises of beer and wine by a "special event retailer" as defined in
section
4-1-2 of this chapter during a "special event" as defined in 235 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/1-3.30. Such license shall be subject to the following
provisions pertaining to other classes of licenses:
      1.   Shall be limited to the provisions of 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/1-3.30 and 5/5-1(e).
      2.   The license applicant must be an educational, fraternal, political,
civic, religious or nonprofit organization.
      3.   Shall be valid for a period up to five (5) days (120 hours) as
specified on the license.
      4.   Is not renewable.
      5.   Licensees are required to fulfill all requirements of those
receiving licenses for the period from April 1 to March 31 the following year.
      6.   No more than seven (7) class I licenses shall be issued to the same
applicant in any one calendar year.
   L.   Class J License (Additional Bar): Class J licenses shall authorize the
retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption within the premises or
within the property lines of the property upon which a licensed premises is
located or within two hundred feet (200') of the property lines of the property
upon which a licensed premises is located (the "authorized premises"). Class J
licenses shall be available as determined by the local liquor control
commissioner only to class AR, AW, C, C-1, or G licensees. Said class J license
shall be issued on the same qualifications and terms and conditions required
for the original license under which the class A, C, or G license was granted.
A separate class J license must be obtained for each additional bar, and each
bar must be designated as a bar on the diagram of the premises submitted with
the application.
   M.   Class K License (Mail Order, Catalog, Internet Sales):
      1.   Class K licenses shall authorize the retail sale of beer to be sold
exclusively by an establishment in which said retail sale of beer is done by
means of mail order, telephone, and internet orders for shipment of beer
through catalog advertisements to members of the general public of the age of
twenty one (21) years or more.
      2.   In addition to other requirements of this chapter, a class K license
shall only be issued to persons who can demonstrate that they are operating a
bona fide mail order, telephone order, internet order, or catalog business for
retail distribution of beer products with no sale at the facility.
      3.   Beer shall be sold in sealed packages only and not for sale,
consumption or gift upon the premises of the licensee, but only for shipment to
various locations or destinations away from the premises of the licensee.
      4.   It is a condition of class K licenses that, at no time will retail
sales, gift or consumption of beer be made to the general public on the
premises of the licensee and, further, that only sales of beer by the licensee
shall be that of mail order, telephone sales, or internet orders to be
delivered by United Parcel Service shipment or other authorized carrier,
pursuant to the regulations adopted by the Illinois state liquor commission, to
locations and destinations away from the premises of the licensee.
   N.   Class L License (Gift Baskets):
      1.   Class L licenses shall authorize the retail sale of wine or
champagne to be sold exclusively as part of an arrangement in a gift basket by
an establishment in which the retail sale of bottled wine and champagne is not
the primary and principal business thereof.
      2.   In addition to other requirements of this chapter, a class L license
shall be only issued to persons who can demonstrate that they are operating a
bona fide business in which the wine/champagne gift basket business is
incidental to the sale of other products.
      3.   Wine and champagne shall be sold in sealed packages only, and
consumption on the premises where sold is not permitted.
      4.   For purposes of this license classification, a "basket" shall be
defined as a decorative gift container which may be constructed of wood, metal,
plastic, woven rope, decorative paper or plastic bag or such similar material,
the purpose of which is to hold the gift bottle arrangement.
      5.   No more than two (2) bottles of wine or champagne shall be included
in any basket. (2013 Code § 3-1-5)
   O.   Class M License (Market): Class M licenses shall authorize the retail
sale of all kinds of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises and the
retail sale of all types of alcoholic liquor for consumption off the premises
so long as the following apply:
      1.   The products sold for consumption off the premises are not opened
and consumed on the premises;
      2.   The total square footage of the premises dedicated for the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor off the premises is no more than one-third (1/3) of
the total square footage of the premises; and
      3.   Permitted goods and merchandise, other than alcoholic liquor, are
also offered for retail sale on the premises.
   P.   Class N License (Special Use): Class N licenses shall authorize a class
AR, AW, C, C-1 and G licensee to transfer a portion of its alcoholic liquor
inventory from its licensed retail premises to the premises specified in the
license hereby created and to sell or offer for sale at retail the transferred
alcoholic liquor for use or consumption for a twenty four (24) hour period,
provided the licensee submits proof of general and liquor liability insurance
for said special use for the premises specified. No more than three (3) special
use licenses shall be issued to the same applicant in any one calendar year.
   Q.   Class O License (Caterer): Class O licenses shall authorize the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor for a twenty four (24) hour period within the village,
on the premises specified on the license, for a "caterer" as defined in section
4-1-2 of this chapter for consumption within the property lines of the premises
only as an incidental part of food service that serves prepared meals which
excludes the serving of snacks as the primary meal for private and public
functions. The licensee shall provide proof of general and liquor liability
insurance. Sale of alcoholic liquor to the licensee shall only be made at the
registered office of the licensee.
   R.   Class P License (Outside Service): Class P licenses shall authorize the
retail sale and consumption of alcoholic liquor within the property lines of
the property upon which the premises is located on a patio, beer garden,
cabana, or other outside area specifically designated as an outside service
area on the diagram of the premises submitted with the application to class AR,
AW, C, C-1, and M licensees. (2013 Code § 3-1-5)
   S.   Class Q-1 License (Product Sampling And Tasting Event): Class Q-
1 licenses shall authorize product sampling for consumption of beer and wine
only within the premises and/or within the property lines of the property upon
which the premises is located of up to three (3) samples of no more than one
ounce of wine or two (2) ounces of beer per consumer per day. A class Q-
1 licensee may offer for sale and serve more than one drink per person for
sampling purposes, provided the total quantity of the sampling package,
regardless of the number of containers in which the alcoholic liquor is served,
does not exceed four (4) ounces of wine or sixteen (16) ounces of beer and
shall be available only to class AW licensees. A separate class P license must
be obtained for outside service.
   T.   Class Q-2 License (Temporary Product Sampling And Tasting Event): Class
Q-2 licenses shall authorize product sampling for consumption of alcoholic
liquor within the premises only of up to three (3) samples of not more than
one-fourth (1/4) ounce of distilled spirits, one ounce of wine, or two (2)
ounces of beer per consumer per day. A class Q-2 licensee may offer for sale
and serve more than one drink per person for sampling purposes, provided the
total quantity of the sampling package, regardless of the number of containers
in which the alcoholic liquor is served, does not exceed one ounce of distilled
spirits, four (4) ounces of wine, or sixteen (16) ounces of beer and shall be
available only to class AR, AW, AP, C, or C-1 licensees. Product sampling
events must be registered with the local liquor control commissioner no later
than forty eight (48) hours prior to the event.
   U.   Class R License (Bring Your Own Bottle): Class R licenses shall
authorize an establishment, the primary purpose of which is the service of
food, or a cooking school, to permit patrons to bring their own wine and/or
beer in original packages and shall require that the patrons who leave with
such of their own wine and beer that has not been consumed to do so only in
sealed or unopened containers in compliance with state of Illinois law.
   V.   Class S License (Sunday Brunch Endorsement): Class S licenses shall
authorize the retail sale, on the premises specified, of alcoholic liquor for
consumption on the premises by brunch patrons only, to a licensee operating a
"restaurant" as defined in section
4-1-2 of this chapter and which offers inside its building a broad menuwide
variety meal commonly referred to as "brunch".
   W.   Class T License (Video Gaming): Class T licenses will be supplemental
in nature and may only be issued to the holder of a Class AR, AR-1, C, C-1, or
G license. A Class T license will authorize, in addition to the rights provided
by the underlying Class AR, AR-1, C, C-1, or G license, the retail sale of
alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises and the operation of video
gaming pursuant to and in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 5 of
Title 4 of this Code.
   X.   Class U License (Cooking, Arts And Crafts Classes): Class U licenses
shall authorize the retail sale of beer and wine by a cooking school, art
studio, or arts and crafts school or similar business within the premises
specified for consumption on the premises, but such sales shall be limited to
persons on the premises for the purpose of attending the art, craft or cooking
class and consumption may only occur while participating in the class. No
exterior signage advertising alcohol is permitted. Licensee's gross revenue
from the sale of beer and wine authorized by the licensee's liquor license may
not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the gross revenue generated by licensee's
business. Licensee shall maintain adequate books and records in accordance with
generally accepted accounting standards, which shall clearly indicate gross
revenue from the sale of beer and wine. (2013 Code § 3-1-5; amd. 2016 Code;
Ord. O-13-08, 3-19-2013; Ord. O-15-04, 3-26-2015; Ord. O-19-01, 4-16-2019; Ord.
O-21-12, 10-19-2021)
4-1-11: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   The fee for any of the licenses hereinafter set forth shall accompany
the application for such license. No license, or renewal of any license, may be
issued until the fee has been paid. The license fees for the classifications of
licenses herein authorized shall be fixed in the amounts as follows:
License Fee Term
License        Fee                           Term
Class AR       $2,500.00                     Per year
Class AR-1     75.00                         Per day
Class AP       2,500.00                      Per year
                                             Per year; the per year fee for
Class AB and W 2,000.00                      class AR licensees shall be
                                             $750.00
Class ARPQ     500.00                        Per year
Class AW       2,500.00                      Per year
Class C        2,500.00                      Per year
Class C-1      500.00                        Per year
Class F        75.00                         Per day
Class G        2,500.00                      Per year
                                             Per license for a period of up
                                             to the first 24 hours with
Class I        250.00                        $125.00 for each additional
                                             consecutive period of up to 24
                                             hours
Class J        200.00                        Per year
Class K        2,500.00                      Per year
Class L        500.00                        Per year
Class M        3,500.00                      Per year
Class N        200.00                        Per license
Class O        250.00                        Per license
Class P        100.00                        Per year
Class Q-1      250.00                        Per year
                                             Per event; the per event fee for
Class Q-2      75.00                         class ARPQ licensees shall be
                                             waived
Class R        250.00                        Per year
Class S        150.00                        Per year
               $1,000 per license year; and
Class T        the fee for each video gaming Per year
               terminal shall be $250.00 per
               machine
Class U        250.00                        Per year
 
   B.   If an application is made and a license granted during the first six
(6) months of each license year, the license fee for such period shall be the
entire fee required for the annual license year. Where application is made and
license granted during the last six (6) months of each license year, the
license fee shall be one-half (1/2) of the entire fee required for the annual
license year; provided, that the proration provided in this subsection shall
not be allowed to any person who has been a licensee for the annual license
year or part thereof preceding this application for a license; and provided
that, the benefit of this subsection shall not apply to a class F license fee.
   C.   The required fee shall be deposited with the local liquor control
commissioner at the time of application for the license. This shall be by
certified check, cashier's check or money order made payable to the village of
Campton Hills. Such fee shall be returned to the applicant if his application
is denied. (2013 Code § 3-1-5; amd. Ord. O-15-04, 3-26-2015; Ord. O-19-01, 4-
16-2019; Ord. O-21-12, 10-19-2021; Ord. O-24-01, 1-9-2024)
4-1-12: NUMBER OF LICENSES:
Maximum number of licenses which may be issued for each Class hereinafter
identified shall be as follows. The maximum number of licenses which may be
issued for each class shall be as follows:
LICENSE NUMBER AVAILABLE
LICENSE    NUMBER AVAILABLE
Class AR   Six (6)
Class AP   Two (2)
Class AB   One (1)
Class ARPQ Zero (0)
Class AW   Zero (0)
Class C    Zero (0)
Class C-1  Zero (0)
Class G    Zero (0)
Class J    One (1)
Class K    Zero (0)
Class L    Zero (0)
Class M    Zero (0)
Class O    Zero (0)
Class P    Five (5)
Class Q-1  Zero (0)
Class R    One (1)
Class S    Zero (0) - One (1)
Class T    Two (2)
Class U    Two (2)
 
   B.   Reduction In The Number Of Licenses: Whenever a license previously
issued under this chapter is revoked, surrendered, nonrenewed or terminated by
dormancy, the maximum number of licenses in the class of the license which is
revoked, surrendered, nonrenewed or terminated by dormancy shall be
automatically and immediately reduced by one (1).
   C.   Appropriate Number Of Licenses: Upon revocation, surrender, nonrenewal
or termination by dormancy, the village clerk shall codify the appropriate
maximum number of licenses for each class whenever the number of license(s) is
reduced by this section. (2013 Code § 3-1-5; amd. 2016 Code; Ord. O-19-01, 4-
16-2019; Ord. O-19-14, 8-20-2019; Ord. O-20-10, 6-2-2020; Ord. O-21-02, 4-8-
2021; Ord. O-21-12, 10-19-2021; Ord. O-21-15, 12-21-2021; Ord. O-24-05, 2-20-
2024; Ord. O-24-12, 5-7-2024; Ord. O-24-13, 6-18-2024; Ord. O-25-02, 1-7-2025;
Ord. O-25-05, 1-21-2025)
4-1-13: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE:
Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter are not transferable in any manner
whatsoever. Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall not descend by the
laws of testate or intestate devolution, but shall cease upon the death of the
licensee; provided, that executors or administrators of the estate of any
deceased licensee, and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when
such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of
the sale of alcoholic liquor under order of the appropriate court, and may
exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after
the death of such decedent or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the
expiration of such license but not longer than six (6) months after the death,
bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee, unless said executors,
administrators or trustees file a new application with the local liquor control
commissioner. A copy of the court order must be provided to the local liquor
control commissioner. (2013 Code § 3-1-5)
4-1-14: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
The village certificate of license issued in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter shall be displayed in a prominent place in the licensed
establishment. (2013 Code § 3-1-24)
4-1-15: LICENSES SUBJECT TO CHANGES, AMENDMENTS, RESTRICTIONS AND CONDITIONS:
Any and all licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to any
and all changes or amendments which may be hereafter made, and any and all
rules adopted by the local liquor control commissioner. Any and all licenses
shall be subject to any restrictions or conditions deemed desirable by the
local liquor control commissioner. (2013 Code § 3-1-5)
4-1-16: CHANGE OF LOCATION OR OWNERSHIP:
   A.   Location Change: A license issued hereunder shall permit the sale of
alcoholic liquor only within the premises described in the application or
within the property lines of the property upon which a licensed premises is
located. Such location may be changed only upon approval of the local liquor
control commissioner. No application involving a change of location shall be
accepted unless the proposed new location is in compliance with the provisions
and regulations of this chapter.
   B.   Ownership Change:
      1.   When a license has been issued to a partnership and a change of
ownership occurs resulting in a partnership interest by one who is not eligible
to hold a liquor license, the license shall terminate effective on the date of
the change.
      2.   When a license has been issued to a corporation and a change takes
place in the officers, directors, or shareholders of more than five percent
(5%) of the stock, or managers resulting in the holding of office or such
shares by one who is not eligible, the license shall terminate effective on the
date of the change.
      3.   If there are any changes in ownership of the establishment licensed
under this chapter or a change of managers, and the licensee does not contact
the liquor control commissioner within thirty (30) days of the change, said
license shall terminate effective on the date of the change.
      4.   A license will not terminate if the liquor control commissioner has
been notified of the change within thirty (30) days and all necessary
background checks and BASSET requirements are pending. (2013 Code § 3-1-5)
4-1-17: LAPSE OF LICENSE FOR MERGER INTO ANOTHER LIQUOR JURISDICTION:
If the premises for which a retail liquor license has been issued by the local
liquor control commissioner by reason of annexation or otherwise comes within
the jurisdiction of any other liquor control commissioner or commission and a
license issued from said other jurisdiction to the holder of the village
license in effect hereunder, then the village license shall automatically
become null and void. (2013 Code § 3-1-5)
4-1-18: AUTHORITY TO DENY OR NOT RENEW DUE TO DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES:
The local liquor control commissioner shall not issue nor renew a liquor
license of any category to any person that discriminates in its service to
individuals on the basis of race, color, gender, ethnic origin, national
origin, or ancestry. Except "club(s)", as defined in section
4-1-2 of this chapter, are exempt from this section. (2013 Code § 3-1-24; amd.
2016 Code)
4-1-19: PROHIBITED HOURS OF SALE AND OCCUPANCY:
   A.   Prohibited Hours Of Sale: It shall be unlawful for any licensee
hereunder to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor or furnish
or give away or allow to permit the same to be consumed on the licensed
premises or any other premises under the control, directly or indirectly, of
the licensee, during the following hours:
      1.   Except on January 1 and except on Thanksgiving Day, between the
hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Mondays,
Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays.
      2.   Except on January 1, between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M.
and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on Saturdays, and between the hours of two o'clock
(2:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Sundays; provided, that as to
package stores, between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and nine o'clock
(9:00) A.M. on Sundays.
      3.   On January 1 and on Thanksgiving Day between the hours of two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. unless January 1 is a Sunday,
and then between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:
00) noon.
      4.   The prohibitions in subsections A2 and A3 of this section shall not
apply:
         a.   During the hours specified on the Sunday brunch endorsement
granted the licensee; or
         b.   Between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock
(12:00) noon on Sundays if no hours are specified on the Sunday brunch
endorsement.
   B.   Prohibited Occupancy; Exceptions: It shall be unlawful to keep open for
business, or to admit persons to any premises licensed under these rules for
the retail sale of alcoholic liquor during the hours within which the sale of
alcoholic liquor is prohibited or to permit or allow persons to remain in or
about the licensed premises either before or after the hours designated within
which the sale and consumption of alcoholic liquor is prohibited on the
licensed premises; provided, however, that restaurants may keep their place of
business open, subject only to the provisions that no sale at retail of
alcoholic liquor or the consumption by persons of alcoholic liquor shall be
permitted or allowed on said licensed premises during the hours prohibited.
(2013 Code § 3-1-9)
   C.   Determination Of Hours: The hours mentioned in this section shall be
Central Standard Time except when daylight saving time is in effect, and then
said hours shall be Central Daylight Saving Time. (2013 Code § 3-1-24)
4-1-20: PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
At the time of the application for license or renewal, certification from the
village building and zoning officer, the Kane County health department and the
Kane County building department shall be provided indicating that the proposed
licensed premises and the property upon which a licensed premises is located
are in conformity with all of the regulations and ordinances of the village
and, where applicable, Kane County. (2013 Code § 3-1-5)
4-1-21: SALES TO AND PRESENCE OF CERTAIN PERSONS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder, individually or through his
agents or employees, to sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person
under the age of twenty one (21) years or to any intoxicated person, except as
provided in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-16.1, or to allow any person
under twenty one (21) years of age to sit, stand or otherwise be located at the
bar portion of a licensee's premises after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. unless such
person is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, grandparent or sibling over
the age of twenty one (21). (2013 Code § 3-1-16; amd. 2016 Code)
4-1-22: MINORS:
   A.   Purchase, Possession, Consumption Prohibited; Exceptions: Any person
less than twenty one (21) years of age shall not purchase or accept a gift of
alcoholic liquor or have alcoholic liquor in his possession. No person shall
purchase, accept delivery or have possession of alcoholic liquor in violation
of this subsection. The consumption of alcoholic liquor by any person less than
twenty one (21) years of age is forbidden. The possession and dispensing or
consumption by a person under twenty one (21) years of age of alcoholic liquor
in the performance of a religious service or ceremony, or the consumption by a
person under twenty one (21) years of age under the direct supervision and
approval of the parents or parent or those persons standing in loco parentis of
such person under twenty one (21) years of age in the privacy of a home is not
prohibited by this subsection. Violation of this subsection shall be punishable
by a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first offense and five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for any subsequent offense within a twelve (12) month
period. (2013 Code § 3-1-24; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Right To Request Identification: If a licensee, or any agent or
employee thereof, believes or has reason to believe that a sale or delivery of
alcoholic liquor is prohibited because the prospective recipient is under the
age of twenty one (21) years, he shall, before making such sale or delivery,
demand presentation of some form of positive identification, containing proof
of age, issued by a public officer in the performance of his official duties.
(2013 Code § 3-1-16)
   C.   Employment:
      1.   Except as enumerated herein, no licensee shall employ any person
under the age of twenty one (21) years to sell, handle, draw, serve, pour, or
mix any alcoholic liquor, beer, or wine, or to tend bar on the licensed
premises.
      2.   Where the principal business of the licensee is the sale of food,
food servers who are eighteen (18) years of age or older may serve alcoholic
beverages. For purposes of this section, a licensee has as its principal
business the sale of food when the gross annual receipts of such sales exceed
fifty percent (50%) of the licensee's total gross income from business
conducted on the licensed premises.
      3.   Where the principal business of the licensee is the sale of
alcoholic liquor, beer, or wine, no such licensee shall employ, engage or
permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years who is not related to
the licensee by blood or marriage to work, entertain, or to act as host or
hostess in any public area on the licensed premises while such premises is open
for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor. For purposes of this subsection, a
licensee has as its principal business the sale of alcoholic liquor, beer, or
wine when the gross receipts of such sales exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
licensee's total gross income from business conducted on the licensed premises.
      4.   It shall be the duty of all licensees to keep and maintain records
of persons performing services within the licensed premises to ensure
compliance with this subsection. (2013 Code § 3-1-17)
   D.   Social Hosting:
      1.   It is unlawful for any parent or guardian to knowingly permit his or
her residence, or any other private property under his or her control, to be
used by an invitee of the parent's child or the guardian's ward, if the invitee
is under the age of twenty one (21), in a manner that constitutes a violation
of any state of Illinois statute or this code relating to alcoholic beverages.
A parent or guardian is deemed to have knowingly permitted his or her
residence, or any other private property under his or her control, to be used
in violation of this subsection D if he or she knowingly authorizes or permits
consumption of alcoholic liquor by underage invitees. Any person who violates
this subsection D shall be punishable by a fine of not less than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
      2.   Where a violation of this subsection D directly or indirectly
results in great bodily harm or death to any person, the person violating this
subsection D shall be prosecuted pursuant to state statute in lieu of this
subsection D. Nothing in this subsection D shall be construed to prohibit the
giving of alcoholic beverages to a person under the age of twenty one (21)
years in the performance of a religious ceremony or service in observation of a
religious holiday. (Ord. O-13-11, 5-21-2013)
      3.   Any person to knowingly authorize or permit a residence which he or
she occupies to be used by an invitee under twenty one (21) years of age and:
a) the person occupying the residence knows that any such person under the age
of twenty one (21) is in possession of or is consuming any alcoholic beverage;
and b) the possession or consumption of the alcohol by the person under twenty
one (21) is not otherwise permitted by law shall be in violation of this
subsection. (Ord. O-13-11, 5-21-2013; amd. 2016 Code)
      4.   For the purposes of this subsection D, where the residence has an
owner and a tenant or lessee, there is a rebuttable presumption that the
residence is occupied only by the tenant or lessee. A person shall not be in
violation of this subsection D if:
         a.   He or she requests assistance from the police department or other
law enforcement agency to either: 1) remove any person who refuses to abide by
the person's performance of the duties imposed by this subsection D; or 2)
terminate the activity because the person has been unable to prevent a person
under the age of twenty one (21) years from consuming alcohol despite having
taken all reasonable steps to do so; and
         b.   This assistance is requested before any other person makes a
formal complaint to the police department or other law enforcement agency about
the activity. (Ord. O-13-11, 5-21-2013)
4-1-23: DESIGNATED DANCING AREA:
Dancing shall be limited to one area designated for such purposes in the
diagram which accompanies the application for a liquor license. The licensee
shall not permit dancing other than in the area so designated. (2013 Code § 3-
1-8)
4-1-24: DUTY TO REPORT DISTURBANCES, FIGHTS AND VIOLATIONS:
Every liquor license holder shall immediately report by telephone to the
village police department all disturbances, breaches of the peace, fights,
assaults and apparent violations of any village or state law occurring on the
licensed premises. (2013 Code § 3-1-24)
4-1-25: ADDITIONAL PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Sound Amplification: It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit or
allow any noise or sound to be amplified outside the bounds of a structure on
the premises if a residence is within five hundred feet (500') of the premises.
(2013 Code § 3-1-10)
   B.   Free Dispensing: Free dispensing of alcoholic liquor by any licensee is
prohibited; except, that product sampling may be conducted by a licensee with a
class Q-1 or Q-2 license only. (2013 Code § 3-1-12)
   C.   Resale: It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell at retail
alcoholic liquor for resale. (2013 Code § 3-1-13)
   D.   Presence Of Intoxicated Persons; Disturbing The Peace: It shall be
unlawful for any licensee, individually or through his agents or employees, to
allow intoxicated persons to loiter on or about that part of the premises
described in the license and the property upon which a licensed premises is
located, which part is in use by or in view of the general public, or permit
any conduct which shall tend to disturb the people or quiet of the neighborhood
or the premises. (2013 Code § 3-1-15)
   E.   Gambling: It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder to permit or
allow any gambling or betting of any money in or about the licensed premises or
to permit or allow any slot machines or any vending machines in or about the
licensed premises, which slot machines or vending machines either directly or
indirectly involve the element of chance. This prohibition will not apply to
video gaming when conducted in accordance with the Illinois Video Gaming Act,
230 ILCS 40/1, et seq., a valid Class T liquor license, and the regulations of
Chapter 5 of Title 4 of this Code. (2013 Code § 3-1-18)
   F.   Prostitution And Lewdness:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder to allow or permit
any soliciting for prostitution or lewdness on the licensed premises. The
following kinds of conduct are prohibited:
         a.   The performance of acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual
acts.
         b.   The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling on the
breast, buttocks, anus or genitals.
         c.   The actual or simulated displaying of the breasts, buttocks,
pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals. The aforesaid body parts shall be covered
by opaque material which does not permit viewing of said body parts.
         d.   The permitting by a licensee of any person to remain in or upon
the licensed premises who exposes to public view his or her entire breasts or
genitals, vulva or anus.
         e.   The displaying of moving pictures or photographic slide
presentations depicting acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual
act.
      2.   Employees shall not have bodily contact with patrons, and patrons
shall not be permitted to purchase beverages for employees. For purposes of
this subsection F2, the term "employees" shall include independent contractors
performing services on the licensed premises and employees of any independent
contractors performing services on the licensed premises. (2013 Code § 3-1-14)
   G.   Harboring, Assisting Criminals: It shall be unlawful for any licensee
to harbor, conceal, aid or assist any fugitive from justice. (2013 Code § 3-1-
11; amd. Ord. O-19-01, 4-16-2019)
4-1-26: REVOCATION, SUSPENSION AND FINES:
   A.   Authority To Revoke, Suspend Or Fine: The local liquor control
commissioner may revoke or suspend for not more than thirty (30) days any
license issued by him, and in addition may fine any licensee, if he determines
that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of the liquor control act,
any valid ordinance or resolution enacted by the Corporate Authorities or any
applicable rule or regulation established by the local liquor control
commissioner. The fine imposed shall not exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for a first violation within a twelve (12) month period, one
thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for a second violation within a
twelve (12) month period, and two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for
a third or subsequent violation within a twelve (12) month period. Each day on
which a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. Not more
than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) in fines under this subsection may
be imposed against any licensee during the period of his license. Proceeds from
such fines shall be paid into the general corporate fund.
   B.   Hearing: However, no such license shall be so revoked or suspended and
no licensee shall be fined except after a public hearing by the local liquor
control commissioner with a three (3) day written notice to the licensee
affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend. All such hearings
shall be open to the public, and the local liquor control commissioner shall
reduce all evidence to writing and shall maintain an official record of the
proceedings. If the local liquor control commissioner has reason to believe
that any continued operation of a particular licensed premises will immediately
threaten the welfare of the community, he may, upon the issuance of a written
order stating the reason for such conclusion and without notice or hearing,
order the licensed premises closed for not more than seven (7) days, giving the
licensee an opportunity to be heard during that period; except, that if the
licensee shall also be engaged in the conduct of another business or businesses
on the licensed premises, such order shall not be applicable to such other
business or businesses.
   C.   Local Liquor Control Commissioner Determination: The local liquor
control commissioner shall, within five (5) days after such hearing, if he
determines after such hearing that the license should be revoked or suspended
or that the licensee should be fined, state the reason or reasons for such
determination in a written order, and either the amount of the fine, the period
of suspension, or that the license has been revoked, and shall serve a copy of
such order within the five (5) days upon the licensee.
   D.   Appeals To State Commission: The licensee, after the receipt of such
order of suspension or revocation, shall have the privilege, within a period of
twenty (20) days after the receipt of such order of suspension or revocation,
of appealing the order to the state commission for a decision sustaining,
reversing or modifying the order of the local liquor control commissioner. If
the state commission affirms the local commissioner's order to suspend or
revoke the license at the first hearing, the appellant shall cease to engage in
the business for which the license was issued until the local commissioner's
order is terminated by its own provisions or reversed upon rehearing or by the
courts. (2016 Code; amd. Ord. O-19-14, 8-20-2019; amd. Ord. O-20-10, 6-2-2020;
Ord. O-21-02, 4-8-2021)
4-1-27: HEARINGS:
Unless otherwise provided in section
4-1-26 of this chapter, the following hearing provisions apply: (2016 Code)
   A.    Notice Requirements: Whenever this chapter requires a hearing before
the local liquor control commissioner or said commissioner takes any action
affecting a license or licensee, a hearing shall be held, and the licensee
shall be afforded reasonable notice of such hearing. Such notice shall be sent
by certified mail, return receipt requested, or personal delivery to the
address of the licensee contained on the application for the liquor license and
shall state:
      1.    The time, place, and nature of the hearing.
      2.    A statement of the legal authority and jurisdiction under which the
hearing is to be held.
      3.    A reference to the particular section(s) of this chapter or statute
(s) involved.
      4.    A statement informing the licensee of his ability to respond by
presenting evidence and argument.
   B.    Conduct Of Hearings: A hearing required under this chapter shall be
held in accordance with the following rules:
      1.    A hearing shall be held at a reasonable time, date and place.
      2.    No cause shall be heard earlier than three (3) days after receipt
by a licensee of the notice required under this section.
      3.    A licensee may present evidence and argument.
      4.    The local liquor control commissioner may limit, but not prohibit,
the presentation of evidence and argument.
      5.    Where a licensee has received the requisite notice under this
section and fails to appear at a hearing, the local liquor control commissioner
may act ex parte. The local liquor control commissioner may also have an
informal hearing where the liquor license will not be affirmatively acted on at
such hearing.
   C.    Decisions: Any decision, order or determination rendered by the local
liquor control commissioner which affects the rights, duties, or privileges of
a licensee shall be in writing, and the licensee shall be notified personally
or by certified mail of the decision. Any such decision, order or determination
may include assessment of all costs, fees and expenses as determined by the
local liquor control commissioner. (2013 Code § 3-1-19)
   D.    Continuances For Hearings:
      1.    A request for a continuance of any hearing in any matter before the
local liquor control commissioner will not be allowed by the commissioner
unless for good and valid reason in writing and unless made at least two (2)
days prior to the date set for hearing.
      2.    The local liquor control commissioner may, in his discretion, grant
a continuance if extenuating and unusual circumstances are presented in support
of the request for continuance.
      3.    Any continuance requested by the licensee shall be contingent upon
payment by the licensee of all costs, fees, and expenses as determined by the
local liquor control commissioner. (2013 Code § 3-1-22)
4-1-28: APPEALS:
Any appeal taken from a decision of the local liquor control commissioner shall
be reviewed on the record taken by and prepared by a certified court reporter
or certified shorthand reporter. (2013 Code § 3-1-23)
4-1-29: ENTRY ONTO PREMISES:
Any entry authorized by this chapter onto premises licensed under this chapter
shall be accomplished without a breach of the peace. (2013 Code § 3-1-20)
4-1-30: WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS:
Compliance with any or all of the provisions of this chapter concerning
procedure may be waived by the local liquor control commissioner. (2013 Code §
3-1-21)
4-1-31: CESSATION OF BUSINESS:
Any licensee who has ceased to do business or closes the licensed place of
business for a period of more than thirty (30) successive days without written
permission from the local liquor commissioner shall be subject to having its
license declared forfeited and lapsed by order of the local liquor
commissioner. (Ord. O-19-14, 8-20-2019; amd. Ord. O-20-10, 6-2-2020; Ord. O-21-
02, 4-8-2021)
4-1-32: SALE OF COCKTAILS, MIXED DRINKS AND SINGLE SERVINGS OF WINE TO GO:
Pursuant to 235 ILCS 5/6-28.8, relative to the sale of cocktails, mixed drinks
and single servings of wine for off-premises consumption, local liquor license
holders, with liquor licenses that allow for the sale and consumption of
cocktails, mixed drinks and/or wine on the licensed premises, may conduct the
sale of cocktails, mixed drinks and single servings of wine “in person,” on a
“to-go” basis, and by delivery, for off-premises consumption, in full
compliance with the provisions of 235 ILCS 5/6-28.8, until August 1, 2028.
Where the local liquor license, that allows for the on-premises consumption of
alcoholic liquor, does not provide for the sale of cocktails and mixed drinks,
but only provides for the sale of beer and wine, said liquor licensee shall
only be permitted to sell single servings of wine pursuant to the provisions of
this Section. (Ord. 24-10, 6-18-2024)
CHAPTER 2
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
SECTION:
4-2-1: Definitions
4-2-2: Certificate Of Registration
4-2-3: Notice Regulating Peddlers And Solicitors
4-2-4: Duties Of Solicitors And Peddlers
4-2-5: Uninvited Soliciting Or Peddling
4-2-6: Time Limit
4-2-7: Mobile Food Vendors
4-2-8: Violation; Penalties
4-2-9: Constitutional Rights
4-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, as used herein, shall be
construed to have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
                    A self-contained food service operation, located in a
                    readily movable vehicle, wagon, trailer, or cart that is
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR: either motorized, wheeled, or towed, and is used to store,
                    prepare, display or serve food intended for individual
                    portion service.
MOBILE FOOD A self-contained food service operation, located in a readily movable vehicle,
VENDOR:     wagon, trailer, or cart that is either motorized, wheeled, or towed, and is used
            to store, prepare, display or serve food intended for individual portion service.
PEDDLING:   Any one or more of the following activities:
            A.   Selling or offering for sale, barter or exchange at retail any goods, wares,
           merchandise or services of any kind whatsoever by traveling from place to place
            along the streets of the village or from residence to residence therein, but
            shall not include solicitation or canvassing for future delivery.
            B.   Itinerant vendor activities by any person who transports tangible personal
            property for retail sale within the village, where the person does not maintain
            in the state an established office, distribution house, sales house, warehouse,
            service center or residence from which such business is conducted; provided,
           however, this term shall not include any person who delivers tangible personal
            property within the village who is fulfilling an order for such property which
            was solicited or placed by mail or other means. It shall be prima facie evidence
            that a person is an "itinerant vendor" if the person does not transact business
            from a fixed location or if the person does not own or lease, for a term of at
            least six (6) months, the property from which business is conducted.
            C.   Transient merchant activities by any person who is engaged temporarily in
            the retail sale of goods, wares or merchandise in the village and who, for the
            purpose of conducting such business, occupies any building, room, vehicle,
            structure of any kind, or vacant lot; provided, however, this term does not
            include any person selling goods, wares or merchandise which are raised, produced
            or manufactured by him; to any person selling vegetables, fruit or perishable
           farm products at an established village market; to any person operating a store
            or refreshment stand at a resort; or to any person operating a stand or booth on
            or adjacent to property owned by him or upon which he resides. It shall be prima
            facie evidence that a person is a "transient merchant" if the person does not
            transact business from a fixed location or if the person does not own, or lease
            for a term of at least six (6) months, the property from which business is
            conducted.
REGISTERED
SOLICITOR   Any person who has obtained a valid certificate of registration as herein
AND         provided, where such certificate is in the possession of, and on the person of,
REGISTERED  the one soliciting or peddling during all soliciting or peddling.
PEDDLER:
RESIDENCE:  Every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one or more
            persons, contained within any type of building or structure.
SOLICITING: Any one or more of the following activities:
            A.   Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise,
            foodstuffs, insurance, subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers
           and every other type or kind of publication, or services of any kind, character
            or description whatsoever, for any kind of consideration whatsoever, all for
            future delivery. (Ord. O-16-21, 12-20-2016; amd. Ord. O-17-8, 9-5-2017; Ord. O-
            17-09, 10-4-2017; Ord. O-20-07, 5-5-2020)
 
4-2-2: CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION:
   A.   Certificate Required: Prior to engaging in any "soliciting" or
"peddling" activities in the village, as defined by this chapter, any person
must first apply for and secure a certificate of registration as provided by
this chapter for each person engaging in such activity. A certificate of
registration issued pursuant to this Chapter 2 is non-transferrable.
   B.   Ineligibility for Certificate: The following persons shall be
ineligible for a certificate of registration:
      1.   Any person who has been convicted of the commission of a felony
under the laws of the state of Illinois or any other state or federal law of
the United States within five (5) years of the date of the application; or
      2.   Any person who has been convicted of a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter; or
      3.   Any person whose certificate of registration issued hereunder has
previously been revoked as herein provided.
      4.   Any person who has previously been issued certificates of
registration for a total of 180 days in a current calendar year.
      5.   Any person applying for a certificate of registration to conduct
activities on behalf of an entity, where such entity has seven (7) persons
currently certified hereunder on its behalf.
   C.   Application for Certificate:
      1.   Form and Oath: Application for a certificate of registration shall
be made by each individual and by each entity upon a form provided by and filed
with the village clerk. The applicant shall state, under oath, such information
requested on the application form as is required by the provisions of this
chapter and such other relevant information as determined by the village clerk.
      2.   Identification. An applicant for a certificate of registration must
submit a valid drivers' license or state issued photo identification card with
the application form, a copy of which will be attached to the certificate of
registration.
      3.   Entity Information. The name and address of the entity on whose
behalf the soliciting or peddling activity is being conducted, together with
credentials establishing the applicant's relationship to the entity.
Additionally, the applicant shall supply the name, contact information and
location of the nearest supervisor or manager overseeing the soliciting or
peddling activity that is subject to the application.
   D.   Fees:
      1.   Fees Established: Fees shall be paid at the time of filing the
application, as follows:
      All persons who apply for a certificate under this Chapter 2 shall in
addition to the fee identified below pay an application processing and
background check fee of $25, which shall be non-refundable.
 
Duration Of Certificate Requested Fee Per Person And, If Applicable, Each
                                  Entity
Single Day                        $35.00
30 Day                            $75.00
90 Day                            $200.00
 
   E.   Issuance or Denial of Certificate; Contents:
      1.   Denial: The village president, after consideration of the
application and all information obtained relative thereto, shall deny the
application if the applicant does not possess the qualifications for such
certificate as herein required. Endorsement shall be made by the village
president upon the application of the denial of the application.
      2.    Issuance: When the applicant is found to be fully qualified, the
certificate of registration shall be issued by the village president or his
designee.
      3.    Time Limit for Action: All applications shall be acted upon by the
village president within twenty-one (21) days after receipt of a completed
application.
      4.    Contents: Each certificate of registration shall state the
expiration date thereof.
   F.   Revocation Of Certificate: Any certificate of registration issued
hereunder may be revoked by the Village President if the holder of the
certificate is found by the Village to be in violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter, or has made a false material statement in the application, or
otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a certificate of
registration under the terms of this chapter. Immediately upon such revocation,
written notice thereof shall be given by the Village President to the holder of
the certificate in person, email with proof of transmission, or by certified
U.S. mail addressed to his address set forth in the application. Immediately
upon the giving of such notice of revocation, the certificate of registration
shall become null and void; provided, however, that the certificate holder may
request, in writing within 10 days of the revocation, a post-revocation hearing
before the Board of Trustees, which shall be heard at the next following board
meeting which is scheduled at least three (3) business days after Village
receipt of the certificate holder's request.
   G.   Records Kept: The Office of the Village Clerk shall cause to be kept an
accurate record of every application received and acted upon, together with all
other information and data pertaining thereto, and of all certificates of
registration issued under the provisions of this chapter, and of the denial of
applications. Applications for certificates shall be numbered in consecutive
order as filed, and every certificate issued, and any renewal thereof, shall be
identified with the duplicate number of the application upon which it was
issued. (Ord. O-16-21, 12-20-2016; amd. Ord. O-17-8, 9-5-2017; Ord. O-20-07, 5-
5-2020)
4-2-3: NOTICE REGULATING PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS:
   A.   Notice Requirements: The owner or occupant of any residence who desires
to forbid trespasses by solicitors, or peddlers or unlicensed solicitors and
peddlers, may attach or exhibit upon or near the main front door, and the main
rear or side door (if any, and if to be protected), a card or plaque stating
such of the following as may be appropriate, in letters at least one-third inch
(1/3") in height:
SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS NOT INVITED (or the word "PROHIBITED" may be
substituted for "NOT INVITED")
or
SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS NOT INVITED UNLESS REGISTERED WITH THE VILLAGE
   B.   Notice Provided by Village: For the convenience of residents of the
village and for purposes of uniformity, cards or plaques containing the
foregoing legend shall be made available by the village. The form of card or
plaque provided in this section shall not be deemed to be an exclusive form of
notice. Such card or plaque so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to
any solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon. (Ord. O-16-21, 12-20-2016; amd. Ord. O-17-8, 9-
5-2017)
4-2-4: DUTIES OF SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon any property of
another in the village after receiving, immediately prior to such entry, notice
from the owner or occupant that such entry is forbidden, or to remain upon the
property of another after receiving notice from the owner or occupant to
depart.
   B.   A person shall be deemed to have received notice from the owner or
occupant within the meaning of this chapter if he has been notified personally,
either orally or in writing, or if a printed or written notice forbidding such
entry has been conspicuously posted at the main entrance to said property or
the forbidden part thereof.
   C.   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited
or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant.
   D.   All solicitors and peddlers must carry their certificates of
registration during all solicitation and peddling activities, which certificate
must be visible to the public at all times during such activities. (Ord. O-16-
21, 12-20-2016; amd. Ord. O-17-8, 9-5-2017)
4-2-5: UNINVITED SOLICITING OR PEDDLING:
   A.   Prohibited: Any person soliciting or peddling who is forbidden entry by
notice given in compliance with this chapter shall be deemed guilty of
remaining on the property after receiving notice to depart if he shall remain
on the property, or if he shall ring the doorbell or knock or create any sound
calculated to attract the attention of the occupant.
   B.   Exemptions: Notices exhibited pursuant to this chapter shall not be
deemed applicable to and shall not prevent access to residential property by a
solicitor or peddler who has received prior invitation, written or oral, from
the owner or occupant thereof. (Ord. O-16-21, 12-20-2016; amd. Ord. O-17-8, 9-
5-2017)
4-2-6: TIME LIMIT:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person, whether registered under this chapter or not, to go upon any premises
and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence located thereon, or
rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated
to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence for the purpose of
securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in "soliciting" or
"peddling", both as defined in section
4-2-1 of this chapter, prior to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after five o'clock
(5:00) P.M., Monday through Saturday. (Ord. O-16-21, 12-20-2016; amd. Ord. O-
17-8, 9-5-2017; Ord. O-20-07, 5-5-2020)
4-2-7: MOBILE FOOD VENDORS:
All mobile food vendor operations in the Village must comply with the
regulations set forth in this Section. Further, all mobile food vendors must
obtain a permit prior to operating in the Village in accordance with this
Section.
   A.   General Regulations.
      1.   Each mobile food vendor shall supply a trash receptacle for use by
the customers. Prior to leaving each stop, the vendor shall remove any litter
left at the stop by the vendor or by customers.
      2.   Sales of items other than food and beverage items are prohibited.
      3.   No mobile food vendor shall stop at any time for the purpose of
making sales on private property without the prior consent of the property
owner.
      4.   Mobile food vendors shall observe all local, county and state
traffic codes and parking regulations and observe all other relevant municipal
ordinances.
      5.   No mobile food vendor shall stop and remain in one location for the
purpose of making sales for more than two (2) hours, unless serving as an
approved vendor as part of a special event.
      6.   Signage shall be limited to the surface of the vehicle.
      7.   The mobile food vending permit shall be kept in the vehicle and be
shown to all people who ask to see the permit at all times that the mobile food
vendor is engaging in sales.
   B.   Permit Requirements.
      1.   Every person required to obtain a mobile food vendor permit shall
make a written application for a mobile food vendor permit, pay the permit fee
and obtain a permit prior to engaging in the mobile food vending business
within the village.
      2.   Applications for mobile food vendor permits are subject to the
application requirements and procedures set forth in Section
4-2-2 of this Chapter, except for the pre-approval process of Subsection C.3
and the fee provisions of Subsection D.
      3.   No mobile food vendor permit will be issued without evidence that a
permit has been issued by the Kane County Department of Health, if required.
      4.   The following permit fee shall be paid at the time of filing of the
application for a mobile food vendor permit:
 
Duration Of Permit Requested Fee Per Mobile Food Vendor Truck or Vehicle and,
                             if Applicable, Each Entity
1 day event                  $35.00
2 day event                  $50.00
1 year                       $75.00
 
      A separate fee must be paid for each mobile food vendor truck used in the
vendor's business. (Ord. O-17-8, 9-5-2017; amd. Ord. O-17-9, 10-4-2017)
4-2-8: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
   A.   Violation; Penalty: Any person who shall be found guilty by a court of
competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of this chapter or of failing
to comply with any requirement hereof, or of violating any certificate, any
approval, or any directive issued under the provisions of this chapter, shall
be guilty of a petty offense, punishable by a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
   B.   Reimbursement Of Costs: Any person who shall be found guilty by a court
of competent jurisdiction of violating a provision of this chapter or of
failing to comply with any requirement hereof, or of violating any certificate,
any approval or any directive issued under the provisions of this chapter
shall, in addition to the fines provided, be obligated to reimburse the village
for its attorney fees, court costs, court reporter costs, and expert witness
fees, and all other out of pocket costs incurred by the village in the
prosecution of the said violation or violations.
   C.   Injunctive Relief: The village may make application to the circuit
court for an injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such
other order as the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this
chapter. (Ord. O-16-21, 12-20-2016; amd. Ord. O-17-8, 9-5-2017)
4-2-9: CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted or enforced to deprive any person
of any rights guaranteed under the constitution of the state or the United
States. (Ord. O-16-21, 12-20-2016; amd. Ord. O-17-8, 9-5-2017)
CHAPTER 3
CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE
SECTION:
4-3-1: Definitions
4-3-2: Fee Requirements
4-3-3: Accounting
4-3-4: Other Taxes Apply
4-3-5: Audit Of Service Provider
4-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
GROSS REVENUES: A. All consideration of any kind or nature including, without
limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or
video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within
the village.
   B.   "Gross revenues" shall include the following:
      1.   Recurring charges for cable or video service.
      2.   Event based charges for cable service or video service including,
but not limited to, pay per view and video on demand charges.
      3.   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service
equipment.
      4.   Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video
service including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair
charges.
      5.   Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service including, but not limited to, service order and service
termination charges.
      6.   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and
other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments.
      7.   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its
affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation
of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the
village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the
village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant
regional or national compensation arrangement.
      8.   Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the
operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's network,
such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection B9 of this
definition.
      9.   In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or
integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the
portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from
its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business.
      10.   The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-801(b).
   C.   "Gross revenues" do not include any of the following:
      1.   Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt,
subject to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
      2.   Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the
amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is
attributable to cable service or video service.
      3.   Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service
including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunications
services, information services, or the provision of directory or internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to
noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable
laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
      4.   The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the
purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's
subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will
resell the service within the village and pay the fee permitted by 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.
      5.   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers
or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental entity
and collected by the holder of the state issued authorization and required to
be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes.
      6.   Security deposits collected from subscribers.
      7.   Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors
for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the
cable service or video service.
   D.   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the
calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the
payment of the fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b)
which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide
cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and
the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission
pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801 by the holder to the village for the service areas
within its territorial jurisdiction.
VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is
required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which
is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public
right of way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by
a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 USC section 332(d) or any
video programming provided solely as part of and via service that enables users
to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services offered over
the public internet. (2013 Code § 3-4-1)
4-3-2: FEE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Fee Imposed; Amount: A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing
cable service or video service in the village. The amount of the fee imposed
hereby shall be five percent (5%) of the holder's gross revenues.
   B.   Notice To Village: The holder shall notify the village at least ten
(10) days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service
or video service in the village.
   C.   Holder's Liability: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service
provider fee to the village. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence
on the first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt
by the holder of the ordinance adopting this chapter. The ordinance adopting
this chapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on
the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/21-401(b)(6) to the village.
   D.   Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a
quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter.
If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each
payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of
the fee. (2013 Code § 3-4-2)
   E.   Late Fees And Payments: All fees due and payments which are past due
shall be governed by ordinances adopted by the village pursuant to the local
government taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et
seq. (2013 Code § 3-4-6)
   F.   Exemptions From Fee: The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing
cable service or video service providers that have an existing franchise
agreement with the village in which a fee is paid.
   G.   Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may
deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that the operator owes under
this chapter. (2013 Code § 3-4-2)
4-3-3: ACCOUNTING:
All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made pursuant
to generally accepted accounting principles. (2013 Code § 3-4-3)
4-3-4: OTHER TAXES APPLY:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from
any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including any tax that
is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to
cable service or video service. A state issued authorization shall not affect
any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the village simplified
municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any
telephone service provided by the holder. A state issued authorization shall
not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to the payment of village
911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges, if any. (2013 Code § 3-4-4)
4-3-5: AUDIT OF SERVICE PROVIDER:
   A.   Audit Required: The village will notify the holder of the requirements
it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to submit to an
audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the same
requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to
recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the
village. If all local franchises between the village and cable operator
terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village
pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be
construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.
   B.   Additional Payments: Any additional amount due after an audit shall be
paid within thirty (30) days after the village submission of an invoice for the
sum. (2013 Code § 3-4-5)
CHAPTER 4
DAYCARE HOMES
SECTION:
4-4-1: Definition
4-4-2: State License Required; Village Permit Requirements
4-4-1: DEFINITION:
As used in this chapter, "daycare homes" are hereby defined as set forth from
time to time in section 406.2 of chapter 1 of part 406 of title 89 of the
Illinois administrative code. (2013 Code § 3-6-1)
4-4-2: STATE LICENSE REQUIRED; VILLAGE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Daycare homes duly licensed by the state of Illinois shall be permitted
upon the approval of a permit application filed with the village building and
zoning officer and payment of an application fee of twenty five dollars
($25.00); provided, however, if such daycare home is located on a nonarterial
road, the application shall be referred to the village planning and zoning
commission, with reasonable notice given to all property owners whose
properties are within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the proposed daycare
home. (2013 Code § 3-6-2)
   B.   All applications shall be reviewed by the Kane County division of
transportation for possible impact fees and traffic pattern review. (2016 Code)
CHAPTER 5
VIDEO GAMING
SECTION
4-5-1: Video Gaming Permitted
4-5-2: License Required; Application
4-5-3: Fees
4-5-4: Privilege
4-5-5: Regulations
4-5-6: Video Gaming Cafes
4-5-7: Compliance
4-5-8: Revocation
4-5-1:    VIDEO GAMING PERMITTED:
   A.   Video gaming, as defined by the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 40/1 et seq., is permitted in the Village subject to the
provisions of this article.
   B.   Video gaming is not permitted within the Village except pursuant to the
issuance of a Class T liquor license to the holder of a Class AR, AR-1, C, C-1,
or G license as set forth in section
4-1-10 of this Code, and pursuant to the issuance of a valid gaming terminal
license as set forth in Section
4-5-2 of this Code. (Ord. O-19-01, 4-16-2019; amd. Ord. O-21-07, 4-20-2021)
4-5-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
A Class T licensed establishment must apply for and obtain a valid gaming
terminal license from the Village President for each video gaming terminal to
be operated on a licensed premises. Information about the location and
operation of the video gaming terminals must be submitted with the application,
along with a copy of the licensee's State video gaming license issued by the
Illinois Gaming Board, and payment of the gaming terminal fee required by this
article. (Ord. O-19-01, 4-16-2019; amd. Ord. O-21-07, 4-20-2021)
4-5-3: FEES:
   A.   The fee for a Class T Supplemental Video Gaming Liquor License shall be
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per establishment, per license year. The
license year shall be from April 1 through March 31 of the following year. The
license fees shall not be prorated or refunded.
   B.   The fee for each video gaming terminal in an establishment in the
Village that holds a Class T Supplemental Video Gaming Liquor License shall be
two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) per video gaming terminal per each year
that a Class T Supplemental Video Gaming Liquor License is held by the
establishment. This fee shall not be prorated or refunded. (Ord. O-19-01, 4-16-
2019; amd. Ord. O-21-07, 4-20-2021; Ord. O-22-01, 1-4-2022; Ord. O-24-01, 1-9-
2024)
4-5-4: PRIVILEGE:
A video gaming license is purely a personal privilege and does not constitute
property nor is it transferable. (Ord. O-19-01, 4-16-2019; amd. Ord. O-21-07,
4-20-2021)
4-5-5: REGULATIONS:
The following regulations apply to all licensed establishments operating a
video gaming terminal on the licensed premises:
   A.    A valid State video gaming license must be clearly displayed at all
times.
   B.   A valid Village video gaming license must be clearly displayed at all
times.
   C.   No more than six (6) video gaming terminals may be located on the
licensed premises.
   D.   All video gaming terminals must be located in an area restricted to
persons over twenty-one (21) years of age. The entrance to the restricted area
must be within the view of at least one (1) employee of the establishment who
is over twenty-one (21) years of age. Any licensed establishment that allows
persons under twenty-one (21) years of age to enter the establishment must
isolate video gaming terminals in a separate area inaccessible to minors.
   E.    No licensed establishment may permit any person under the age of
twenty- one (21) years to use, play, or operate a video gaming terminal.
   F.   Signage must be posted at the entrance to, and inside of, the
designated gaming area in accordance with the regulations adopted by the
Illinois Gaming Board.
   G.    The licensed establishment must fully comply with all applicable
Village ordinances, including the Village's liquor control regulations, as well
as any applicable Federal and State laws and regulations.
   H.    The licensed establishment must fully comply with the Illinois Video
Gaming Act, as amended, and all rules, regulations, and restrictions imposed by
the Illinois Gaming Board.
   I.   Licensed establishments must immediately notify the Village President
in the event the Illinois Gaming Board revokes or suspends the licensed
establishment's video gaming license. The revocation, loss, or suspension of a
valid State video gaming license shall automatically result in the revocation,
loss, or suspension of the Village video gaming license for all video gaming
terminals without any refund of any fee.
   J.   An owner, manager, or employee over the age of twenty-one (21) must be
present during all hours of operation when video gaming terminals are available
for use by the public. (Ord. O-19-01, 4-16-2019; amd. Ord. O-21-07, 4-20-2021;
O-21-14, 12-21-2021)
4-5-6: VIDEO GAMING CAFES:  
Video gaming cafes are not permitted in the Village. A "video gaming café" is
defined as an establishment whose primary or major focus is video gaming, and
the service of alcohol and food is secondary to the video gaming operation. The
following factors may be considered when determining if a proposed or operating
establishment is a video gaming cafe:
   A.   The layout and design of the establishment;
   B.   The preparation and variety of food and beverages offered;
   C.   The creation and operation of a commercial kitchen on the premises
where gaming is situated or a partnership with an establishment that operates a
commercial kitchen;
   D.   Whether the number of video gaming machines relative to the customer
seating capacity of the establishment is less than ten (10) customer seats to
one (1) machine;
   E.   Whether the square footage of space devoted to video gaming relative to
the amount of space devoted to other activities is less than four (4) s.f. for
non-gaming to one (1) s.f. for gaming;
   F.   The source of proposed or actual revenue derived from the
establishment;
   G.   Whether the establishment is proposed to be marketed as a gaming
establishment or have a gambling theme;
   H.   The number of employees at the establishment and their proposed
function; and
   I.   Any other factors as deemed relevant by the Village President. (Ord. O-
19-01, 4-16-2019; amd. Ord. O-21-07, 4-20-2021)
4-5-7: COMPLIANCE:
The Village and its agents must be allowed unrestricted access to enter the
licensed establishment to determine compliance with this article and the
Illinois Video Gaming Act. (Ord. O-19-01, 4-16-2019; amd. Ord. O-21-07, 4-20-
2021)
4-5-8: REVOCATION:
In addition to the general penalty authorized by section
1-4-1  of this Code for violations of this Code, the Village President may
revoke or suspend any video gaming license issued by the Village if the Village
President determines the licensed establishment has violated any of the
provisions of this chapter, any provision of other Village ordinances, or any
applicable state or federal law or regulation. No video gaming license shall be
revoked or suspended, however, until a public hearing has been conducted by the
Village President, with a three (3)-day written notice to the licensed
establishment to the licensee or the licensee's manager of the licensed
premises. No hearing will be required, however, to revoke or suspend a village
video gaming license for an establishment that has its state video gaming
license revoked or suspended. (Ord. O-19-01, 4-16-2019; amd. Ord. O-21-07, 4-
20-2021)
CHAPTER 6
ADULT USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION
4-6-1: Definitions
4-6-2: Cannabis Business Establishments Prohibited:
4-6-3: Public Nuisance Declared:
4-6-4: Violations:
4-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this Chapter, have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, as follows:
                                        Cannabis business establishments
                                        include: adult use cannabis cultivation
                                        centers, adult use cannabis craft
                                        growers, adult use cannabis processing
ADULT USE CANNABIS BUSINESS             organizations, adult use cannabis
ESTABLISHMENTS:                         dispensing organizations, adult use
                                        cannabis infuser organizations, adult
                                        use processing organizations, and adult
                                        use cannabis transporting
                                        organizations.
                                        An adult use cannabis craft grower is a
                                        facility operated by an organization or
                                        business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        cultivate, dry, cure and package
                                        cannabis and perform other necessary
ADULT USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER:        activities to make cannabis available
                                        for sale at a dispensing organization
                                        or use at a processing organization,
                                        per the definition of craft grower as
                                        set forth in the Cannabis Regulation
                                        and Tax Act, (P.A.101-0027), as may be
                                        amended from time-to-time, and
                                        regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        An adult use cannabis cultivation
                                        center is facility operated by an
                                        organization or business that is
                                        licensed by the Illinois Department of
                                        Agriculture to cultivate, process,
                                        transport and perform necessary
ADULT USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER:  activities to provide cannabis and
                                        cannabis-infused products to licensed
                                        cannabis business establishments, per
                                        the definition of cultivation center as
                                        set forth in the Cannabis Regulation
                                        and Tax Act, (P.A.101-0027), as may be
                                        amended from time-to-time, and
                                        regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        An adult use cannabis dispensing
                                        organization is a facility operated by
                                        an organization or business that is
                                        licensed by the Illinois Department of
                                        Financial and Professional Regulation
                                        to acquire cannabis from licensed
                                        cannabis business establishments for
ADULT USE CANNABIS DISPENSING           the purpose of selling or dispensing
ORGANIZATION:                           cannabis, cannabis-infused products,
                                        cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or
                                        related supplies to purchasers or to
                                        qualified registered medical cannabis
                                        patients and caregivers, per the
                                        Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act,
                                        (P.A.101-0027), as may be amended from
                                        time-to-time, and regulations
                                        promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        directly incorporate cannabis or
ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION cannabis concentrate into a product
OR INFUSER:                             formulation to produce a cannabis-
                                        infused product, per the Cannabis
                                        Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-
                                        0027), as it may be amended from time-
                                        to-time, and regulations promulgated
                                        thereunder.
                                        An adult use cannabis processing
                                        organization, or processor, is a
                                        facility operated by an organization or
                                        business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        either extract constituent chemicals or
ADULT USE CANNABIS PROCESSING           compounds to produce cannabis
ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR:              concentrate or incorporate cannabis or
                                        cannabis concentrate into a product
                                        formulation to produce a cannabis
                                        product, per the Cannabis Regulation
                                        and Tax Act, (P.A.101-0027), as may be
                                        amended from time-to-time, and
                                        regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        An adult use cannabis transporting
                                        organization, or transporter, is an
                                        organization or business that is
                                        licensed by the Illinois Department of
                                        Agriculture to transport cannabis on
ADULT USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING         behalf of a cannabis business
ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER:            establishment or a community college
                                        licensed under the Community College
                                        Cannabis Vocational Training Pilot
                                        Program, per the Cannabis Regulation
                                        and Tax Act, (P.A.101-0027), as it may
                                        be amended from time-to-time, and
                                        regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        A natural individual, firm,
                                        partnership, association, joint stock
                                        company, joint venture, public or
PERSON:                                 private corporation, limited liability
                                        company, or a receiver, executor,
                                        trustee, guardian, or other
                                        representative appointed by order of
                                        any court. (Ord. O-19-17, 10-15-2019)
 
4-6-2: CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED:
All adult use cannabis business establishments are prohibited from being
located within the Village of Campton Hills. No person shall locate, operate,
own, suffer, allow to be operated or aid, abet or assist in the operation of
adult use cannabis business establishments within the Village of Campton Hills.
(Ord. O-19-17, 10- 15-2019)
4-6-3: PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED:
Operation of any prohibited adult use cannabis business establishment within
the Village of Campton Hills in violation of the provisions of this chapter is
hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be abated pursuant to all available
remedies. (Ord. O-19-17, 10-15-2019)
4-6-4: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of this chapter may be enforced in accordance with the provisions of
Title 1, Chapter 4 of this Village Code. (Ord. O-19-17, 10-15-2019)
CHAPTER 7
CHARTER BUSES
SECTION:
4-7-1: Purpose
4-7-2: Applicability
4-7-3: Permit Required
4-7-4: Application For Permit
4-7-5: Issuance Of Permit; Conditions Imposed
4-7-6: Non-Liability Of Village
4-7-7: Punctuality
4-7-8: Violation; Penalty
4-7-1: PURPOSE:
The general purpose of this chapter is to provide for the safe and sound
disembarkment of passengers of privately chartered buses or other
transportation services within the Village. (Ord. O-24-02, 1-23-2024)
4-7-2: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   This section shall apply to commercial motor vehicles operating as
common carriers when:
      1.   The vehicle is engaged in a privately chartered service;
      2.   The service includes the disembarkation of ten (10) or more
passengers within the Village who will not reboard; and
      3.   The service does not include arrangements for round-trip
transportation.
   B.   As used in this section, "privately chartered service" refers to
services wherein a motor vehicle is engaged by a person or entity for specific
transportation purposes, not including services that are part of regular,
publicly available transportation routes or schedules, or any transportation
service offered by, or in cooperation with, the Village. "Privately chartered
service" does not include courtesy shuttles transporting customers or guests to
or from a fixed location as an incidental service provided by a business,
business nor does it include the local or regional transporting of customers or
guests to patronize an entertainment or shopping destination within the
Village, or to attend a local event. (Ord. O-24-02, 1-23-2024)
4-7-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to offer or provide privately chartered
services disembarking passengers in the Village without a valid chartered
transportation permit issued in accordance with this chapter. A separate permit
shall be required for each motor vehicle providing the services and shall be
valid only for the date, time, and location specified in the permit. (Ord. O-
24-02, 1-23-2024)
4-7-4: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
   A.   The owner, operator, or driver of any motor vehicle to which this
chapter applies which proposes to allow passengers to disembark in the Village
shall file an application with the Chief of Police, or his/her designee. The
completed application shall contain all required information set forth in
subsection (B) below and shall be submitted at least seven (7) business days
prior to the date of the proposed disembarking date.
   B.   The Chief of Police, or his/her designee, shall prepare an application
form which shall, at a minimum, require an applicant to provide the following
information:
      1.   The full name, full address, email address, and telephone numbers of
the owner, operator, and driver of the motor vehicle. The mobile phone number
of the driver of the vehicle shall also be provided.
      2.   The full name, full address, email address, mobile and land-line
telephone numbers of the entity or individuals that have either directed, paid
for, or financed the transport of persons who will disembark in the Village.
      3.   The full name, full address, email address, and telephone number of
the applicant seeking the license.
      4.   The full name of all persons that are proposed to disembark in the
Village along with copies of IDs for said person to the extent such IDs exist
or are in the possession of the passengers.
      5.   The name, address, or location in the Village where the applicant
proposes to allow passengers to disembark.
      6.   The date and time at which the applicant's passengers will disembark
in the Village which shall be from seven o'clock (7:00) a.m. to four o'clock
(4:00) p.m. on a Monday through Friday, excluding any federal, state, or
Village holidays.
      7.   The name and address of all locations from which the passengers are
being picked-up for transport to the Village.
      8.   The full name, full address, mobile and land-line telephone numbers,
and electronic mail addresses of all entities or individuals that shall be
present to meet and receive the passengers disembarking in the Village.
      9.   A detailed plan identifying how the disembarking passengers will be
cared for, housed, and fed, upon disembarking in the Village. The plan shall be
signed by the entity that agrees to be responsible for providing the actions
detailed in the plan.
      10.   Written confirmation from the owner of the property that contains
the proposed diembarkment location that the owner of the property consents to
the disembarkment of the specified passengers on the date, time and location
included on the application.
      11.   Any additional information the Chief of Police, or his/her
designee, may require provided that such information is related to the purposes
of this section.
   C.   The person submitting an application shall swear or affirm that to the
best of their knowledge and belief the information set forth in such
application is true and correct, and such oath or affirmation shall be attested
to by a person authorized to administer oaths or witness affirmations within
the state or territory where the application is sworn to or affirmed. (Ord. O-
24-02, 1-23-2024)
4-7-5: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS IMPOSED:
   A.   Upon receipt of an application pursuant to this section, the Chief of
Police, or his/her designee, shall review same and undertake a review of the
information contained in the application to verify its truth and authenticity.
If the application is not complete, the Chief of Police, or his/her designee,
shall, in writing, advise the applicant of the additional items needed to
complete the application. Within seven (7) business days after receiving a
completed application, and upon payment of all required fees or fines due under
this Chapter and compliance with all other applicable requirements of this
Chapter, unless the Chief of Police, or his/her designee, has determined that
the applicant is disqualified as provided below, the Chief of Police, or his/
her designee, shall issue a chartered transportation permit. Such chartered
transportation permit shall contain the approved date, time, and location for
disembarkment of passengers and may contain such conditions and limitations as
are necessary to promote safe and sound passenger disembarkment.
   B.   Upon approval of an application, the Chief of Police, or his/her
designee, shall inform the applicant that the application is approved and shall
provide the applicant, or a person designated thereby, with a telephone number
to coordinate the arrival of the motor vehicle in the Village.
   C.   If the Village denies an application made under this section, the Chief
of Police, or his/her designee, shall reduce the findings to writing and
transmit the same to the applicant within seven (7) business days. The
applicant may submit a new application or seek relief from the determination by
the Chief of Police, or his/her designee by submitting an appeal to the Village
Administrator, in writing, for a hearing before the Village Administrator. The
Village Administrator shall either grant or deny the appeal in writing within
seven (7) business days of receiving the appeal.
   D.   Disqualification. The Chief of Police, or his/her designee, shall not
approve an application for any person who:
      1.   Has supplied materially false or misleading information in
connection with an application under this section.
      2.   Has failed to ensure the care, housing, transportation, or feeding
of any passengers disembarking in the Village or otherwise failed to implement
or perform the detailed plan pursuant to the terms of an approved application.
(Ord. O-24-02, 1-23-2024)
4-7-6: NON-LIABILITY OF VILLAGE:
The Village assumes no liability for any aspect of a chartered transportation
service or for the failure or neglect of any person associated with the
operation of such service. (Ord. O-24-02, 1-23-2024)
4-7-7: PUNCTUALITY:
For any given approval, unscheduled buses must arrive no sooner than, and no
later than, thirty (30) minutes after the approved arrival time, otherwise the
permit shall be considered invalidated. Any loading/unloading of passengers
outside of this scheduled window shall result in a seven hundred and fifty
dollar ($750.00) fine per passenger to the bus operator. (Ord. O-24-02, 1-23-
2024)
4-7-8: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Complaints alleging any violation of this section for which the Village may
impose a fine upon the owner, operator or driver of any motor vehicle to which
this section applies to shall be brought in the name of the Village and
adjudicated before the Village's Administrative Adjudication Hearing Officer.
The administrative adjudicator shall impose a fine of not less than seven
hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00) per passenger. (Ord. O-24-02, 1-23-2024)
TITLE 5
HEALTH, SANITATION AND ENVIRONMENT
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
5-1-1: Definitions
5-1-2: Nuisances Declared
5-1-3: Exemptions From Provisions
5-1-4: Right Of Entry
5-1-5: Enforcement
5-1-6: Violations; Penalties
5-1-7: Nonliability Of Village
5-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as indicated in
this section, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Other definitions
as stated in rules and regulations that are referenced in this chapter shall
apply.
AGRICULTURAL PURPOSES: The growing, developing, processing, conditioning, or
selling of farm crops and farm seeds, truck garden crops, animal and poultry
husbandry, apiculture, aquaculture, dairying, floriculture, horticulture,
nurseries, tree farms, sod farms, pasturage, viticulture, and wholesale
greenhouses when such agricultural purposes constitute the principal activity
on the land.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE: Any duly sworn officer of the village of Campton
Hills, building and zoning officer, building officer, or Kane County health
officer.
BRUSH: Tree trunks, limbs, branches, and twigs.
BUILDING: Any structure which is designed, used or intended for the support,
enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals, or other property and
which is permanently affixed to the land.
CEREMONIAL FIRE: An outdoor fire larger than three feet by three feet by two
feet (3' x 3' x 2') which is used for entertainment purposes as part of a
specifically scheduled public or private event and excludes leaves, grass or
shrubbery clippings or cuttings.
DISEASED ANIMAL: An animal showing symptoms of a disease or having an illness
or being in an unhealthy state.
DWELLING: A building, or portion thereof, designed or used exclusively for
residential occupancy, including single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings,
multiple-family dwellings and apartment hotels, but not including hotels,
motels, trailer coaches or mobile homes.
DWELLING UNIT: Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming
a single habitable unit with facilities that are used, or intended to be used,
for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
EXTERMINATION: The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests
by eliminating their harborage places, by removing or making inaccessible
materials that may serve as their food, by poisoning, spraying, or trapping, or
by any other recognized and legal method of pest elimination, which has been
approved by the village or Kane County health officer.
GARBAGE: Organic waste resulting from the preparation, processing, handling and
storage of food and all decayed or spoiled food from any source whatsoever.
GRASS: All vegetative ground cover located within a yard, excluding noxious
weeds.
HUMAN WASTES: Food and byproducts of metabolism which are passed out of the
human body.
INFESTATION: The presence within a building of any insects, rodents, vermin or
other pests.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle from which, for more than fourteen
(14) days, the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed, or on which the
engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise so
treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven or operated under its own
motor power. "Inoperable motor vehicle" shall not include a motor vehicle which
has been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven in forward drive and
also in reverse under its own motor power in order to perform ordinary service
or repair operations nor a motor vehicle kept within a completely enclosed
building when not in use. This chapter shall not apply to any motor vehicle
that is kept within a building when not in use, to operable historic vehicles
over twenty five (25) years of age, or to a motor vehicle on the premises of a
place of a duly licensed business engaged in the wrecking or junking of motor
vehicles.
JUNK: Is defined as, but not limited to, car parts, scrap metal, furniture,
appliances, equipment, glass, and paper irrespective of whether these materials
may be reused.
JUNK VEHICLE: Shall include any unlicensed, stripped, junked and/or wrecked
motor vehicle not in safe operating condition.
LANDSCAPE WASTE: All accumulations of cut grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves,
flowers, and weeds.
MANURE: Stable bedding and excrement of all domestic animals and fowl.
NOXIOUS WEED: An annual, biennial or perennial plant propagated by seed or
vegetative parts, listed herein and/or in the Illinois noxious weed law, which
is injurious to public health, crops, livestock, land or other property.
Noxious weeds as identified herein and by the Illinois noxious weed law shall
include, but are not limited to, the following: marihuana (Cannabis sativa L.),
Sandbar Willow (Salix), Phragmites, Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense), perennial
sow thistle (Sonchus arvensis), musk thistle (Carduus nutans), perennial
members of the Sorghum genus including Johnson grass (Sorghum halepense),
Sorghum almum, and other Johnson grass X sorghum crosses with rhizomes, quack
grass (Agropyron repens), curled (curly) dock (Rumex crispus), corn cockle
(Agrostemma githago), wild morning glories (Ipomoea coccinea, Ipomoea
hederacea, Ipomoea pandurata, Ipomoea purpurea), poison ivy (Rhus radicans),
purple loosestrife (Lythrum salicaria), garlic mustard (Alliaria petiolata),
multiflora rose (Rosa multaflora), and burdock (Arctium minus).
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the sensibilities of reasonable
persons, or any act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health
and welfare of inhabitants of the village, or any activity which, by its
perpetuation. can reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the
property of a person or persons within the community. Nuisance includes, but is
not limited to, those activities and/or conditions declared in section
5-1-2.
OCCUPANT: Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession
of space within in a building.
OWNER: Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in real property; or recorded in the official records of the
county as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of such
property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the
executor or administrator of the estate of such person having a legal interest
in real property.
PRAIRIE PLANTS: Any one of eight hundred fifty one (851) species of plants
defined as a prairie plant by the Illinois plant information network maintained
by the Illinois natural history survey.
RECREATIONAL FIRE: An outdoor fire for warmth, cooking for human consumption or
temporary nonceremonial purposes where the fire is not larger than three feet
by three feet by two feet (3' x 3' x 2') and excludes burning of leaves, grass
or shrubbery clippings or cuttings.
REFUSE: Garbage, rubbish, ashes, sweepings, manure, dead animals, privy or
cesspool contents or litter.
RIGHT OF WAY SIGNS: Any sign placed within the right of way on any public road,
street or highway other than signs authorized by the village, and signs
installed by or on behalf of any governmental agency.
RODENTS: Rats and mice.
RUBBISH: Combustible and noncombustible waste material, except garbage; the
term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other
combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber,
leather, tree branches, cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery, and dust
from similar materials.
STRUCTURE: Anything erected, the use of which requires a location on or in the
ground, or attached to something having a location on or in the ground.
TENANT: A person, corporation, partnership, group, or other entity, whether or
not the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a
unit.
VERMIN: Roaches, bedbugs, fleas, lice, termites, mosquitoes, flies or similar
pestlike insects.
YARD: An open space on the same lot with a structure. (2013 Code § 7-2-1; amd.
2016 Code; amd. Ord. O-20-11, 8-18-2020; Ord. O-22-03, 2-1-2022)
5-1-2: NUISANCES DECLARED:
It is hereby declared that any of the following activities and/or conditions
are nuisances and are unlawful when conducted or allowed to exist on property
located within the village, whether conducted, allowed, suffered or permitted
by the owner, tenant, and/or other occupant thereof (it being the intent of
this chapter to make all such persons jointly and severally liable for
compliance herewith):
   A.   Animals And Infestations:
      1.   Animals At Large: To wilfully allow the running at large of cattle,
horses, mules, asses, swine, sheep, goats, dogs, chickens, ducks, geese, other
fowl, or other domestic or exotic animals, other than on the owner's property.
      2.   Animal Fights: To keep or use, or permit to be kept or used, or to
be in any way connected with the management of, any room, place or building or
other premises for the purpose of fighting or baiting any dog, cock or other
animal.
      3.   Offal, Filthy Substances; Animal Carcasses: To allow any offal,
filth or noisome substance to be collected or deposited or to remain in any
place, to the prejudice of others; to allow carcasses of dead animals or any
part of decaying animal matter to so remain which is not buried or destroyed or
collected within twenty four (24) hours after death; provided, that farm
animals that die on a nonbusiness day shall be removed not later than the next
business day.
      4.   Diseased Animals: To allow diseased animals to run at large.
      5.   Animal Houses: To house animals or fowl fifteen feet (15') from the
property line if said animals or fowl create sanitary or health problems to
adjacent persons or property.
      6.   Insects, Vermin, Rodents And Other Pests: To allow an infestation of
insects, vermin, rodents or other pests. Every owner and person in control of a
property, building or structure shall be responsible for the extermination of
any insects, rodents, or other pests therein or on the premises whenever
infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain the property,
building or structure in rodentproof or reasonable insectproof condition.
Furthermore, whenever infestation exists in the shared or public parts of any
property, building, or structure, extermination shall be the responsibility of
the owner. However, every occupant of a building unit shall be responsible for
extermination within the building unit when such occupant is responsible for
the infestation. (2013 Code § 7-2-2)
   B.   Exterior Property Areas:
      1.   Accumulation Of Offensive Substances: To accumulate manure, rubbish,
garbage, refuse or junk vehicles, or human, industrial, noxious or offensive
waste, except the normal storage on a farm of manure for agricultural purposes.
Normal storage for agricultural purpose is considered to be two hundred sixteen
(216) cubic feet per acre (6 feet x 6 feet x 6 feet accumulation) of cultivated
land. (2013 Code § 7-2-2; amd. 2016 Code)
      2.   Depositing Offensive Substances On Public Or Private Property: To
deposit or allow to be deposited offal, fecal matter, nightsoil, garbage,
compost, junk, trash, refuse or other offensive substances upon public or
private property, or to permit such objects to remain upon such property.
Excluded from the provisions of this subsection B2 is the application of
compost for horticultural purposes.
      3.   Depositing Offensive Substances In Waterways, Sewers, Easements Or
Public Ways: To throw or deposit any offal or other offensive matter, or the
carcass of any dead animal, in any watercourse, lake, pond, spring, well,
sanitary sewer, storm sewer, easement, street or public highway. (2013 Code §
7-2-2)
      4.   Drainage Of Sump Pumps And Other Surface Waters:
         a.   For an owner or occupant of property ("subject property") to
cause or allow direct discharge from a sump pump (including a discharge pipe)
or from roofs or gutters to flow into any septic tank or to flow in
unreasonable quantities upon adjacent property. Such discharge shall be
directed to any drainage ditch, swale, stream, pond, storm sewer system, as
permitted by the village, or other body of water on the subject property if it
is practical to do so. (2013 Code § 7-2-2; amd. 2016 Code)
         b.   For an owner or occupant of property to cause natural drainage or
other water to be directed or channeled by a pipe, swale, ditch or other
drainage structure onto an adjacent property.
      5.   Contamination Of Water: To contaminate or render unwholesome or
impure the water of any aboveground or subsurface aquifer, spring, river,
stream, pond or lake, to the injury or prejudice of others or to undertake
activities or actions or allow conditions that may potentially do so.
      6.   Littering:
         a.   To dump, deposit, throw, discard, leave, or cause or permit the
dumping, depositing, discarding or leaving, of litter upon any public or
private property in the village, including upon any river, lake, pond, stream
or body of water.
         b.   To dump, deposit, throw, discard or otherwise dispose of litter
from any motor vehicle upon any public road, upon any public or private
property, including the road right of way, or into any river, lake, pond,
stream or body of water in the village.
      7.   Storage Of Junk, Trash Or Refuse: To keep or store junk, trash and
refuse on property. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, "junk,
trash and refuse" is defined herein to include any and all waste matter,
whether reusable or not, which is offensive to the public health, safety and
welfare of the neighborhood, and is specifically intended to include, but not
to be limited to, trucks, tractors, machinery of any kind, any parts thereof,
iceboxes, refrigerators, freezers, stoves, metal drums or other containers,
paper, construction debris and raw garbage irrespective of whether or not such
objects are located on the property of the owner or bailee of such objects.
This subsection B7 shall not apply to refuse disposal facilities regulated by
the state, the county, or the village.
      8.   Placement Of Garbage And Containers: To place household garbage in
any outside container so that the household garbage is accessible to animals.
Further, it shall be a nuisance and unlawful to place garbage or trash out for
collection more than twenty four (24) hours before the scheduled pick up time.
      9.   Offensive Containers: To allow privies, vaults or garbage cans which
are offensive and which are not flytight, verminproof and rodentproof, or do
not comply with the requirements of this chapter.
      10.   Inoperable Motor Vehicles: To keep inoperable motor vehicles on
public or private property, unless on the premises of a duly licensed business
engaged in the wrecking or junking of motor vehicles or unless in an enclosed
permanent structure.
      11.   Spraying Effluent: To engage in or allow the application of
effluent from any wastewater treatment facility within any subdivision approved
after November 8, 2010. This prohibition may be waived by a two-thirds (2/3)
vote of the corporate authorities upon a petition being filed with the
corporate authorities and after a public hearing following such notice as the
building and zoning officer shall determine and upon a determination by such
two-thirds (2/3) vote that it would be in the public interest to permit such
spraying.
      12.   Burning Garbage: To burn garbage or rubbish outdoors with the
exception of brush. (2013 Code § 7-2-2)
      13.   Burning Manure: To burn manure. (2013 Code § 7-2-2; amd. 2016 Code)
      14.   Storage Of Construction Materials: To store lumber or other
building materials, construction vehicles, and/or construction equipment, not
in connection with a permitted building project in progress on the immediate
premises or unless in a permanent enclosed structure.
      15.   Noxious Weeds: To keep, maintain or grow noxious weeds or other
vegetation which creates a health or safety hazard to the public. Excluded from
the provisions of this subsection B15 are prairie plants, lands or portions of
any lands located in a public nature area, any property owned or leased by a
unit of government and property zoned and used for any agricultural purpose.
      16.   Tall Grass In Residential Yards: To allow "vegetation", defined as
grass, to exceed ten inches (10") in height on a residential use parcel located
within the village. Excluded from the provisions of this subsection B16 are
prairie plants.
      17.   Parking:
         a.   To park any vehicle in the front yard, back yard, corner yard,
side yard or any additional area of a lot or parcel of land situated between
the public right of way and any residence or accessory building or structure
located therein; except, that parking is permitted in an area duly improved
(i.e., a gravel, asphalt or concrete area) for parking purposes, and the
parking of noncommercial vehicles is permitted in a driveway.
         b.   To park any vehicle upon any portion of property owned by any
public body (other than the village) which has posted "No Parking" signs as to
such property or portion thereof.
      18.   Right Of Way Signs: To place, install or leave any right of way
sign.
   C.   Open Burning Of Landscape Waste: Any and all burning in the village
shall be in accordance with the following restrictions:
      1.   The open burning of brush shall occur only on the property upon
which the brush was generated subject to the following restrictions:
         a.   Burning is permitted only on sunny days between nine o'clock (9:
00) A.M. and three o'clock (3:00) P.M.
         b.   Burning is not permitted when the wind is in excess of ten (10)
miles per hour. (2013 Code § 7-2-2)
         c.   Burning is not permitted within twenty feet (20') of any
building, structure, property line, or combustible material. (2013 Code § 7-2-
2; amd. 2016 Code)
         d.   Burning is not permitted when it is determined and announced by
the county health department that inversion conditions or an ozone alert
exists.
         e.   Brush shall be dry when burned.
         f.   Burning is not permitted on public or private roads, alleys,
sidewalks or easements.
         g.   All open burning must be supervised until the fire is
extinguished.
         h.   A fire extinguisher or garden hose or water source shall be
available at the burning site.
         i.   It is the responsibility of the individual conducting the burning
and the owner of the property to satisfactorily determine that there is
compliance with all conditions upon burning as noted in this subsection C1
during any burning.
      2.   The terms and provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any
burning of prairie plants for purposes of habitat reclamation; provided, that
those performing controlled prairie burning must receive the proper permits
from their fire protection district, if applicable, and notify the village
police department.
      3.   The terms and provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the
burning of brush for purposes of domestic fireplaces or cooking or external
fireplaces, or to self-contained outdoor wood burning devices or fireplaces.
(2013 Code § 7-2-2)
      4.   Notwithstanding subsection C1c of this section, the remaining terms
and provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the open burning of brush for
purposes of recreational fires. (2013 Code § 7-2-2; amd. 2016 Code)
      5.   The terms and provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the open
burning of brush for purposes of ceremonial fires; provided, that notice of any
ceremonial fire has been given to the fire protection district, if applicable,
serving the area where the fire is to take place as well as notification to the
village police department. Failure to notify the applicable fire protection
district and police department and obtain permission prior to conducting a
ceremonial fire utilizing brush shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
      6.   The open burning of landscape waste and/or other materials, with the
exception of brush, is prohibited in the village except for those living within
the 60119 U.S. postal service zip code. If the state of Illinois expands its
vehicle emission testing program to include the 60119 zip code, this
prohibition shall automatically apply to the area included in the vehicle
emission testing program. The open burning of landscape waste shall be subject
to the provisions of subsection C1 of this section. (2013 Code § 7-2-2)
   D.   Noise:
      1.   Enumeration Of Noise Nuisances:
         a.   Construction Noise: To perform or allow to be performed
construction, repair or remodeling work where the noise from such can be heard
from a distance of one hundred feet (100') or more from the source of the noise
during the days and times established in section
9-1-4 of this code. (2013 Code § 7-2-2; amd. 2016 Code)
         b.   Vehicular Noise: Notwithstanding any other provision of this
code, to operate or permit the operation of any sound amplification system in a
vehicle or on property, or to operate off road vehicles, including, but not
limited to, off highway motorcycles, minibikes, all-terrain vehicles (ATVs),
snowmobiles or other like or similar vehicles, on private property where the
noise from such vehicle or activity is such as to unreasonably disturb, injure
or endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of reasonable persons
of ordinary sensitivity; and when, after written or verbal warning from law
enforcement personnel, the owner or operator fails to cease and desist from
such operation or activity. The terms "motorcycles", "off road motorcycles",
and "all-terrain vehicles" shall have the same meanings as in the Illinois
vehicle code. "Snowmobile" shall have the same meaning as in the Illinois
snowmobile registration and safety act.
         c.   Modifications To Equipment: Removal or modification of adequate
sound suppression equipment as set forth in section 4-1E of the Illinois
snowmobile registration and safety act.
         d.   Lawn Equipment And Tools: To perform lawn mowing or utilize power
or nonpower tools between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M.
         e.   Harsh, Prolonged Or Unusual Noise: To make, continue, create or
cause to be made or continued any noise which is harsh, prolonged, unnatural,
or unusual in time or place as to occasion unreasonable discomfort to any
persons within the neighborhood from which the noise emanates or as to
unreasonably interfere with the peace and comfort of neighbors or their guests
or operators or customers in places of business, or as to detrimentally or
adversely affect such residences or places of business. Prolonged and incessant
dog barking that is clearly audible by neighboring property owners is deemed to
be prolonged or unusual noise.
         f.   Raucous Noise: To make, continue, create or cause to be made or
continued any loud or raucous noise.
      2.   Exemptions: Exempt from the provisions of this subsection is noise
generated by agricultural equipment on land zoned and used for agricultural
purposes and work performed by or on behalf of a public body.
      3.   Factors To Determine Noise Nuisances:
         a.   Factors for determining whether a sound is unreasonably loud or
raucous may include, but are not limited to, the following:
            (1)   The proximity of the sound to sleeping facilities, whether
residential or commercial.
            (2)   The land use, nature and zoning of the area from which the
sound emanates and the area where it is received.
            (3)   The time of day the sound occurs.
            (4)   The duration of the sound.
            (5)   Whether the sound is recurrent, intermittent, or constant.
         b.   Proof of violation of this subsection shall not require the use
of any decibel meter or other measuring device.
   E.   Structures:
      1.   Building Exterior: To allow a building exterior to be in poor
repair, structurally unsound, contain unsanitary conditions or to pose a threat
to the public health, safety or welfare. The following standards shall apply to
existing buildings:
         a.   Generally: The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in
good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the
public health, safety or welfare.
         b.   Protective Treatment: All exterior surfaces including, but not
limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies,
decks and fences shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces,
other than decay resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and
decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. All metal surfaces
subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and
corrosion, and all surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and
coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. Removal of lead based paint shall
follow state and federal laws.
         c.   Premises Identification:
            (1)   Buildings shall have approved, plainly legible address
numbers placed in a position to be plainly visible from the street or road
fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast in color with their
background.
            (2)   Address numbers shall be arabic numerals or alphabet letters.
Numbers shall be a minimum of four inches (4") (102 mm) high with a minimum
stroke width of five-tenths inch (0.5") (12.7 mm). Single occupancy buildings
with rural fire numbers may use the sign provided by the fire protection
district to satisfy this requirement if the sign is clearly visible at the
street. Multiple-tenant buildings shall additionally have suite letters that
conform to the above standards.
         d.   Structural Members: All structural members shall be maintained
free from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed
dead and live loads.
         e.   Foundation Walls: All foundation walls shall be maintained free
from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to
prevent the entry of rodents and other pests.
         f.   Exterior Walls: All exterior walls shall be free from holes,
breaks, and loose or rotting materials and be maintained weatherproof.
         g.   Roofs And Drainage: All roofing and flashing shall be sound,
tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to
prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the
structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good
repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a
manner that creates a public nuisance.
         h.   Decorative Features: All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra
cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in
good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.
         i.   Overhang Extensions: All overhang extensions including, but not
limited to, canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes,
and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and properly anchored so
as to be kept in a sound condition.
         j.   Stairways, Decks, Porches And Balconies: Every exterior stairway,
deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be
maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and
capable of supporting the imposed loads.
         k.   Chimneys And Towers: All chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks,
and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and
in good repair.
         l.   Handrails And Guards: Every handrail and guard shall be firmly
fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition.
         m.   Windows, Skylights, Doors And Frames: Every window, skylight,
door and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weathertight.
Operable windows required for ventilation shall have fitted screens.
         n.   Glazing: All glazing materials shall be maintained free from
cracks and holes.
         o.   Doors: All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be
maintained in good condition.
         p.   Basement Hatchways: Every basement hatchway shall be maintained
to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water.
         q.   Guards For Basement Windows: Every basement window that is open
shall be supplied with rodent shields, storm windows or other approved
protection against the entry of rodents.
         r.   Vehicular Doors: Vehicular openings which were originally
designed and constructed with a closing door shall continue to be maintained in
operating condition and able to be fully closed.
         s.   Furniture On Porches, Accessory Structures, Yards And Landings:
Household furniture such as sofas, stuffed chairs and mattresses, which are not
designed to withstand the elements and for outdoor use, shall not be permitted
to be placed on porches, accessory structures, yards and landings as such
furniture may provide a location where insects, rodents or other vermin may
breed or may reasonably be expected to breed. This subsection shall not
prohibit the storage of such household furniture on a totally enclosed porch
having a roof, walls, screens or glass windows or the temporary placement of
such items outdoors when in use.
      2.   Accessory Structures: To allow an accessory structure to a
residential, commercial or nonagricultural use, including detached garages,
sheds, gazebos, decks, platforms, fences and walls, to be in poor repair,
structurally unsound, contain unsanitary conditions or pose a threat to the
public health, safety or welfare. The following standards shall apply to
existing accessory structures:
         a.   Generally: Accessory structures shall be maintained in good
repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the
public health, safety or welfare.
         b.   Structural Members: All structural members shall be maintained
free from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed
dead and live loads.
         c.   Foundation Walls: All foundation walls shall be maintained free
from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to
prevent the entry of rodents and other pests.
         d.   Exterior Walls: All exterior walls shall be free from holes,
breaks, and loose or rotting materials and maintained weatherproof.
         e.   Roofs And Drainage: All roofing and flashing shall be sound,
tight and not have defects that admit rain or melting ice or snow. Roof
drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or
interior portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be
maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall be
discharged in accordance with subsection B4 of this section.
         f.   Windows, Skylights, Doors And Frames: Every window, skylight,
door and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weathertight.
         g.   Doors: All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be
maintained in good condition.
         h.   Vehicular Doors: Vehicular doorways shall have closing doors.
      3.   Dangerous Structures: To allow any building, mobile home, shed,
fence or other manmade structure to exist which is hazardous to public health
because of its condition, faulty construction or lack of proper repair.
      4.   Inside Refuse Storage And Disposal: To place, leave, dump or
accumulate any garbage, rubbish or other refuse in any building or structure.
      5.   Lighting In Residential Areas: Lighting installed for the purpose of
illuminating residential yards shall be designed so that it does not produce
direct illumination or cause glare or excessive light onto surrounding public
and private property. Spillover lighting onto adjacent property shall not
exceed 0.5 lumen per square foot. Safety lights that are motion activated are
permitted in residential neighborhoods, provided they are working properly and
do not result in excessive spillover lighting onto adjacent property. (2013
Code § 7-2-2)
      6.   Pools, Spas And Hot Tubs: All inground pools, aboveground pools,
spas and hot tubs and their barriers including fences, self-closing and self-
latching gates, covers and alarms shall be maintained in working order, in a
clean and sanitary condition, and in good repair. Water must be maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition or be completely drained. Pools that have been
abandoned or are not in an operable state of condition must be removed. (2013
Code § 7-2-2; amd. 2016 Code)
5-1-3: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
   A.   The terms and provisions of this chapter shall not apply to property
which is both zoned and used for any agricultural purpose; except, subsection
 5-1-2B13, "Burning Manure", of this chapter shall apply to such property.
(2013 Code § 7-2-3; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   The terms and provisions of this chapter shall not apply to structures
which were exempt from the provisions of the county building regulations as an
agricultural use structure when originally erected and continue to be used for
agricultural purposes. Structures which were exempt from the provisions of the
county building regulations as an agricultural use structure when originally
erected but which are currently used for nonagricultural purposes or are vacant
or abandoned are not exempt from the terms and provisions of this chapter.
(2013 Code § 7-2-3)
5-1-4: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The code official is authorized to enter the structure or premises at
reasonable times to inspect subject to constitutional restrictions on
reasonable searches and seizures. If entry is refused or not obtained, the code
official is authorized to pursue recourse as provided by law. (2013 Code § 7-2-
4)
5-1-5: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Notice Of Violation: Whenever a nuisance is found to exist within the
village, any authorized representative may give a ticket or warning notice
indicating the violation and remedy sought, accompanied by a statement of the
appropriate fine. Right of way signs may be immediately removed by the village
in addition to fines provided for herein. In the case of cleanup and structural
violations, the authorized representative shall give written notice to the
owner and/or occupant of the property upon which such nuisance exists or upon
the person allowing, causing or maintaining the nuisance. The notice of
violation under the provisions of this section shall contain:
      1.   The location of the violation.
      2.   A description of what constitutes the violation.
      3.   A statement of acts necessary to abate or correct the violation.
      4.   A date by which the violation must be abated or corrected to avoid
further legal action.
   B.   Complaint: In the event the owner or occupant of the property upon
which such nuisance exists has failed within the prescribed time to abate such
nuisance, then an authorized representative shall file a complaint pursuant to
the processes and methods prescribed by title 1, chapter 4, article A,
"Administrative Adjudication Procedures", of this code. Any authorized
representative may issue a complaint against the owners, lessees and/or
occupants of said property or the persons responsible for causing the nuisance
charging a violation of any provision of this chapter. Such complaint may seek
any and all applicable relief available at law or in equity including, but not
limited to, abatement of the nuisance, fines or injunctive relief. Issuance of
a notice of violation shall not be a precondition to the filing of a complaint.
(2013 Code § 7-2-5)
5-1-6: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Violations: Each day a violation of this chapter exists constitutes a
separate offense. Fines for the violations listed in this subsection shall be
as follows:
      1.   First offense: One hundred dollars ($100.00).
      2.   Second offense within a twelve (12) month period: Two hundred
dollars ($200.00). (2013 Code § 7-2-6)
      3.   Third or further offenses within a twelve (12) month period: Three
hundred dollars ($300.00).
      4.   Fines for cleanup violations: One hundred dollars ($100.00) per day
after notice to clean up. Violations are as follows:
         Animal waste and infestation violations.
         Burning violations.
         Cleanup violations (includes depositing of offensive substances on
public or private property; storage of junk; depositing offensive substances in
waterways, sewers, easements or public ways; placement of garbage and
containers; accumulation of offensive substances; offensive containers;
littering; and storage of construction materials).
         Contamination of water violations.
         Inoperable motor vehicles.
         Light in residential areas violations.
         Noxious weeds violations.
         Parking violations (only applies to parking on yards).
         Right of way signs.
         Structure violations.
         Swimming pool, spa and hot tub violations.
         Tall grass in residential yards violations. (2013 Code § 7-2-6; amd.
2016 Code)
   B.   Cleanup Costs:
      1.   If the owner, agent, occupant or tenant of any premises or lot
neglects or fails to abate a declared nuisance after due notice and time
specified by the authorized representative, consistent with the constitutional
rights of the owner, agent, or occupant thereof, the authorized representative
may request a private hauler to remove such materials, and the expense incurred
shall be billed to the owner, agent, occupant or tenant.
      2.   If the owner, agent, occupant or tenant of any premises or lot
neglects or fails to exterminate any infestations of vermin or rodents after
due notice and time, as specified by the authorized representative, the
authorized representative may cause such vermin or rodents to be exterminated,
and the expense incurred shall be billed to the owner, agent or occupant.
      3.   If the charge for cleanup or extermination remains unpaid, the
amount shall become a special lien against the property. Such lien shall be
such notice to all persons from the time of its recording, and shall bear
interest at the maximum legal rate thereafter until satisfied. (2013 Code § 7-
2-6)
5-1-7: NONLIABILITY OF VILLAGE:
   A.   The authorized representative charged with the enforcement of this
chapter while acting for the village and in good faith and without malice shall
not thereby render himself liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all
personal liability for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a
result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of official duties.
   B.   Any suit instituted against the authorized representative because of an
act performed by him in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions
of this chapter, shall be defended by the legal representative of the village
until the final termination of the proceedings.
   C.   In no case shall the authorized representative be liable for costs in
any action, suit, or proceedings that may be instituted in pursuance of the
provisions of this chapter.
   D.   The authorized representative, acting in good faith and without malice,
shall be free from liability for acts performed under any provisions of this
chapter or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of his official
duties in connection therewith. (2013 Code § 7-2-7)
CHAPTER 2
STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE, COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS IN ABOVEGROUND TANKS
SECTION:
5-2-1: Tanks Inside Buildings Prohibited
5-2-2: Tanks Outside, Above Grade
5-2-3: Exemptions From Provisions
5-2-1: TANKS INSIDE BUILDINGS PROHIBITED:
Aboveground tanks for the storage of flammable and combustible liquids
including, but not limited to, gasoline, kerosene and diesel fuel are not
allowed to be located in buildings. (2013 Code § 7-4-1)
5-2-2: TANKS OUTSIDE, ABOVE GRADE:
The storage of gasoline, kerosene and diesel fuel in outside aboveground tanks
is prohibited within the village, except by special permit. Compliance with the
following criteria is required for the issuance of a special permit for such
use:
   A.   The aboveground tank site is required to be a minimum of one hundred
feet (100') from the property line, except for residential, educational,
institutional, and assembly occupancies, which shall be three hundred feet
(300'). The location of the aboveground tank shall also comply with such
additional and further regulations as may be provided in the village zoning
ordinances and other requirements as provided by law. The tank shall not be
located in such manner that, in the opinion of the village building and zoning
officer (who shall consult with a person having expertise in such matters), it
constitutes a threat to life or property.
   B.   Buildings on the same parcel shall be at least fifty feet (50') from
the tank site.
   C.   A site plan for the installation of an aboveground tank shall be
submitted to the village building and zoning officer showing all buildings and
structures on the same and adjoining parcels.
   D.   Fixed fire protection systems shall be provided for all aboveground
tank installations over five hundred (500) gallons in capacity.
   E.   At least two (2) fire hydrants shall be provided within three hundred
feet (300') of the aboveground tank. The minimum flow for each hydrant shall be
one thousand (1,000) gallons per minute each. The fire flow duration shall be
sixty (60) minutes for flows up to one thousand (1,000) gallons per minute, two
(2) hours for flows between one thousand (1,000) and two thousand (2,000)
gallons per minute, and three (3) hours for flows over two thousand (2,000)
gallons per minute.
   F.   An evacuation plan shall be developed and submitted to the building and
zoning officer for review and approval for all properties within one-fourth (1/
4) mile of the aboveground tank.
   G.   A description of the proposed truck routes used to serve the tank
(fill/discharge) shall be provided to the building and zoning officer for
review and approval.
   H.   A site plan and complete description shall be provided to the office of
the Illinois state fire marshal for review and approval.
   I.   All aboveground storage tanks shall be two (2) hours' fire rated, UL
listed (ULI 2085).
   J.   The maximum number of tanks at one business location is one.
   K.   The maximum size shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) gallons'
capacity.
   L.   The aboveground tank shall be provided with tank containment or diking
equal to the maximum tank capacity, plus the fire flow described above. (2013
Code § 7-4-2)
   M.   The aboveground tanks shall be protected with physical barriers per the
fire code adopted by the village. (2013 Code § 7-2-4; amd. 2016 Code)
   N.   Aboveground storage tanks shall not be used by the general public nor
shall any liquid contained in the aboveground tank be transferred into any type
vessel or device to be used or controlled by the general public.
   O.   All aboveground tank installations shall be enclosed by a metal cyclone
type fence with screening attached. A roof structure shall be provided to
provide protection from the weather, and shall include the secondary
containment area or dike. Each tank shall be provided with a minimum of three
feet (3') of clear space for maintenance and inspection.
   P.   Liquid stored in an aboveground tank, excluding propane, shall not have
a flashpoint less than that of gasoline or minus thirty six degrees Fahrenheit
(-36°F) to minus forty five degrees Fahrenheit (-45°F).
   Q.   An automatic shutoff device capable of stopping the delivery of fuel
into a storage tank at ninety percent (90%) of the tank capacity shall be
provided.
   R.   Tank contents must be transferred by means of fixed pumps only. Pumps
must be designed and equipped so as to prevent accidental discharge.
   S.   All tank openings associated with piping, vents, and inspections shall
be through the top of the tank only.
   T.   Approved antisiphon devices shall be installed at each connection of
the piping to the tank when such piping extends below the level of the top of
the tank.
   U.   UL listed, portable ABC type fire extinguisher(s) shall be provided.
   V.   No parking is allowed within fifty feet (50') of any aboveground tank.
   W.   All aboveground tank plans must include the following:
      1.   Site plans as described above.
      2.   Aboveground tank details including all piping, pump and transfer
systems, manufacturer's tank specifications, and all specifications, and all
site protection, safety equipment, and safety signage per NFPA 704.
      3.   All aboveground tanks require a village building permit, and four
(4) sets of plans and specifications are required.
      4.   Approval for all aboveground tank installations shall be by the
village building and zoning officer. (2013 Code § 7-4-2)
5-2-3: EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to gasoline, kerosene and diesel tanks used in
farming operations located other than in platted subdivisions. (2013 Code § 7-
4-3)
TITLE 6
POLICE AND PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
6-1-1: Department Created; Composition
6-1-2: Residency Regulations
6-1-3: Appointments, Promotions And Discharges
6-1-4: Chief Of Police
6-1-4A: Police Commander
6-1-5: Deputy Chief Of Police
6-1-6: Duties Of Police Officers
6-1-7: Part Time Police
6-1-8: Rules And Regulations
6-1-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED; COMPOSITION:
There is hereby created a police department, an executive department of the
village. This department shall consist of those officers as may be provided
from time to time by the president and board of trustees. (2013 Code § 1-14-1)
6-1-2: RESIDENCY REGULATIONS:
Anything in this code to the contrary notwithstanding, no member of the police
department shall be required to be a resident of the village, but all police
officers at all times while employed by the village and all applicants for a
position as a police officer shall reside within twenty five (25) miles of the
borders of the village. (2013 Code § 1-14-8)
6-1-3: APPOINTMENTS, PROMOTIONS AND DISCHARGES:
   A.   Appointments And Promotions: Except for the position of chief of
police, appointments to and promotions within the police department shall be
made by the board of fire and police commissioners in the manner provided by
law. (2013 Code § 1-14-3)
   B.   Discharges: No full time police officer shall be discharged from the
department except after a hearing on charges before the board of fire and
police commissioners as provided by law; provided, that this shall not be
construed as affecting the power of the village president to appoint and remove
the chief of police. (2013 Code § 1-14-4)
6-1-4: CHIEF OF POLICE:
   A.   Office Created; Appointment: There is hereby created the position of
and office of the chief of police. The chief shall be appointed and removed by
the village president, subject to the advice and consent of the board of
trustees; provided, that if the person appointed as chief of police was at the
time of such appointment a member of the department, he shall retain his status
and rank while serving as chief of police and shall revert to such status and
rank when his term as chief of police has ended. (2013 Code § 1-14-2)
   B.   Duties: The chief of police shall keep such records and make such
reports concerning the activities of his department as may be required by
statute, ordinance or by direction from the village president. The chief shall
be responsible for the performance by the police department of all its
functions, and all persons who are members of the department shall serve
subject to the orders of the chief of police. (2013 Code § 1-14-5)
6-1-4A: POLICE COMMANDER:
   A.   Office Created; Appointment: There is hereby created the position of
and office of police commander, limited to one such person. The police
commander shall be appointed and removed by the chief of police. Provided, that
if the person appointed as police commander was at the time of such appointment
a member of the department, he shall retain his status and rank while serving
as police commander and shall revert to such status and rank when his term as
police commander has ended.
   B.   Powers and Duties: The police commander shall have such powers and
duties as shall be delegated in writing to such person by the chief of police
from time to time. (Ord. O-22-08, 4- -2022)
6-1-5: DEPUTY CHIEF OF POLICE:
   A.   Office Created; Appointment: There is hereby created the position of
and office of deputy chief of police, limited to one such position. The deputy
chief of police shall be appointed by the chief of police, pursuant to section
10-2.1-4 of the Illinois municipal code 1 , which provides in applicable part:
      Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, a non-home rule
municipality of 130,000 or fewer inhabitants, through its council or board of
trustees, may, by ordinance, provide for a position of deputy chief to be
appointed by the chief of the police department. The ordinance shall provide
for no more than one deputy chief position if the police department has fewer
than 25 full-time police officers and for no more than 2 deputy chief positions
if the police department has 25 or more full-time police officers. The deputy
chief position shall be an exempt rank immediately below that of Chief. The
deputy chief may be appointed from any rank of sworn, full-time officers of the
municipality's police department, but must have at least 5 years of full time
service as a police officer in that department. A deputy chief shall serve at
the discretion of the Chief and, if removed from the position, shall revert to
the rank currently held, without regard as to whether a vacancy exists in that
rank. A deputy chief of police, having been appointed from any rank of sworn
full-time officers of that municipality's police department, shall be
permitted, regardless of rank, to take promotional exams and be promoted to a
higher classified rank than he currently holds, without having to resign as
deputy chief of police.
   B.   Powers And Duties: The Deputy Chief of Police shall have such powers
and duties as shall be delegated in writing to such person by the Chief of
Police from time to time. (Ord. O-13-05, 3-19-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-4.
6-1-6: DUTIES OF POLICE OFFICERS:
It shall be the duty of the members of the Police Department to see to the
enforcement of all ordinances of the Village and all statutes effective in the
Village, to preserve order and prevent infractions of the law and to arrest
violators thereof. Every member of the Police Department is hereby declared to
be a conservator of the peace. (2013 Code § 1-14-6)
6-1-7: PART TIME POLICE:
   A.   Employment Authorized: The Village may employ part time police officers
from time to time as the Village deems necessary and convenient.
   B.   Hiring Standards: Any person employed as a part time police officer
must meet the following standards:
      1.   Be of good moral character, of temperate habits, of sound health,
and physically and mentally able to perform assigned duties.
      2.   Be at least twenty one (21) years of age.
      3.   Pass a medical examination.
      4.   Pass a background investigation.
      5.   Possess a high school diploma or GED certificate.
      6.   Possess a valid State of Illinois driver's license.
      7.   Have no felony convictions.
      8.   If an individual who has served in the U.S. military, must have been
honorably discharged.
   C.   Training: Part time police officers shall be trained in accordance with
the Illinois Police Training Act 1 , and the rules and requirements of the
Illinois Law Enforcement Training Standards Board.
   D.   Duties And Restrictions: A part time police officer shall have all the
responsibilities of a full time police officer and such specific duties as
delineated in the general orders of the Village Police Department, but the
number of hours a part time officer may work within a calendar year is
restricted. Part time police officers shall not be assigned to supervise or
direct full time police officers. (2013 Code § 1-14-10)
   E.   Holiday Pay: Part time police officers shall be paid one and one-half
(11/2) times their pay rate when they work on Village holidays. (2013 Code § 1-
14-9)
   F.   Discipline; Compliance With Department Rules: Part time officers shall
be under the disciplinary jurisdiction of the Chief of Police. Part time police
officers serve at the discretion of the Corporate Authorities, shall not have
any property rights in said employment, and may be removed by the Corporate
Authorities at any time. Part time police officers shall comply with all
applicable rules and general orders issued by the Police Department. (2013 Code
§ 1-14-10)
 
Notes
1 1. 50 ILCS 705/1 et seq.
6-1-8: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Chief of Police may make or prescribe such rules and regulations for the
guidance of the members of the department as he shall see fit, and the rules
shall be binding on such members. (Ord. O-13-03, 2-19-2013)
CHAPTER 2
INTRUSION ALARM SYSTEMS
SECTION:
6-2-1: Purpose
6-2-2: Definitions
6-2-3: Permit Required
6-2-4: Application For Permit; Issuance Or Denial
6-2-5: Term Of Permit
6-2-6: Nontransferability Of Permit
6-2-7: Audible Alarm System Requirements
6-2-8: False Alarms
6-2-9: Permission Required To Test Equipment
6-2-10: Revocation Of Permit; Reinstatement; Appeals
6-2-11: Nonliability Of Village
6-2-12: Violation; Penalties
6-2-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted for the purpose of regulating and permitting alarm
systems to which the police are expected to respond. (2013 Code § 3-3-1)
6-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, phrases and terms, as used in this chapter, shall be
construed to have the meanings herein ascribed thereto:
ALARM AGENT: Any person employed by, working for, representing, or
subcontracted by an alarm company.
ALARM COMPANY: A person in the business of selling, providing, maintaining,
servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing an alarm system
in an alarm site. This definition shall also include individuals or firms that
install and service alarm systems that will be used in their private or
proprietary facilities. This does not include persons doing installation or
repair work where such work is performed without compensation of any kind.
ALARM SYSTEM: Any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, arranged to
signal the occurrence of any actual or attempted burglary or robbery to which
the police are expected to respond.
ALARM USER: A person(s) in control of an alarmed premises where an alarm system
is located.
ALARMED PREMISES: Any building, structure, or facility where an alarm system is
installed to signal the occurrence of any actual or attempted entry or entry to
which the police are expected to respond.
AUDIBLE ALARM: An alarm system or device that generates an audible sound.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DIGITAL ALARM COMMUNICATOR SYSTEM: A system in which signals
are transmitted from a digital alarm communicator transmitter located at an
alarmed premises through the public switched telephone network to a digital
alarm communicator receiver at a central alarm station or the Kane County
communications center.
AUTOMATIC DIALING TELEPHONE ALARM: A device that automatically dials any of the
Kane County communications center emergency telephone lines, without human
activation of the device by the alarm user or employees of the alarm user, upon
detection of an unauthorized entry or other unauthorized activity at an alarmed
premises.
CENTRAL ALARM STATION: A system in which the operation of electrical protection
circuits and devices are signaled automatically to, recorded at, or maintained
and serviced from a place of business having trained alarm operators in
attendance at all times.
CHIEF OF POLICE: The chief of police of the village of Campton Hills, or his
designee.
FALSE ALARM: An alarm dispatch request to a law enforcement agency, when the
responding law enforcement officer finds no evidence of a criminal offense or
attempted criminal offense after having completed a timely investigation of the
alarm site. Severe weather, power outages, transmission line malfunctions, acts
of God, malicious acts of persons not under the control of the alarm user, or
any other cause clearly beyond the control of the alarm user will be considered
in determining if a fine, warning or other punitive action will be taken
against the alarm user as provided by this chapter.
NOTICE: Written notice given by personal service upon the addressee, or given
by the United States postal service, postage paid, to the addressee's last
known mailing address.
PERMITTEE: Any person to whom a valid alarm permit has been given by the
village.
PERSON: A natural person, or a firm, partnership, corporation, limited
liability company, association, organization, company, or other entity.
PRERECORDED TELEPHONE MESSAGE: A prerecorded voice message transmitted or
received over a telephone line.
VILLAGE: The village of Campton Hills.
VILLAGE PRESIDENT: The president of the village, or his designee. (2013 Code §
3-3-2)
6-2-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to use, own or lease an alarm system or to be in
control of an alarmed premises wherein an alarm system is operated or
maintained without having first obtained a permit as provided in this chapter.
A permit must be obtained for each separately addressed operating location.
(2013 Code § 3-3-3)
6-2-4: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; ISSUANCE OR DENIAL:
   A.   Each applicant for a permit to maintain an alarm system shall file a
written application with the police department stating:
      1.   The full legal name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
      2.   The name, address and telephone number of the proposed alarmed
premises.
      3.   The type of alarm system at the alarmed premises.
      4.   A list of three (3) persons, including their addresses and telephone
numbers, who may be contacted and will respond to the alarmed premises in the
event of an emergency or to reset or deactivate the alarm system, or who could
contact the alarm user.
      5.   The name, address, and telephone number of the alarm company that is
responsible for the monitoring, maintenance, and repair of the system.
   B.   A permit will not be issued until a completed application is received
and approval has been granted by the chief of police. Incomplete applications
shall be returned to the applicant.
   C.   No fee shall be charged to obtain an alarm user permit.
   D.   An application for an alarm user permit shall be denied if:
      1.   The applicant has failed to pay false alarm fees required by this
chapter for different alarmed premises under the applicant's ownership or
control.
      2.   The applicant has failed to comply with any provisions of this
chapter.
      3.   The applicant makes any false statement of a material fact for the
purpose of obtaining an alarm permit.
   E.   The chief of police shall be responsible for processing and issuing
alarm user permits. (2013 Code § 3-3-4)
   F.   Each alarm user shall amend the alarm user permit application on file
within fourteen (14) days after the information on such application becomes
outdated or inaccurate. (2013 Code § 3-3-6)
6-2-5: TERM OF PERMIT:
All permits issued are valid indefinitely unless revoked. (2013 Code § 3-3-3)
6-2-6: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF PERMIT:
An alarm user permit shall not be transferred to other premises or to another
person. (2013 Code § 3-3-7)
6-2-7: AUDIBLE ALARM SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS:
An alarm system that emits an audible signal that may be heard by persons
outside the alarmed premises, structure or facility shall conform to the
following requirements:
   A.   No audible alarm system shall create a sound similar to that of a civil
defense warning system.
   B.   Audible alarm systems shall automatically discontinue emitting an
audible alarm within ten (10) minutes after it is activated. (2013 Code § 3-3-
8)
6-2-8: FALSE ALARMS:
   A.   Deliberate False Alarms: It is unlawful for any person to knowingly
activate an alarm system for the purpose of summoning the police department
unless such person knows or reasonably suspects that there is an actual or
attempted burglary or robbery on the premises. (2013 Code § 3-3-9)
   B.   Fines; Notice Requirements:
      1.   Subject to the provisions of subsection B2 of this section, any
alarm user permittee who has more than one false alarm within a twelve (12)
month period at a single alarmed premises will be assessed fines according to
the following schedule:
         Second false alarm: Fifty dollars ($50.00).
         Third false alarm: Seventy five dollars ($75.00).
         Fourth false alarm: One hundred dollars ($100.00).
         Each false alarm in excess of four (4): Three hundred dollars
($300.00).
      2.   The alarm user shall be notified, in writing, of each occurrence of
a false alarm. Within fourteen (14) days of the notification, the alarm user
may submit a report or meet with the chief of police for the purpose of showing
cause as to whether circumstances exist to warrant voiding the false alarm
record. After review of the information received, the chief of police shall
issue a written finding to the alarm user as to whether the false alarm will be
voided. The finding of the chief of police shall be final.
      3.   Any person in control of an alarmed premises accused of a violation
of this subsection may settle the violation by paying the amount set forth in
subsection B1 of this section to the village within fourteen (14) days of
notification. In the event any assessed fines are not paid within fourteen (14)
days, a complaint may be issued for the alleged violation. (2013 Code § 3-3-10)
6-2-9: PERMISSION REQUIRED TO TEST EQUIPMENT:
No person shall conduct, or cause to be conducted, any test or demonstration of
any alarm system or signaling device that is directly connected to the Kane
County communications center without first obtaining permission from said
center. Permission to test shall not be required when the alarm system or
signaling device is connected to an intermediary receiver and is not relayed to
the Kane County communications center. (2013 Code § 3-3-12)
6-2-10: REVOCATION OF PERMIT; REINSTATEMENT; APPEALS:
   A.   1. An alarm permit may be revoked if the alarmed premises has more than
ten (10) false alarms within a twelve (12) month period as provided herein.
      2.   The chief of police shall notify the alarm user in writing that the
alarm permit shall be revoked thirty (30) days from the date of notification.
      3.   The alarm user shall have fourteen (14) days from the date of
notification to submit a written report to the chief of police describing
actions taken or to be taken to identify and eliminate the cause of the false
alarms and to request that the alarm user's permit be reinstated.
      4.   If the alarm user submits a report requesting reinstatement of the
alarm user's permit, the chief of police shall determine if the action taken or
to be taken will substantially reduce the likelihood of false alarms; if he
determines that the action will substantially reduce the likelihood of false
alarms, he shall notify the alarm user that the request to reinstate the alarm
user's permit has been approved.
      5.   If the alarm user's permit is reinstated and thereafter, the police
department responds to three (3) false alarm activations in the same twelve
(12) month period at the alarmed premises, the chief of police shall proceed
with the permit revocation process again as described in this section. The
alarm user shall also be assessed a fine in the amount of three hundred dollars
($300.00) for each subsequent false alarm during such twelve (12) month period.
      6.   If the chief of police determines that the action taken or to be
taken will not substantially reduce the likelihood of false alarms, the request
for reinstatement shall be denied. The chief of police shall give notice to the
user that the permit will be revoked without further notice. (2013 Code § 3-3-
11)
      7.   An alarm user whose permit has been revoked may appeal this decision
by filing a written request for a review meeting with the village administrator
within fourteen (14) days of mailing of notice of revocation.
      8.   If a review meeting with the village administrator is requested,
written notice of the time and place of the review meeting will be served on
the alarm user by the village administrator within fourteen (14) days of the
request by the alarm user.
      9.   The chief of police and the alarm user shall have the right to
present written and oral evidence, subject to the right of cross examination by
both parties.
      10.   If the village administrator determines that the alarm user has not
taken action which substantially reduces the likelihood of false alarms, the
village administrator shall issue written findings to that effect and an order
denying reinstatement of the alarm user's permit.
      11.   If the village administrator determines that the alarm user has
taken action which substantially reduces the likelihood of false alarms, the
village administrator shall issue findings to that effect and an order
approving reinstatement of the alarm user's permit.
      12.   If the alarm user's permit is reinstated by the chief of police or
the village administrator and thereafter the police department responds to
three (3) or more false alarm activations in the same twelve (12) month period
at the alarmed premises, the chief of police shall proceed with the permit
revocation process as described in this section. The alarm user shall also be
assessed a fine in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each
subsequent false alarm activation through the remainder of the twelve (12)
month period. (2013 Code § 3-3-11; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Any permittee who fails to pay fines provided under this chapter within
thirty (30) days from the date of the invoice requesting payment shall have the
alarm permit revoked. Any such alarm permit shall not be reinstated until all
the unpaid fines are paid in full. (2013 Code § 3-3-11)
   C.   It is unlawful for any person to use, own or lease an alarm system or
to be in control of alarmed premises wherein an alarm system is operated or
maintained when a permit has been revoked. (2013 Code § 3-3-3)
6-2-11: NONLIABILITY OF VILLAGE:
The village shall not be liable for any defects in the operation of any alarm
system or signal line system or for any failure or neglect of any person
associated with the installation or maintenance of any alarm system, for any
failure or neglect of any alarm user, for the transmission or receipt of alarm
signals, or for any failure or neglect to respond upon receipt of an alarm from
any source. In the event the village finds it necessary to revoke an alarm
user's permit or to otherwise provide for the disconnection of any alarm
system, the village shall have no liability for such action. No special duty
other than that owed to the general public shall be created by virtue of this
chapter or as a result of the transmission to or receipt of alarm signals by
the Kane County communications center. (2013 Code § 3-3-13)
6-2-12: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
   A.   Each notice to the police department of an activation of the alarm
system at the alarmed premises for which a permit has not been issued shall be
considered a separate violation of this chapter which shall be assessed a fine
as follows: (2013 Code § 3-3-5)
      1.   First false alarm: Violation notice.
      2.   Second false alarm: One hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00).
      3.   Each false alarm in excess of two (2): Three hundred dollars
($300.00). (2013 Code § 3-3-5; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provisions of this
chapter, in addition to the fines established, may be fined as provided in this
code. Each day during which a violation in this chapter continues or is
permitted to exist shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. (2013
Code § 3-3-15)
CHAPTER 3
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
6-3-1: County Animal Control Ordinance Adopted
6-3-2: Fees
6-3-1: COUNTY ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE ADOPTED:
The provisions of the Kane County animal control ordinance are hereby adopted
by reference as part of this chapter. (2013 Code § 7-1-1)
6-3-2: FEES:
   A.   The intergovernmental agreement made and entered into on May 29, 2007,
between Kane County and the village provides for various fees for animal
control services performed by the county. These fees are hereby adopted by
reference as part of this chapter and to the extent paid to the county by the
village, will be charged to the owner or person in possession of the animal.
(2013 Code § 7-1-2)
   B.   In the event that the county animal control service is unavailable and
the village police department or other village departments must perform the
following animal control services, the village will impose the following fees
to the individual owner of the animal, in addition to any expenses paid by the
village to others on behalf of such animal: Seventy five dollars ($75.00) to
pick up stray or sick or injured animals. (2013 Code § 7-1-3)
CHAPTER 4
SYNTHETIC ALTERNATIVE DRUGS
SECTION:
6-4-1: Definitions
6-4-2: Prohibitions
6-4-3: Violation; Penalties
6-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
A PRODUCT CONTAINING A SYNTHETIC ALTERNATIVE DRUG: Any product containing a
"synthetic cannabinoid", "synthetic stimulant" or "synthetic psychedelic/
hallucinogen", as those terms are defined herein, such as, but not limited to,
the following examples of brand names or identifiers:
2010
8-Ball
Aztec Gold
Aztec Midnight Wind Tezcatlipoca
Back Draft
Bad 2 the Bone
Banana Cream Nuke
Bayou Blaster
Black Diamond
Black Magic Salvia
Black Mamba
Blueberry Hayze
Bombay Blue
Buzz
C3
C4 Herbal Incense
Caneff
Cherry Bomb
Chill Out
Chill X
Chronic Spice
Citrus
Colorado Chronic
D-Rail
DaBlock
Dark Night II
Demon
Diamond Spirit
Dragon Spice
Dream
Earthquake
Eruption Spice
Euphoria
EX-SES
EX-SES Platinum
EX-SES Platinum Blueberry
EX-SES Platinum Cherry
EX-SES Platinum Strawberry
EX-SES Platinum Vanilla
Fire Bird Ultimate Strength Cinnamon
Forest Humus
Freedom
Fully Loaded
Funky Monkey
Funky Monkey XXXX
G Four
G Greenies Caramel Crunch
Genie
Gold Spirit Spice
Green Monkey Chronic Salvia
Greenies Strawberry
Heaven Improved
Heavenscent Suave
Humboldt Gold
Jamaican Gold
K Royal
K1 Orbit
K2
K2 (unknown variety)
K2 Amazonian Shelter
K2 Blonde
K2 Blue
K2 Blueberry
K2 Citron
K2 Cloud 9
K2 Kryptonite
K2 Latte
K2 Mellon
K2 Mint
K2 Orisha Black Magic Max
K2 Orisha Max
K2 Orisha Regular
K2 Orisha Super
K2 Orisha White Magic Super
K2 Peach
K2 Pina Colada
K2 Pineapple
K2 Pineapple Express
K2 Pink
K2 Pink Panties
K2 Sex
K2 Silver
K2 Solid Sex on the Mountain
K2 Standard
K2 Strawberry
K2 Summit
K2 Summit Coffee Wonk
K2 Thai Dream
K2 Ultra
K2 Watermelon
K3
K3 Blueberry
K3 Cosmic Blend
K3 Dusk
K3 Grape
K3 Heaven Improved
K3 Heaven Legal
K3 Kryptonite
K3 Legal
K3 Legal - Earth (silver)
K3 Legal - Original (Black)
K3 Legal - Sea (silver)
K3 Legal - Sun (Black)
K3 Mango
K3 Original
K3 Original Improved
K3 Strawberry
K3 Sun
K3 Sun Improved
K3 Sun Legal
K3 XXX
K4 Bubble Bubble
K4 Gold
K4 Purple Haze
K4 Silver
K4 Summit
K4 Summit Remix
KI Gravity
KI Orbit
Kind Spice
Legal Eagle
Legal Eagle Apple Pie
Love Potion 69
Love Strawberry
Magic Dragon Platinum
Magic Gold
Magic Silver
Magic Spice
Mega Bomb
Mid-Atlantic Exemplar
Mid-Atlantic Exemplar (K2 Summit)
Midnight Chill
MNGB Almond/Vanilla
MNGB Peppermint
MNGB Pinata Colada
MNGB Spear Mint
MNGB Tropical Thunder
Moe Joe Fire
Mojo
Mr. Smiley's
MTN-787
Mystery
Naughty Nights
New Improved K3
New Improved K3 Cosmic Blend
New Improved K3 Dynamite
New Improved K3 Kryptonite
New K3 Earth
New K3 Heaven
New K3 Improved
New K3 Sea Improved
New-Kron Bomb
Nitro
Ocean Blue
Paradise
p.e.p. pourri Love Strawberry
p.e.p. pourri Original Spearment
p.e.p. pourri Twisted Vanilla
p.e.p. pourri X Blueberry
Pink Tiger
Potpourri
Potpourri Gold
POW
Pulse
Rasta Citrus Spice
Rebel Spice
Red Bird
S1. S Werve
Samurai Spirit
Sativah
Scope Vanilla
Scope Wildberry
Sence
Shanti Spice
Shanti Spice Blueberry
Silent Black
Skunk
Smoke
Smoke Plus
Space
Spice Artic Synergy
Spice Diamond
Spice Gold
Spice Silver
Spice Tropical Synergy
Spicey XXX
Spicey Regular XXX Blueberry
Spicey Regular XXX Strawberry
Spicey Ultra Strong XXX Strawberry
Spicey Ultra Strong XXX Vanilla
Spicylicious
Spike 99
Spike 99 Ultra
Spike 99 Ultra Blueberry
Spike 99 Ultra Cherry
Spike 99 Ultra Strawberry
Spike Diamond
Spike Gold
Spike Maxx
Spike Silver
Stinger
Summer Skyy
Super Kush
Super Summit
Swagger Grape
SYN Chill
SYN Incense Lemon Lime
SYN Incense Smooth
SYN Incense Spearmint
SYN Lemon Lime
SYN Lemon Lime #2
SYN Smooth
SYN Spearmint
SYN Spearmint #2
SYN Suave
SYN Swagg
SYN Vanilla
SYN Vanilla #2
Texas Gold
Time Warp
Tribal Warrior
Ultra Cloud 10
Unknown cigarette
Utopia
Utopia-Blue Berry
Voo Doo Remix (black package)
Voo Doo Remix (orange package)
Voodoo Child
Voodoo Magic
Voodoo Remix
Who Dat
Who Dat Herbal Incense
Wicked X
Winter Boost
Wood Stock
XTREME Spice
Yucatan Fire
Zombie World
SYNTHETIC CANNABINOID: Any laboratory created compound that functions similar
to the active ingredient in marijuana, tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), including,
but not limited to, any quantity of a natural or synthetic material, compound,
mixture, preparation, and substance and its analog (including isomers, esters,
ethers, salts, and salts of isomers) containing a cannabinoid receptor agonist,
such as:
JWH-007 (1-pentyl-2-methyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole)
JWH-015 ((2-Methyl-1-propyl-1H-indol-3-yl)-1- naphthalenylmethanone)
JWH-018 (1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole)
JWH-019 (1-hexyl-3-(naphthalen-1-oyl) indole)
JWH-073 (naphthalen-1-yl-(1-butylindol-3-yl) methanone)
JWH-081 (4-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1- pentylindol-3-yl) methanone)
JWH-098 (4-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentyl-2- methylindol-3-yl) methanone)
JWH-122 (1-Pentyl-3-(4-methyl-1-naphthoyl) indole)
JWH-164 (7-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1- pentylindol-3-yl) methanone
JWH-200 (1-(2-morpholin-4-ylethyl)indol-3-yl)- naphthalen-1-ylmethanone)
JWH-203 (2-(2-chlorophenyl)-1-(1-pentylindol-3- yl) ethanone
JWH-210 (4-ethylnaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol- 3-yl) methanone
JWH-250 (1-pentyl-3-(2-methoxyphenylacetyl) indole)
JWH-251 (1-pentyl-3-(2-methylphenylacetyl) indole)
JWH-398 (1-pentyl-3-(4-chloro-1-naphthoyl) indole)
HU-210 ((6aR,10aR)-9-(Hydroxymethyl)-6,6- dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-
6a,7,10,10a- tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-1-ol)
HU-211 ((6aS,10aS)-9-(Hydroxymethyl)-6,6- dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-
6a,7,10,10a- tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-1-ol)
HU-308 ([(1R,2R,5R)-2-[2,6-dimethoxy-4-(2- methyloctan-2-yl)phenyl]-7,7-
dimethyl-4- bicyclo[3.1.1]hept-3-enyl] methanol)
HU-331 ((3-hydroxy-2-[(1R,6R)-3-methyl-6-(1- methylethenyl)-2-cyclohexen-1-yl]-
5-pentyl-2,5- cyclohexadiene-1,4-dione)
CP 55,940 (2-[(1R,2R,5R)-5-hydroxy-2-(3- hydroxypropyl) cyclohexyl]- 5-(2-
methyloctan-2-yl)phenol)
CP 47,497 (2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]- 5- (2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol) and
its homologues
WIN 55,212-2 ((R)-(+)-[2,3-Dihydro-5-methyl-3- (4-morpholinylmethyl) pyrrolo
[1,2,3-de)-1,4- benzoxazin-6-yl]-1-nepthalenylmethanone)
RCS-4 ((4-methoxyphenyl)(1-pentyl-1H-indol-3- yl) methanone)
RCS-8 (1-(1-(2-cyclohexylethyl)-1H-indol-3-yl)- 2-(2-methoxyphenyl) methanone)
SYNTHETIC PSYCHEDELIC/HALLUCINOGEN: Any compound that mimics the effects of any
federally controlled schedule I substance including, but not limited to, any
quantity of a natural or synthetic material, compound, mixture, preparation,
substance and its analog (including salts, isomers, esters, ethers and salts of
isomers) containing substances which have a psychedelic/hallucinogenic effect
on the central nervous system and/or brain, such as:
2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-ethylphenyl) ethanamine (2C- E)
2-(2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylphenyl) ethanamine (2C-D)
2-(4-Chloro-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl) ethanamine (2C-C)
2-(4-Iodo-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl) ethanamine (2C- I)
2-(4-(Ethylthio)-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl) ethanamine (2C-T-2)
2-(4-(Isopropylthio)-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl) ethanamine (2C-T-4)
2-(2,5-Dimethoxyphenyl) ethanamine (2C-H)
2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-nitro-phenyl) ethanamine (2C-N)
2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-(n)-propylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-P)
SYNTHETIC STIMULANT: Any compound that mimics the effects of any federally
controlled schedule I substance such as cathinone, methcathinone, MDMA and MDEA
including, but not limited to, any quantity of a natural or synthetic material,
compound, mixture, preparation, substance and its analog (including salts,
isomers, and salts of isomers) containing substances which have a stimulant
effect on the central nervous system, such as:
3-Fluoromethcathinone
4-Fluoromethcathinone (other name: flephedrone)
3,4-Methylenedioxymethcathinone (other name: methylone, MDMC)
3,4-Methylenedioxypyrovalerone (other name: MDPV)
4-Methylmethcathinon (other names: mephedrone, 4-MMC)
4-Methoxymethcathinone (other names: methedrone, bk-PMMA, PMMC)
4-Ethylmethcathinone (other name: 4-EMC)
Ethcathinone
Beta-keto-N-methylbenzodioxyolylpropylamine (other names: butylone, bk-MBDB)
Napthylpyrovalerone (other names: naphyrone, NRG-1)
N,N-dimethylcathinone (other name: metamfepramone)
Alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name: alpha-PPP)
4-methoxy-alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name: MOPPP)
3,4-methylenedioxy-alpha- pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name: MDPPP)
Alpha-pyrrolidinovalerophenone (other name: alpha-PVP)
6,7-kihydro-5H-indeno(5,6-d)-1,3-dioxal-6- amine) (other name: MDAI)
Any compound that is structurally derived from 2-amino-1-phenyl-1-propanone by
modification or substitution in any of the following ways:
   A.   In the phenyl ring to any extent with alkyl, alkoxy, alkylenedioxy,
haloalkyl, or halide substituents, whether or not further substituted in the
phenyl ring by one or more other univalent substituents;
   B.   At the 3-position with an alkyl substituent;
   C.   At the nitrogen atom with alkyl, dialkyl, benzyl, or methoxybenzyl
groups; or
   D.   By inclusion of the nitrogen atom in a cyclic structure. (2013 Code §
3-5-1)
6-4-2: PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Sale Or Delivery: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer
for sale or delivery any product containing a synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant
or psychedelic/hallucinogen. (2013 Code § 3-5-2)
   B.   Possession: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess a
product containing a synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant or psychedelic/
hallucinogen. (2013 Code § 3-5-3)
   C.   Use: It shall be unlawful for any person to be under the influence of a
synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant or psychedelic/hallucinogen. (2013 Code § 3-5-
4)
6-4-3: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a fine as set forth herein. Each day that an offense is committed, or
continues to be committed, shall be considered a new and separate offense.
   B.   The court shall consider as an aggravating factor for purposes of
imposition of any penalty for conviction of an offense committed under this
chapter, the following:
      1.   That the sale or delivery, possession or use occurred on the real
property comprising any school, or any conveyance owned, leased or contracted
by a school to transport students to or from school or a school related
activity, or on any public way within one thousand feet (1,000') of the real
property comprising any school or of any conveyance owned, leased or contracted
by a school to transport students to or from school or a school related
activity;
      2.   That the sale or delivery was by a person who is at least eighteen
(18) years of age to any person under eighteen (18) years of age and who is at
least three (3) years his junior.
      3.   Any other pertinent factor or circumstance. (2013 Code § 3-5-5)
CHAPTER 5
MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
SECTION:
6-5-1: Criminal Code Adopted
6-5-2: Offenses Enumerated
6-5-1: CRIMINAL CODE ADOPTED:
Except where an offense would be declared a misdemeanor or felony with a
penalty of more than six (6) months incarceration, all of the definitions,
requirements, regulations, prohibitions, provisions, and sections of the
Illinois Criminal Code of 2012, 720 ILCS 5/1-1, et seq., as amended, are hereby
adopted by the village. Any and all violations thereof shall be considered
violations of this chapter, and each such violation shall subject the violator
thereof to the procedures and penalties provided in Title 1, Chapter 4 of this
Code, but in no case shall such penalty be greater than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) per offense. (Ord. O-22-03, 2-1-2022)
6-5-2: OFFENSES ENUMERATED:
It is hereby declared that any of the following activities are unlawful:
   A.   The possession, use, sale, gifting or other distribution of drug
paraphernalia as defined by the Illinois statutes, except as authorized under
the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-1, et seq.).
   B.   The possession, use, sale, gifting or other distribution of cannabis in
violation of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-1, et seq.).
   C.   The violation of the hours of curfew for persons under such age as
established by state statute.
   D.   The violation of the pyrotechnic use act, 425 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 35/0.01 et seq., including the possession, sale, and use of fireworks
in the village, except as expressly authorized by the village board for a
community event. (Ord. O-15-08, 6-9-2015; amd. Ord. O-19-21, 12-17-2019)
TITLE 7
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
VEHICLE CODE
SECTION:
7-1-1: Vehicle Code Adopted; Exclusions
7-1-2: Amendments To Code
7-1-3: Citations
7-1-4: Penalties
7-1-1: VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED; EXCLUSIONS:
   A.   Pursuant to the authority granted to municipalities by section 20-204
of the Illinois vehicle code 1 , there is hereby adopted by reference as part
of this title, the following provisions of the Illinois vehicle code, 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes, the same being a public record of the state as now
in effect, and as may be amended from time to time, subject to deletions,
additions, amendments or modifications set forth in section
7-1-2 of this chapter: (Ord. O-14-01, 1-21-2014)
      1.   Chapters 1, 3, 6, 9, 11, 12, 13C, 15 and 16 in their entirety except
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501(d). (Ord. O-14-01, 1-21-2014; amd. 2016
Code)
      2.   Snowmobile registration and safety act.
      3.   Child passenger protection act. (Ord. O-14-01, 1-21-2014)
   B.   Excluded from adoption by reference and hereby deleted are chapters 2,
4, 5, 7, 8, 10, 17, 18a, 18b and 18c and the miscellaneous laws of the Illinois
vehicle code, except as specified in subsection A of this section. (Ord. O-14-
01, 1-21-2014; amd. 2016 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/20-204.
7-1-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
The amendments, modifications, and/or additions, as found in the sections of
this title, are hereby made in the provisions in the Illinois vehicle code
otherwise herein adopted by reference. To the extent such amendments,
modifications and/or additions or any other provisions of this code are
inconsistent with the provisions of the Illinois vehicle code herein adopted,
the more restrictive and specific regulation shall apply. (2013 Code § 6-1-2)
7-1-3: CITATIONS:
Any citation to the above and foregoing provisions shall be designated as set
forth in the Illinois vehicle code and prefixed by reference to this title.
(2013 Code § 6-1-3)
7-1-4: PENALTIES:
Every person convicted of violating any provision of section
7-1-1 of this chapter, the Illinois vehicle code, as incorporated by reference
into this code by section
7-1-1 of this chapter, shall be punishable by one or more of the following
dispositions as are authorized for such offense by reference to the Illinois
vehicle code and as may be determined by the court:
   A.   Such maximum fine as authorized by reference to the Illinois vehicle
code.
   B.   A term of incarceration, either periodic or continuous, in a penal
institution other than the penitentiary as authorized by reference to the
Illinois vehicle code.
   C.   A term of supervision or conditional discharge as authorized by
reference to the Illinois vehicle code and the Illinois unified code of
corrections. (2013 Code § 6-1-4)
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Application Of Provisions
7-2-2: Authority To Direct Traffic
7-2-3: Obedience To, Eluding Law Enforcement Officials
7-2-4: Display Of State Registration Plates
7-2-5: Fire Department Vehicles And Apparatus
7-2-6: Right Of Way
7-2-7: Prohibited Acts
7-2-1: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this title applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon the
highways shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the
United States, the state, the village or any county, city, town, district or
any other political subdivision of the state, except as provided in this title
and subject to such specific exceptions as set forth in this title with
reference to authorized emergency vehicles. (2013 Code § 6-1-5)
7-2-2: AUTHORITY TO DIRECT TRAFFIC:
   A.   Law Enforcement Officials: Law enforcement officials, or such
authorized officers or crossing guards as are assigned or authorized by the law
enforcement agency, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand,
or signal in conformance with traffic laws and regulations; provided, that in
the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard
pedestrians, law enforcement officials may direct traffic as conditions may
require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws and regulations.
   B.   Fire Department Officials: Officers of the fire department, when at the
scene of a fire, may direct or assist the law enforcement officials in
directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity.
   C.   Unauthorized Persons: It shall be unlawful for any person not
authorized by the law enforcement agency to direct or attempt to direct
traffic. (2013 Code § 6-1-6)
7-2-3: OBEDIENCE TO, ELUDING LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS:
   A.   Obedience Required: No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply
with any lawful order or direction of any law enforcement official, fire
department official or school crossing guard invested by law with authority to
direct, control or regulate traffic.
   B.   Fleeing, Attempting To Elude Prohibited: Any driver or operator of a
motor vehicle who, having been given a visual or audible signal by a law
enforcement official directing such driver or operator to bring his vehicle to
a stop, wilfully fails or refuses to obey such direction, increases his speed,
extinguishes his lights, or otherwise flees or attempts to elude the official,
is guilty of a violation of this code. The signal given by the law enforcement
official may be by hand, voice, siren, or red or blue light; provided, the
official giving such signal shall be in police uniform, and if driving a
vehicle, such vehicle shall be marked showing it to be an official vehicle of
the law enforcement agency. (2013 Code § 6-1-7; amd. 2016 Code)
7-2-4: DISPLAY OF STATE REGISTRATION PLATES:
State registration plates issued for a motor vehicle shall be attached thereto,
as provided by statute. Every such registration plate shall at all times be:
   A.   Securely fastened in a horizontal position to the vehicle for which it
is issued so as to prevent the plate from swinging.
   B.   Fastened in a place and position to be clearly visible.
   C.   Maintained free from foreign materials and in a condition to be clearly
legible. (2013 Code § 6-1-13)
7-2-5: FIRE DEPARTMENT VEHICLES AND APPARATUS:
   A.   Following Or Parking Near Fire Apparatus: The driver of any vehicle
other than one on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus
traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than five hundred feet (500') or
drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has
stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
   B.   Driving Over Fire Hose: No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected
hose of a fire department when laid down on any street, private road or
driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire without the consent of the
fire department official in command. (2013 Code § 6-1-8)
7-2-6: RIGHT OF WAY:
   A.   Preferential Right Of Way: Preferential right of way at an intersection
may be indicated by stop or yield signs.
   B.   Stop Intersections: Except when directed to proceed by a law
enforcement officer or traffic control signal, every driver of a vehicle
approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop at a
clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection, or if none, then at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. After having stopped,
the driver shall yield the right of way to any vehicle which has entered the
intersection from another roadway or which is approaching so closely on the
roadway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when the driver is
moving across or within the intersection, but said driver, having so yielded,
may proceed at such time as a safe interval occurs.
   C.   Yield Right Of Way Intersections:
      1.   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in obedience
to such sign, slow to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and, if
required for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if
none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if
none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a
view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. After slowing or
stopping, the driver shall yield the right of way to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time such driver is moving across or within the
intersection.
      2.   If a driver is involved in a collision or interferes with the
movement of other vehicles at an intersection which is controlled by a yield
right of way sign, such collision or interference shall be deemed prima facie
evidence of the driver's failure to yield the right of way. (2013 Code § 6-1-9)
7-2-7: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Clinging To Moving Vehicles: Any person riding upon any bicycle,
motorcycle, motor driven cycle, coaster, sled, roller skates, or any toy
vehicle shall not attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle upon any
street or roadway. (2013 Code § 6-1-10)
   B.   Transporting Alcoholic Liquor: No person shall transport, carry,
possess or have any alcoholic liquor in or upon or about any motor vehicle
except as permitted by state statute. (2013 Code § 6-1-11)
   C.   Damage To Public Ways And Property: It shall be unlawful for any person
to injure or damage any public highway or street or any bridge, culvert, sign,
signpost, or structure upon or used or constructed in connection with any
public highway or street for the protection thereof or for protection or
regulation of traffic thereon by any unusual, improper or unreasonable use
thereof, or by carelessly driving or using any vehicle thereon, or by
mutilating, defacing or destruction thereof.
   D.   Engine Braking:
      1.   No person shall operate or cause to be used or operated within the
Village an engine braking system that emits excessive noise on any commercial
vehicle within the corporate limits of the Village. For the purposes of this
section, an engine braking system shall be deemed to be any device which uses
the force of the engine in any commercial vehicle to slow or alter the speed of
the vehicle by the application of force to the drive train thereof, including
but not limited to engine brakes, exhaust brakes, or other similar systems. A
commercial vehicle shall be deemed to be emitting excessive noise if the
vehicle is operating an engine braking system, and if the vehicle is not
equipped with an adequate sound muffling system on the exhaust thereof. It is a
defense to this paragraph that the driver used an engine braking system that
emits excessive noise in an emergency to avoid a collision with a person or
another vehicle on the roadway.
      2.   Excessive engine braking noise signs. In accordance with Section 12-
602.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, the City Engineer or his designees shall
cause signs to be erected and maintained that prohibit the driver of a
commercial vehicle, as defined in Section 1-111.8 of the Illinois Vehicle Code
(625 ILCS 5/1-111.8), from operating or actuating any engine braking system
that emits excessive noise. The sign shall state, “EXCESSIVE ENGINE BRAKING
NOISE PROHIBITED.”
      3.   A violation of this Section
7-2-7  (D) is an equipment violation punishable by a fine of $75.
   E.   Snow Or Ice Removal: No person, firm, corporation or institution,
public or private, shall plow or remove or cause to be plowed or removed ice or
snow from any shopping center, parking lot, commercial or institutional service
area or driveway or any other public or private service area or driveway and
deposit such ice or snow upon a public highway or along the shoulder or edge of
a public highway. This prohibition shall not pertain to a residential driveway
or sidewalk.
   F.   No commercial truck traffic shall traverse either north or south on
Nancy Lane, in the area that lies south of Burlington Road and North of Silver
Glen Road, except those vehicles performing local deliveries or providing
services to the properties that lie upon this road. (2013 Code § 6-1-12; amd.
Ord. O-22-05, 4-5-2022; Ord. O-23-02, 1-24-2023; Ord. O-25-01, 1-7-2025)
CHAPTER 3
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS, MARKINGS AND DEVICES
SECTION:
7-3-1: Specifications; Official Devices
7-3-2: Installation And Maintenance
7-3-3: Obedience To Devices
7-3-4: Unauthorized Signs, Signals, Markings And Advertisements
7-3-5: Damage To, Interference With Devices
7-3-6: Effect Of Devices On Enforcement
7-3-1: SPECIFICATIONS; OFFICIAL DEVICES:
   A.   Compliance With State Specifications: All traffic control signs,
signals and devices shall conform to the "Manual Of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices And Specifications" approved by the state department of transportation.
   B.   Uniformity: All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular
purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location
throughout the village.
   C.   Official Traffic Control Devices: All traffic control devices so
erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this title
shall be official traffic control devices. (2013 Code § 6-1-14)
7-3-2: INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE:
The appropriate official shall place and maintain traffic control signs,
signals, and devices when and as required under this title to make effective
the provisions hereof and, with the concurrence of the village board of
trustees, may place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he
may deem necessary and as may be authorized by the village board of trustees to
regulate traffic under this title, under state law, or to guide or warn
traffic. (2013 Code § 6-1-15)
7-3-3: OBEDIENCE TO DEVICES:
   A.   Obedience Required: Every person shall obey the instructions of any
official traffic control device thereto placed in accordance with this title,
unless otherwise directed by a law enforcement official, subject to the
exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this title.
   B.   Avoiding Devices Prohibited: It is unlawful for any person to leave the
roadway and travel across private property to avoid an official traffic control
device. (2013 Code § 6-1-16)
7-3-4: UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS, MARKINGS AND ADVERTISEMENTS:
   A.   Unauthorized Signs, Signals And Markings: No person shall place,
maintain or display upon or in view of any street any unauthorized sign,
signal, marking, or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or
resembles an official traffic control device or which attempts to direct the
movement of traffic, nor shall any person place, maintain, or display upon or
in view of any street any other sign which hides from view or interferes with
the movement of traffic or the effectiveness of any traffic control device.
   B.   Advertising On Signs Prohibited: No person may place or maintain, nor
shall the village permit upon any street, any traffic sign or signal bearing
thereon any commercial advertising.
   C.   Nuisance Declared: Every prohibited sign, signal or marking is a public
nuisance, and the appropriate village official is empowered to remove the same
or cause it to be removed without notice. (2013 Code § 6-1-17)
7-3-5: DAMAGE TO, INTERFERENCE WITH DEVICES:
No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, injure,
knock down, or remove any official traffic control device. (2013 Code § 6-1-18)
7-3-6: EFFECT OF DEVICES ON ENFORCEMENT:
No provision of this title for which official traffic control devices are
required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and
place of the alleged violation, an official device is not in proper position
and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever
a particular section does not state that official traffic control devices are
required, such section shall be effective even though no devices are erected or
in place. (2013 Code § 6-1-19)
CHAPTER 4
PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-4-1: Stopping, Standing Or Parking Prohibited
7-4-2: Parking During Inclement Weather
7-4-3: Parking For Certain Purposes Prohibited
7-4-4: Parking For Persons With Disabilities
7-4-5: Removal Of Illegally Parked Vehicles
7-4-1: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful at all times to stop, stand or park a vehicle in
any of the following places:
      1.   Within any intersection.
      2.   On any parkway or on or across any sidewalk from March 1 through
November 30 between the hours of seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. and nine o’clock (9:
00) P.M. on Monday through Friday, or between the hours of nine o’clock (9:00)
A.M. and nine o’clock (9:00) P.M. on Saturday and Sunday.
      3.   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street.
      4.   In any place where such vehicle would reduce to less than eighteen
feet (18') the width of the roadway available for use by moving traffic.
      5.   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction if it
would result in the obstruction of moving traffic.
      6.   On any railroad tracks.
      7.   In any fire lane.
      8.   In any subway or upon any bridge or viaduct.
      9.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb, or within twenty feet
(20') of a point on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone.
      10.   On that area of any front yard which lies as an open space between
the front lot line and the nearest line of a principal building on that lot and
which extends across the full width of the lot, unless that area has been
covered with concrete, asphalt, blacktop or otherwise improved with a permanent
material and commonly known as a driveway for automobiles.
      11.   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping, standing or
parking.
      12.   On a crosswalk. (2013 Code § 6-1-30; amd. 2016 Code)
      13.   Within the Fox Mill (Farmstead Phase) Subdivision, such areas of
streets where official "No Parking" signs have been posted pursuant to the
Highway Commissioner's discretion.
         a.   The Fox Mill (Farmstead Phase) Subdivision streets are as
follows:
 
East Laura Ingalls Wilder Drive - Joyce Kilmer Court
West Laura Ingalls Wilder Drive - Francis Bret Harte Street
Vachel Lindsay Street           - Edna St. Vincent Millay Street
Taylor Caldwell Street          - Edgar Lee Masters Street
Oliver Wendell Holmes Street     
 
      14.   On the portion of Brown Road that lies North of IL Route 64, to a
distance of two hundred feet (200') North of Brown Farm Court/Hearthstone
Court, where official "No Parking" signs have been posted pursuant to the
Campton Township Highway Commissioner's discretion.
   B.   Except while momentarily engaged in the pick up or discharge of
passengers, it shall be unlawful to stop, stand or park a vehicle or any part
thereof in any of the following places:
      1.   In front of or within five feet (5') on either side of a public or
private driveway.
      2.   At any curb within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
      3.   Within twenty feet (20') of any crosswalk.
      4.   Within thirty feet (30') of any flashing signal, stop sign or other
traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.
      5.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and, on the opposite side of the street, within seventy five feet (75')
of such an entrance.
   C.   Except while temporarily engaged in the act of loading or unloading
merchandise or passengers, it shall be unlawful to stop, stand or park a
vehicle in any of the following areas:
      1.   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
      2.   At any place where official signs prohibit parking, unless a valid
parking permit issued by the village is properly displayed in said vehicle.
   D.   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any
such prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as is unlawful. (2013
Code § 6-1-30; amd. 2016 Code; Ord. O-20-02, 1-21-2020; Ord. O-23-12, 6- -2023;
Ord. O-25-08, 4-8-2025)
7-4-2: PARKING DURING INCLEMENT WEATHER:
   A.   Parking Prohibited after Snowfall or Ice Event: It shall be unlawful
for any driver or vehicle owner to allow their vehicle to stand, park, or
remain parked for a period of time longer than five (5) minutes for the loading
and unloading of passengers and/or thirty (30) minutes for the loading,
unloading, pick up, or delivery of materials from any service, delivery,
commercial, or private vehicle in any public street, roadway or alley,
including the curb and gutter or shoulder of a public roadway, in the village
anytime there is a snow or ice event. If said vehicle restricts or obstructs
the passage of any emergency vehicle including, but not limited to snowplow
trucks or machinery used for snow/ice removal, it must be removed immediately
upon request. These restrictions will be enforced: when there is a publicly
broadcast U.S. Weather Service snow or ice forecast and the snow/ice has
started to fall; while the snow, ice, sleet, or freezing rain is falling; as
long as snow, ice or sleet remains on the pavement; or while any snow removal
operations are going on. This prohibition shall remain in effect until such
time as the street, roadway, or alley has been plowed or the snow, ice or sleet
has been removed therefrom.
   B.   Nuisance Declared; Removal; Responsibility For Costs: Whenever a
village police officer finds a vehicle parked in violation of this section, and
where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic, interferes with the
use of streets or in any other manner creates a dangerous or unsafe condition,
such a vehicle is declared a nuisance and a hazard to public safety, and the
police officer may cause the removal of such vehicle to a public garage or
other place of safety during snow, ice and sleet removal operations of the
village on such streets, and the expense of such removal and storage in such
public garage shall be paid by the owner or operator of the vehicle, in
addition to any other penalties imposed by this title.
   C.   Dates of Parking Restrictions: The parking prohibitions listed in this
section shall apply from November 1st through April 1st.
   D.   Additional Discretionary Prohibitions: The Chief of Police of the
Village shall have the discretion to implement additional parking bans to
facilitate the abatement of dangerous inclement weather conditions under this
section. (2013 Code § 6-1-30; amd. Ord. O-19-22, 12-17-2019)
7-4-3: PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED:
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of:
   A.   Displaying such vehicle for sale.
   B.   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except for repairs
necessitated by an emergency. (2013 Code § 6-1-30)
7-4-4: PARKING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES:
   A.   It shall be prohibited to park any motor vehicle which is not bearing
registration plates or decals issued pursuant to the Illinois vehicle code 1
to a person with a disability or to a disabled veteran as evidence that the
vehicle is operated by or for a person with a disability or a disabled veteran,
in any parking place, including any private or public off street parking
facility, specifically reserved, by the posting of an official sign, for motor
vehicles bearing such registration plates.
   B.   Any person or local authority owning or operating any public or private
off street parking facility may, after notifying the police, remove or cause to
be removed to the nearest garage or other place of safety any vehicle parked
within a stall or space reserved for use by persons with disabilities which
does not display registration plates for persons with disabilities or a special
decal or device as required under this section. (2013 Code § 6-1-30; amd. 2016
Code)
   C.   Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this section
shall be fined two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in addition to any costs or
charges connected with the removal or storage of any motor vehicle authorized
under this section. (2013 Code § 6-1-30)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.
7-4-5: REMOVAL OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES:
   A.   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing, stopped or parked
in violation of the provisions of this chapter, such officer may move the
vehicle or require the driver or other person in charge to move the same to
such a place as will not interfere with the use of the streets and highways.
   B.   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended in any street
where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic, or the use of the
streets, driveways, sidewalks and other public places in the village, or such
vehicle remains parked in one location for a period of forty eight (48) hours
or more, such officer may cause the removal of such a vehicle to a public
garage or other place of safety, and the expense of such removal and storage in
such public garage shall be paid by the owner or operator of said vehicle.
(2013 Code § 6-1-30)
CHAPTER 5
VEHICLE SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD
SECTION:
7-5-1: Size, Weight And Load
7-5-2: Vehicles Exceeding Weight Limits
7-5-3: Permits
7-5-4: Permit Fees
7-5-1: SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD:
The village hereby adopts by reference and is authorized to enforce all vehicle
size, weight and load regulations and laws as set forth in article I of chapter
15 of the Illinois vehicle code 1 , as enacted and amended. (2016 Code; amd.
Ord. O-19-10, 6-4-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/15-101 et seq.
7-5-2: VEHICLES EXCEEDING WEIGHT LIMITS:
The village hereby adopts by reference and is authorized to enforce all
regulations and laws in regards to vehicles exceeding weight limits as set
forth in article II of chapter 15 of the Illinois vehicle code 2 , as enacted
and amended.(2016 Code; amd. Ord. O-19-10, 6-4-2019)
 
Notes
2 2. 625 ILCS 5/15-201 et seq.
7-5-3: PERMITS:
   A.   The village hereby adopts by reference all regulations and laws in
regards to vehicle permits as is set forth in article III of chapter 15 of the
Illinois vehicle code 3 , as enacted and amended.
   B.   The owner, operator, or lessee of an overweight or oversize vehicle
operating on any highway owned and maintained by the village must apply for a
permit in the method and form provided by the village. The permit application
must include payment of the applicable fee pursuant to section
7-5-4  of this code. The chief of police or the chief’s designee is authorized
to issue a permit for good cause to ensure movements will not unduly damage
roadways within the village. Permits are only valid for the dates and times
specified, and the chief of police or his designee is authorized to establish
reasonable provisions for permits. Permits are non-transferable to other
vehicles and must be carried in the permitted vehicle in either paper or
electronic form.
   C.   The village may contract with other units of government including, but
not limited to, Campton Township, Plato Township and their respective road
districts for purposes of administering and enforcing these vehicle permit laws
within the village. The village may also contract with one (1) or more service
providers to administer the overweight or oversize vehicle permit application
process. (2016 Code; amd. Ord. O-19-10, 6-4-2019)
 
Notes
3 3. 625 ILCS 5/15-301 et seq.
7-5-4: PERMIT FEES:
   A.   A permit fee must be paid at the time of application for an overweight
or oversized vehicle permit, in the amount provided below, plus any
administrative fee imposed by the service provider pursuant to a contract with
the village:
      1.   Overweight Vehicles (includes any over dimensions).
         Single Trip (5 days):      $50.00
         Round Trip (10 days):      $80.00
         Quarterly (90 days):      $200.00
         Annual (365 days):      $800.00
      2.   Oversize Only Vehicles.
         Single Trip (5 days):      $25.00
         Round Trip (10 days):      $40.00
         Quarterly (90 days):      $100.00
         Annual (365 days):      $400.00
   B.   For purposes of this section:
      1.   A ‘single trip’ is defined as one (1) movement of an oversize or
overweight vehicle or load.
      2.   A ‘round trip’ is defined as one (1) movement of an oversize or
overweight vehicle or load, and a return trip of the same vehicle or load.
      3.   ‘Quarterly’ and ‘annual’ permits are to be considered limited
continuous operation of the same oversize or overweight vehicle with
interchangeable loads. (Ord. O-19-10, 6-4-2019)
CHAPTER 6
IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES
SECTION:
7-6-1: Authority To Impound; Grounds For Impoundment
7-6-2: Removal By Towing Company; Costs
7-6-3: Supervision Of Impoundment
7-6-4: Notice Of Impoundment
7-6-5: Storage And Redemption Of Impounded Vehicle
7-6-6: Disposition Of Unclaimed Vehicles
7-6-7: Records Kept
7-6-1: AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND; GROUNDS FOR IMPOUNDMENT:
Members of the law enforcement agency are hereby authorized to remove a vehicle
from any public way to the nearest vehicle pound or authorized garage as
determined and designated by the law enforcement agency under the following
circumstances:
   A.   When a vehicle on any public way is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic, and the person in charge of the vehicle is, by reason
of physical injury, incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide
for its custody or removal.
   B.   When any vehicle is left unattended on any public way and is so parked
illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal
movement of traffic.
   C.   When any vehicle illegally occupies a parking space for an unreasonable
time. (2013 Code § 6-1-24)
7-6-2: REMOVAL BY TOWING COMPANY; COSTS:
The vehicle shall be removed by an authorized towing company pursuant to this
code and ordinances of the village and Illinois state statutes. Any and all
fees associated with the towing of said vehicle shall be the responsibility of
the owner of such vehicle. In addition to such fees charged by the towing
company, the owner shall be responsible for an administrative fee to the
village in the amount of twenty five dollars ($25.00). The vehicle shall not be
released to the owner until said owner pays in full all such towing charges and
administrative charges. (2013 Code § 6-1-24)
7-6-3: SUPERVISION OF IMPOUNDMENT:
It shall be the duty of the law enforcement agency to cause every vehicle
removed from any public way to be so removed and conveyed by or under the
direction of a member of the law enforcement agency to an authorized garage or
place of impoundment. (2013 Code § 6-1-25)
7-6-4: NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT:
   A.   Notice To Owner: Whenever the law enforcement agency has impounded any
vehicle as aforesaid, said agency shall ascertain from the registration records
of the state and of the village the name and address of the owner thereof and
shall immediately give or cause to be given notice to such owner of the fact of
such removal and impounding and the reason therefor and of the place to which
such vehicle has been removed.
   B.   Owner Unknown; Notice To State: Whenever the law enforcement agency has
impounded any vehicle as aforesaid and does not know and is not able to
ascertain the name of the owner, or for any reason is unable to give notice to
the owner as hereinbefore provided, and in the event the vehicle is not
returned to the owner within a period of seven (7) days, then and in that
event, the law enforcement agency shall immediately send or cause to be sent a
written report of such removal and impounding by mail to the secretary of
state. Such notice shall include a complete description of the vehicle, the
date, time, and place from which removed, the reasons for such removal, and the
address of the vehicle pound or authorized garage where the vehicle is stored.
(2013 Code § 6-1-26)
7-6-5: STORAGE AND REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE:
   A.   Storage: It shall be the duty of the law enforcement agency to safely
keep any vehicle so impounded until such vehicle shall have been repossessed by
the owner or person legally entitled to possession thereof or otherwise
disposed of, as hereinafter provided.
   B.   Redemption Of Impounded Vehicle: Before the owner or person entitled to
possession of any legally impounded vehicle shall be permitted to remove the
same from the custody of the law enforcement agency, he shall furnish evidence
of his identity and ownership of the vehicle and right of possession thereto,
shall sign a receipt for the vehicle, and shall pay a fee to cover the cost of
towing or removal to an authorized garage and, in addition thereto, the cost of
storage at a rate for each day or fraction of a day said vehicle is stored
therein. (2013 Code § 6-1-27)
7-6-6: DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES:
   A.   Public Sale:
      1.   Whenever any abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed vehicle seven (7)
years of age or newer remains unclaimed by the owner or other person legally
entitled to possession thereof for a period of thirty (30) days from the day
such vehicle was impounded, and after notice shall have been given, it shall be
the duty of the law enforcement agency to sell such vehicle at public auction
to the highest bidder for cash, the time and place of such sale to be published
at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the village, not less
than ten (10) nor more than fifteen (15) days from the expiration of said
thirty (30) days, and the agency shall also cause a notice of such sale to be
mailed to the secretary of state not less than ten (10) nor more than fifteen
(15) days from the expiration of said thirty (30) days. Said notice shall
contain a full description of the vehicle to be sold and the time and place of
sale; provided, that any such vehicle not sold at the first sale may be offered
for sale and sold at any subsequent sale without further notice or publication.
      2.   The proceeds of such sale, after paying all liens and deducting all
reasonable charges and expenses incurred in receiving, towing, keeping,
preparing and giving notices, advertising for sale or selling or otherwise
disposing of such vehicle, shall be paid to the village treasurer. (2013 Code §
6-1-28)
   B.   Restoration By Village: If, in the opinion of the law enforcement
official processing the vehicle, it has a value of two hundred dollars
($200.00) or more and can be restored to a safe operating condition, the
village may authorize its purchase as salvage, and the village shall apply to
the secretary of state for a salvage certificate as provided in the Illinois
vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 through 5/3-118.1. A
vehicle classified as an antique vehicle, expanded use antique vehicle, custom
vehicle or street rod may, however, be sold to a person desiring to restore it.
(2013 Code § 6-1-28; amd. 2016 Code)
   C.   Sales To Public Employees Prohibited: No member of the law enforcement
agency, nor any other employee of the village or any other village, city,
county or state, directly or indirectly, shall purchase or participate in the
bidding for or purchase of any vehicle offered for sale as aforesaid. (2013
Code § 6-1-28)
7-6-7: RECORDS KEPT:
The law enforcement agency shall cause to be kept an accurate record of the
description of the vehicle, including the name of the officer from whom such
vehicle was received, the officer employed to tow or deliver the same to said
authorized garage, the date and time when received, the place where found,
seized or taken possession of, the make and color of car, style or body, kind
of power, motor number, serial number, number of cylinders, year built, state
license number, if any, wheel tax license number, if any, equipment and general
description of condition, the name and address of the person redeeming said
vehicle, the date of redemption, and the manner and date of disposal of said
vehicle in case the same shall not be redeemed, together with the towing and
storage charges. Said record shall be in the form prescribed by the law
enforcement agency. It shall also be the duty of the law enforcement agency to
keep reports of all such vehicles delivered to said agency, which reports shall
be kept in the office of the agency and available for inspection by any
interested party at all reasonable hours of the day. (2013 Code § 6-1-29)
CHAPTER 7
UNLAWFUL OPERATION OF BUSES
SECTION:
7-7-1: Definitions
7-7-2: Prohibited Conduct
7-7-3: Penalty
7-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this section, the following definitions shall apply:
 
                             Any type of commercial motor vehicle with a weight
                             of at least thirty-six thousand (36,000) pounds,
BUS:                         that is designed to carry, or is actually
                             carrying, more than ten (10) individuals and
                             operating as a common carrier.
                             Bus service that operates trips involving
                             passengers disembarking in the Village on a
REGULARLY SCHEDULED SERVICE: predictable and recurring basis, following a
                             schedule that is published in advance and
                             available to the general public, and provides
                             service in exchange for paying a fare.
                             The unloading or disembarking of passengers from a
                             bus originating from outside of the Chicago -
                             Naperville - Elgin, Illinois - Indiana - Wisconsin
                             Metropolitan Statistical Area, as defined by the
UNSCHEDULED BUS STOP:        U.S. Office of Management and Budget, subject to
                             the requirements of Section
                             4-7-1 of this code, that is not operating pursuant
                             to and in accordance with an application approved
                             in accordance with that section. (Ord. O-24-02, 1-
                             23-2024)
 
7-7-2: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
   A.   Unscheduled bus stops. No person, including, but not limited to, the
owner, operator, or driver of any bus shall make an unscheduled bus stop in the
Village. This section shall not apply to motor vehicles which are not subject
to Section
4-7-1 of this code.
   B.   Operation of a bus without a Village permit. Except as otherwise
provided by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bus on any
street, place or public highway in the Village without first having obtained a
specific grant of authority to do so from the Village Board in the form of an
ordinance designating the routes, terms and conditions under which such bus may
be operated, and regulating such other matters pertaining to bus as is within
the scope of the powers granted to the Village. (Ord. O-24-02, 1-23-2024)
7-7-3: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting, or
refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the enforcement of, any of
the provisions of this section, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by
a fine of seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. The
operation of each bus contrary to the provisions of this section shall be
considered a separate offense for each day that the same is so operated. (Ord.
O-24-02, 1-23-2024)
CHAPTER 8
SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES USED IN THE COMMISSION OF AN OFFENSE
SECTION:
7-8-1: Definitions
7-8-2: Vehicle Use During Commission Of Offense
7-8-3: Notice Of Seizure And Impoundment
7-8-4: Preliminary Hearing
7-8-5: Final Administrative Hearing
7-8-6: Appeal
7-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meaning
ascribed to them as follows:
 
HEARING OFFICER: An attorney licensed in the State of Illinois for a minimum of
                 three years.
OWNER:           A person who holds legal title to a motor vehicle or the right
                 of possession of the vehicle. (Ord. O-24-14, 7-16-2024)
 
7-8-2: VEHICLE USE DURING COMMISSION OF OFFENSE:
   A.   Vehicles Used During Commission Of Offense: Any motor vehicle operated
or used, with the express or implied permission of the registered owner of
record or lessee (as registered with the Secretary of State, State of
Illinois), during the commission of or in furtherance of any offense or
violation set forth in subsection B of this section, shall be subject to
seizure and impoundment by the Village, and the owner of record or lessee of
said vehicle may be liable to the Village for an administrative fee in the
amount noted in subsection B below, in addition to any towing and storage fees
as hereinafter provided.
   B.   Violations Or Offenses Subject To Seizure And Impoundment:
      1.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized and
forfeited pursuant to section 36-1 of the Illinois Criminal Code of 2012; or
      2.   Driving under the influence of alcohol, another drug or drugs, an
intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof, in violation of
section 11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code; or
      3.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, a felony or in violation of the Illinois Cannabis Control
Act; or
      4.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act; or
      5.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, any of the following weapons-related offenses: possession of
explosives or explosive or incendiary devices (720 ILCS 5/20-2); unlawful use
of a weapon (720 ILCS 5/24-1); unlawful use or possession of weapons by felons
(720 ILCS 5/24-1.1); aggravated discharge of a firearm (720 ILCS 5/24-1.2);
aggravated discharge of a machine gun or a firearm equipped with a device
designed or used for silencing the report of a firearm (720 ILCS 5/24-1.2-5);
reckless discharge of a firearm (720 ILCS 5/24-1.5); aggravated unlawful use of
a weapon (720 ILCS 5/24-1.6); unlawful use of firearm projectiles (720 ILCS 5/
24-2.1); manufacture, sale or transfer of bullets or shells represented to be
armor piercing bullets, dragon’s breath shotgun shells, bolo shells, or
flechette shells (720 ILCS 5/24-2.2); unlawful sale of firearms (720 ILCS 5/24-
3); unlawful possession of firearms and firearm ammunition (720 ILCS 5/24-3.1);
unlawful discharge of firearm projectiles (720 ILCS 5/24-3.2); unlawful sale or
delivery of firearms on the premises of any school (720 ILCS 5/24-3.3);
unlawful sale of firearms by liquor licensee (720 ILCS 5/24-3.4); unlawful
purchase of a firearm (720 ILCS 5/24-3.5); and armed violence (720 ILCS 5/33A-
2); or
      6.   Driving while a driver’s license, permit, or privilege to operate a
motor vehicle is suspended or revoked pursuant to section 6-303 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code; except that vehicles shall not be subjected to seizure or
impoundment if the suspension is for an unpaid citation (parking or moving) or
due to failure to comply with emission testing; or
      7.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting, possessing, or
attempting to solicit or possess cannabis or a controlled substance, as defined
by the Cannabis Control Act or the Illinois Controlled Substances Act; or
      8.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle with an expired driver’s
license, in violation of section 6-101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, if the
period of expiration is greater than one year; or
      9.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle without ever having been issued
a driver’s license or permit, in violation of section 6-101 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, or operating a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a
driver’s license or permit due to a person’s age; or
      10.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a
warrant has been issued by a Circuit Clerk in Illinois for failing to answer
charges that the driver violated section 6-101, 6-303, or 11-501 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code; or
      11.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of article 16 or 16A of the Illinois
Criminal Code of 1961 or the Illinois Criminal Code of 2012; or
      12.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit the offense of aggravated fleeing or attempting to elude a
peace officer. The offense of aggravated fleeing or attempting to elude a peace
officer is committed by any driver or operator of a motor vehicle who, having
been given a visual or audible signal by a peace officer directing such driver
or operator to bring his or her vehicle to a stop, willfully fails or refuses
to obey such direction, increases his or her speed, extinguishes his or her
lights, or otherwise flees or attempts to elude the officer, and either: (1)
drives at a rate of speed at least 21 miles per hour over the legal speed
limit; (2) causes bodily injury to any individual; (3) causes damage in excess
of $300 to property; (4) involves disobedience of two or more official traffic
control devices; or (5) involves the concealing or altering of the vehicle’s
registration plate or digital registration plate. The signal given by the peace
officer may be by hand, voice, siren, or red or blue light; provided that the
officer giving such signal shall be in police uniform, and, if driving a
vehicle, such vehicle shall display illuminated oscillating, rotating or
flashing red or blue lights which, when used in conjunction with an audible
horn or siren, would indicate the vehicle to be an official police vehicle.
Such requirement shall not preclude the use of amber or white oscillating,
rotating or flashing lights in conjunction with red or blue oscillating,
rotating or flashing lights as required in Section 12-215 of Chapter 12 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/12-215).
      13.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, any other misdemeanor or felony offense in violation of the
Illinois Criminal Code of 1961 or the Illinois Criminal Code of 2012; or
      14.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in violation of section 11-503
of the Illinois Vehicle Code:
         a.   While the vehicle is part of a funeral procession; or
.         b.   In a manner that interferes with a funeral procession.
      15.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle when the vehicle's registration
has been canceled, suspended or revoked contrary to Section 3-702 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/3-702).
   C.   Existing Regulations Not Abrogated:
      1.   This chapter shall be in addition to and shall not replace or
otherwise abrogate any existing State or Federal law or Village ordinance that
relates to the seizure and/or impoundment of motor vehicles, and any penalty
provided in this chapter shall be in addition to any and all penalties that may
be assessed or imposed by a court for violation of any criminal offense or
local ordinance violation offense.
      2.   The provisions of this chapter shall apply only to motor vehicles
seized and impounded for offenses set forth in subsection B of this section.
   D.   Provisions Inapplicable If Vehicle Was Stolen: The provisions of this
chapter are inapplicable if at the time of the offense the vehicle used in the
violation was stolen or otherwise operated without the knowledge and express or
implied consent of the registered owner, and verified proof of the theft was
provided to the Village.
   E.   Administrative Fee Applicable to Vehicle Impoundment: The owner of
record or lessee of any such vehicle shall be liable to the Village for an
administrative penalty of five hundred dollars ($500) plus any applicable
towing and storage fees, except as noted below:
       1.   7-8-2B(4) - one thousand, five hundred dollars ($1,500)
       2.   7-8-2B(5) - two thousand dollars ($2,000)
       3.   7-8-2B(12) - one thousand dollars ($1,000). (Ord. O-24-14, 7-16-
2024; amd. Ord. O-25-07, 2-4-2025)
7-8-3: NOTICE OF SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT:
   A.   Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle
is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this chapter, and the police
officer has effected an arrest for any of the offenses set forth in subsection
7-8-2B of this chapter, the police officer shall provide for the towing of the
vehicle to a facility authorized by the Chief of Police. Prior to the vehicle
being towed, the police officer shall notify any person identifying himself as
the owner or lessee of the vehicle or any person who is found to be in control
of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation, and who is physically
present at the scene, that the vehicle will be seized and impounded, and that
the owner or lessee has the right to request a preliminary vehicle impoundment
hearing and participate in an administrative hearing. If the owner or lessee is
present at the scene, the police officer shall inform the owner or lessee that
he/she has a right to make a written request for a preliminary vehicle
impoundment hearing within forty-eight hours of the seizure in accordance with
the provisions of section
7-8-4 of this chapter. If the owner or lessee of the vehicle is not present at
the scene, the Village shall send the owner or lessee written notice of the
seizure and impoundment by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the
address listed on the owner or lessee’s vehicle registration within twenty-four
hours of impoundment, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, or Village holidays. Said
notice shall inform the owner or lessee that he/she has the right to request a
preliminary vehicle impoundment hearing within forty-eight hours of the owner
or lessee’s receipt of the notice in accordance with section
7-8-4 of this chapter. The Village shall also provide notice that said motor
vehicle shall be impounded pending the completion of the hearings provided for
in this chapter, unless the owner or lessee of the motor vehicle or a
lienholder of record posts with the Village a cash bond as set forth in section
7-8-5 of this chapter.
   B.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, the
arresting police officer may release the vehicle prior to towing if the vehicle
subject to seizure and impoundment was not owned by the person placed under
arrest and the registered owner or person legally authorized to possess the
vehicle shall arrive at the scene of the arrest prior to the actual removal or
towing of the vehicle and the lawful owner or person lawfully entitled to
possession of the vehicle possesses a valid operator’s license, proof of
ownership or registration, proof of liability insurance and would not, as
determined by the arresting police officer, indicate a lack of ability to
operate the motor vehicle in a safe manner, or who would otherwise, by
operating the motor vehicle, be in violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
   C.   Said vehicle shall be impounded pending the completion of the
preliminary vehicle impoundment hearing provided for in section
7-8-4 of this chapter, unless the owner or lessee of the vehicle or a
lienholder posts with the Village a cash bond, or pays by money order or
certified check to the Village of Campton Hills the amount of the specific
administrative fee noted in subsection
7-8-2E above, plus any accrued towing and storage charges. (Ord. O-24-14, 7-16-
2024)
7-8-4: PRELIMINARY HEARING:
If the owner of record or lessee of a vehicle seized and impounded pursuant to
this chapter desires to appeal the seizure, said owner or lessee must make a
request for a preliminary vehicle impoundment hearing within forty eight hours
of the seizure, or within forty eight hours of receipt of notice by the owner
or lessee of the seizure if the owner or lessee was not present at the time of
the seizure. Said request shall be in writing and filed with the Chief of
Police or his designee who shall conduct such preliminary hearing within forty-
eight hours after receipt of the request, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, or
Village holidays. All interested persons shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to be heard at the preliminary vehicle impoundment hearing. The
formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing, and hearsay evidence
shall be admissible only if it is the type commonly relied upon by reasonably
prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. If, after the hearing, the
Chief of Police or his designee determines by a preponderance of the evidence
that the vehicle was properly subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to
this chapter, he shall order the continued impoundment of the vehicle as
provided in this section, unless the owner or lessee of the vehicle or a
lienholder posts with the Village a cash bond, or pays by money order,
certified check, or approved credit card service the amount of the specific
administrative fee noted in subsection
7-8-2E above, plus any applicable towing and storage fees. If the Chief of
Police or his designee determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the
vehicle was improperly seized and impounded pursuant to this chapter, the
vehicle will be returned without penalty or other fees. (Ord. O-24-14, 7-16-
2024)
7-8-5: FINAL ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:
   A.   Unless the owner or lessee of the motor vehicle prevails at a
preliminary vehicle impoundment hearing held pursuant to section
7-8-4 of this chapter, or the owner or lessee affirmatively waives his/her
right to a final administrative hearing, within ten business days after a motor
vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to this chapter, the Village shall
notify the owner of record, or lessee and any lienholders of record by personal
service or first class mail, of the date, time and location of a hearing that
will be conducted pursuant to this section. The notice shall state the fees
that may be imposed, and that a motor vehicle not released by cash bond or
other form of payment acceptable to the Village may be sold or disposed of by
the Village in accordance with applicable law.
   B.   The final administrative hearing shall be conducted and held, unless
the owner or lessee prevailed at a preliminary vehicle impoundment hearing,
affirmatively waives the hearing, or the hearing is continued by order of the
Hearing Officer, no later than forty-five days after the motor vehicle was
seized. The hearing shall be conducted and the case decided by a Hearing
Officer appointed by the Village. All interested persons shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to be heard at the hearing. At any time prior to the
hearing date, the Hearing Officer may, at the request of either party, direct
witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing. The formal rules of
evidence will not apply at the hearing and hearsay evidence shall be admissible
if it is the type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the
conduct of their affairs. If, after the hearing, the Hearing Officer determines
by a preponderance of the evidence that the motor vehicle, operated with the
permission, express or implied of the owner or lessee, was properly subject to
seizure and impoundment pursuant to this chapter, the Hearing Officer shall
enter an order finding the owner of record or lessee of the motor vehicle
civilly liable to the Village for an administrative fee in an amount as
specifically noted in subsection
7-8-2E above, and requiring the vehicle to continue to be impounded until the
administrative fee is paid to the Village, plus any applicable towing and
storage fees. If the owner of record or lessee fails to appear at the hearing,
the Hearing Officer shall enter a default order in favor of the Village, a copy
of which shall be sent to the registered owner or lessee via certified mail,
return receipt requested. If a cash bond or other acceptable form of payment
has been posted, that amount shall be applied to the amount owed. If the
Hearing Officer finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was
improperly seized and impounded pursuant to this chapter, the Hearing Officer
shall order the immediate return of the owner or lessee’s vehicle or cash bond
without fees. All orders issued by the Hearing Officer shall be in writing.
   C.   If an administrative fee is imposed pursuant to section
7-8-2E of this chapter, such fee shall constitute a debt due and owing to the
Village. If a cash bond or other form of monetary payment acceptable to the
Village has been posted pursuant to this chapter, such amount shall be applied
to the administrative fee. If a vehicle has been impounded when such an
administrative fee is imposed, the Village may seek to obtain a judgment on the
debt and enforce such judgment against the vehicle as provided by law. Except
as provided otherwise in this section, a vehicle shall continue to be impounded
until the administrative fee is paid to the Village and any applicable towing
and storage fees are paid to the tower, in which case possession of the vehicle
shall be given to the person who is legally entitled to possess the vehicle, or
the vehicle is sold or otherwise disposed of to satisfy a judgment to enforce a
lien as provided by law. If the administrative fee and other applicable fees
are not paid within thirty-five days after an administrative fee is imposed
against an owner of record or lessee who defaults by failing to appear at the
hearing, the vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be disposed of in the
manner provided by law for the disposition of unclaimed vehicles. In all other
cases, if the administrative fee and other applicable fees are not paid within
thirty five days after the expiration of time at which administrative review of
the Hearing Officer’s determination may be sought, or within thirty days after
an action seeking administrative review has been resolved in favor of the
Village, whichever is applicable, the vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and
shall be disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of
unclaimed vehicles under the Illinois Vehicle Code. Unless stayed by a court of
competent jurisdiction, any fine, penalty, or administrative fee imposed under
this chapter which remains unpaid in whole or in part after the expiration of
the deadline for seeking judicial review under the Administrative Review Act
may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
   D.   Except as otherwise specifically provided by law or if the Hearing
Officer found by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was
improperly seized and impounded, no owner, lienholder, or other person shall be
legally entitled to take possession of a vehicle impounded under this chapter
until the administrative fee and other applicable fees under this chapter have
been paid in full. However, whenever a person with a lien of record against an
impounded vehicle has commenced foreclosure proceedings, possession of the
vehicle shall be given to that person if he or she agrees in writing to refund
to the Village the amount of the net proceeds of any foreclosure sale, less any
amounts required to pay all lienholders of record, not to exceed the
administrative penalty, plus the applicable fees.
   E.   If the Hearing Officer finds that the Village exceeded its authority
under this chapter in the seizure and impoundment of a motor vehicle, the
Village shall be liable to the owner of record or lessee of the motor vehicle
for the cost of storage fees and reasonable attorney fees. (Ord. O-24-14, 7-16-
2024)
7-8-6: APPEAL:
Any party may appeal a final decision of the Hearing Officer pursuant to the
provision of the Illinois Administrative Review Act.
(Ord. O-24-14, 7-16-2024)
CHAPTER 9
LOW-SPEED ELECTRIC BICYCLES AND LOW-SPEED ELECTRIC SCOOTERS
SECTION:
7-9-1: Definitions
7-9-2: Low-Speed Electric Bicycles
7-9-3: Low-Speed Electric Scooters
7-9-4: Penalty
7-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
LOW-SPEED ELECTRIC BICYCLE: A bicycle equipped with fully operable pedals and
an electric motor of less than 750 watts that meets the requirements of one of
the following classes:
   A.   “Class 1 Low-Speed Electric Bicycle” means a low-speed electric bicycle
equipped with a motor that provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling
and that ceases to provide assistance when the bicycle reaches a speed of 20
miles per hour.
   B.   “Class 2 Low-Speed Electric Bicycle” means a low-speed electric bicycle
equipped with a motor that may be used exclusively to propel the bicycle and
that is not capable of providing assistance when the bicycle reaches a speed of
20 miles per hour.
   C.   “Class 3 Low-Speed Electric Bicycle” means a low-speed electric bicycle
equipped with a motor that provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling
and that ceases to provide assistance when the bicycle reaches a speed of 28
miles per hour.
   A “Low-Speed Electric Bicycle” is not a moped or a motor-driven cycle, as
those terms are defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code.
LOW-SPEED ELECTRIC SCOOTER: A device weighing less than 100 pounds, with 2 or 3
wheels, handlebars, and a floorboard that can be stood upon while riding, that
is solely powered by an electric motor and human power, and whose maximum
speed, with or without human propulsion, is no more than 20 miles per hour.
   A “Low-Speed Electric Scooter” does not include a moped or motor-driven
cycle, as those terms are defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code.
(Ord. O-25-25, 9-16-2025)
7-9-2: LOW-SPEED ELECTRIC BICYCLES:
   A.   The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this Section.
   B.   Except as otherwise provided in this Section, the provisions of the
Illinois Vehicle Code that apply to bicycles also apply to Low-Speed Electric
Bicycles.
   C.   Except as may be prohibited by the Illinois Vehicle Code, all Class 1
and Class 2 Low-Speed Electric Bicycles shall be permitted to operate in the
same designated Village-owned streets and paths as other bicycles.
   D.   Class 3 Low-Speed Electric Bicycles may only be operated on Village
streets and other locations reserved for the use of motor-driven vehicles, and
may not be operated on Village-owned or privately-owned paths.
   E.   Low-Speed Electric Bicycles are prohibited from use on any Village-
owned sidewalk.
   F.   Any operator of a Class 3 Low-Speed Electric Bicycle must be at least
sixteen (16) years of age.
   G.   All persons operating, or riding upon, a Low-Speed Electric Bicycle
must wear a helmet.
   H.   All Low-Speed Electric Bicycles must display a label, as required by
625 ILCS 5/11-1517(c), stating the wattage, top assisted speed, and
classification of the Low-Speed Electric Bicycle. No person shall knowingly
tamper or modify the speed capability or engagement of a Low-Speed Electric
Bicycle without replacing the label required under this Subsection H.
(Ord. O-25-25, 9-16-2025)
7-9-3: LOW-SPEED ELECTRIC SCOOTERS:
   A.   The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this Section.
   B.   Low-Speed Electric Scooters may not be operated on a highway with a
posted speed limit in excess of 35 miles per hour, or on any other Village-
owned streets or paths displaying signage specifically prohibiting use.
   C.   Any operator of a Low-Speed Electric Scooter must be at least eighteen
(18) years of age and must wear a helmet.
   D.   Every Low-Speed Electric Scooter, when in use at nighttime, shall be
equipped with a lamp on the front that emits a white light visible from a
distance of at least 500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear
that is visible from all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when
directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle, except
that a lamp emitting a steady or flashing red light visible from a distance of
500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to or instead of the red
reflector.
   E.   A Low-Speed Electric Scooter shall not be equipped with, nor shall any
person use upon a Low-Speed Electric Scooter, any siren. This subsection E.
does not apply to a Low-Speed Electric Scooter that is a police vehicle or fire
department vehicle.
   F.   Every Low-Speed Electric Scooter shall be equipped with a brake that
will adequately control movement of and stop and hold the Low-Speed Electric
Scooter.
   G.   A person may not operate a Low-Speed Electric Scooter while carrying
any package, bundle, or article that prevents the operator from keeping at
least one hand upon the handlebars.
   H.   A person may not use a Low-Speed Electric Scooter to carry more than
one person at a time. A person operating a Low-Speed Electric Scooter may not
attach himself or herself or the Low-Speed Electric Scooter to any other
vehicle being operated on the public right-of-way.
   I.   A person operating a Low-Speed Electric Scooter must adhere to all
applicable traffic laws, including yielding to pedestrians and obeying traffic
signals and signs.
   J.   A person may not operate a Low-Speed Electric Scooter upon any public
way in the Village while under the influence of alcohol or any drug.
   K.   Every Low-Speed Electric Scooter shall be well-maintained and in good
operating condition.
(Ord. O-25-25, 9-16-2025)
7-9-4: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter shall be guilty
of a petty misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not less than
seventy-five dollars ($75.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00).
   B.   To the extent that any violation of this Chapter also constitutes a
violation of a criminal statute of the State of Illinois, the violator shall
also be subject to criminal prosecution.
(Ord. O-25-25, 9-16-2025)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
SECTION:
8-1-1: Purpose; Scope; Interpretation
8-1-2: Definitions
8-1-3: Annual Registration Required
8-1-4: Permit Requirements
8-1-5: Insurance; Indemnity; Security
8-1-6: Utility Change Of Ownership, Identity Or Legal Status
8-1-7: General Construction Standards
8-1-8: Public Safety And Traffic Control
8-1-9: Location Of Facilities
8-1-10: Construction Methods And Materials
8-1-11: Vegetation Control
8-1-12: Removal, Relocation Or Modifications
8-1-13: Cleanup And Restoration
8-1-14: Maintenance And Repairs
8-1-15: Variances
8-1-16: Penalties
8-1-1: PURPOSE; SCOPE; INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities on rights- of-way within the Village
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the Village
rights-of-way and the Village as a whole.
   B.   Scope: This chapter applies to all facilities on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within the public rights-of-way within the jurisdiction
of the Village. A facility lawfully established prior to the effective date
hereof may continue to be maintained, repaired and operated by the wireless
provider or utility as presently constructed and located, except as may be
otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.
   C.   Franchises, Licenses Or Similar Agreements:
      1.   The Village, in its discretion and as limited by law, may require
utilities to enter into a franchise, license or similar agreement for the
privilege of locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under,
across, or within the Village rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by
law to enter into such an agreement may request that the Village enter into
such an agreement. In such an agreement, the Village may provide for terms and
conditions inconsistent with this chapter.
      2.   In the event that a utility other than a telecommunications provider
has a franchise, license or similar agreement with the Village, such franchise,
license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such
agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
      3.   In the event of any conflict with, or inconsistency between, the
provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any franchise, license or
similar agreement between the Village and any telecommunications provider, the
provisions of such franchise, license or similar agreement shall govern and
control during the term of such agreement and any lawful renewal or extension
thereof.
   D.   Conflicting Provisions:
      1.   This chapter supersedes all provisions or parts of provisions
adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such
conflict.
      2.   In the event that applicable Federal or State laws or regulations
conflict with the requirements of this chapter, the utility shall comply with
the requirements of this chapter to the maximum extent possible without
violating Federal or State laws or regulations.
   E.   Sound Engineering Judgment: The Village shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this chapter and may exercise the power described
in this chapter to vary the standards, conditions, and requirements expressed
in this chapter when the Village so determines. Nothing herein shall be
construed to limit the ability of the Village to regulate its rights-of-way for
the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. O-18-11, 7-17-
2018)
8-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the
words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed
to it in 92 Illinois Administrative Code section 530.30, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials.
ANTENNA: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals used in the provision of any type of wireless
communications services.
APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench
or pit.
BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion
of a pipe or electrical conductor.
CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as:
carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear runout area.
The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and on the
roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO "Roadside Design
Guide".
COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
CODE: The Village Code of the Village of Campton Hills.
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
utility pole.
COMMUNICATION SERVICE: Cable service, as defined in 47 USC 522(6), as amended;
information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; mobile
service, as defined in 47 USC 153(33), as amended; or wireless service other
than mobile service.
COMMUNICATION SERVICES PROVIDER: A cable operator, as defined in 47 USC 522(5),
as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as
amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 USC 153(51), as
amended; or a wireless provider.
CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of
facilities.
COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right- of-way lines of a
right-of-way.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY: Any work that obstructs the right- of-way or causes a
material adverse effect on the use of the right-of-way for its intended use.
Such work may include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other
cutting; placement (whether temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment,
devices, or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of
the soil, and shall not include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a
manner that does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of
the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
ENGINEER: The Village Engineer or his or her designee.
EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to
facilitate construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare
by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including track and
rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, communications and video cables and
wires, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, small wireless
facilities, as defined in this chapter, and appurtenances thereto) located on,
over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights- of-way under this
chapter, except those owned by the Village.
FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel
facility, such as an antenna, monopole, utility pole, transformer, pump, or
meter station.
FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to
the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the
Village Engineer to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health
or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the
environment including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials,
petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological)
agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or
toxic under any Federal or State law, statute or regulation.
HIGHWAY: A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic including
rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land and
improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage
structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois Highway Code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101
et seq., as amended from time to time.
HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK: A building, property, or site, or group
of buildings, properties, or sites that are either: a) listed in the National
Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the
Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been delegated the
authority by the Federal agency to list properties and determine their
eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with section VI.D.1.a.i
through section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at
47 CFR part 1, appendix C; or b) designated as a locally landmarked building,
property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the Village
pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified
Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or
where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State
Historic Preservation Office is pending.
IDOT: Illinois Department of Transportation.
ILCC: Illinois Commerce Commission.
JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with
or without boring.
JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create
a cavity ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or
more utilities.
MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial
highways.
MONOPOLE: A structure composed of a single spire, pole or tower designed and
principally used to support antennas or related equipment and that is not a
utility pole.
MUNICIPALLY-OWNED INFRASTRUCTURE: Infrastructure in the public right-of-way
within the boundaries of the Village, including, but not limited to,
streetlights, traffic signals, towers, structures, or buildings owned, operated
or maintained by the Village.
OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under rights-of-way.
PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the
centerline of a right-of-way.
PARKWAY: Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by a street or sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to a facility or
for the construction of a facility.
PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to this
chapter.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal slurry.
PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that
which is simply convenient.
PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the Village. If
no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.
PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at the local, State or Federal level.
RESTORATION: The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other area
disrupted by the construction of a facility.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly
used for utility purposes, including utility easements in which the Village has
the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of
facilities other than those of the Village. "Right-of-way" shall not include
any real or personal Village property that is not specifically described in
this definition and shall not include Village buildings, fixtures, and other
structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the
right-of-way.
ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for its use or consumption and not
for sale.
SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to this chapter.
SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A wireless facility that meets both of the following
qualifications: a) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than
six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed
elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an
imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and b) all other
wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the
facility is cumulatively no more than twenty five (25) cubic feet in volume.
The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the
calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services.
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted
engineering principles, practices and experience.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: A. Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange
service, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, or any other
transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between
or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also include wireless telecommunications
as defined in the Illinois Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee
Act, 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 635/1 et seq.
   B.   "Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which
computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code,
and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission.
   C.   "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of telecommunications
by a telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the
service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail consumer who originates
or terminates the end to end communications. Retailer access charges, right of
access charges, charges for use of intercompany facilities, and all
telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and used as a component
of, or integrated into, end to end telecommunications service shall not be
included in gross charges as sales for resale.
   D.   "Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services
through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47
USC section 521 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the Village
through an open video system as defined in the rules of the Federal
Communications Commission (47 CFR section 76.1550 et seq.), as now or hereafter
amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person that installs, owns, operates or
controls facilities in the public right-of-way used or designed to be used to
transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in making
sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any "facility" that is
not a small wireless facility as defined in this chapter.
UTILITY POLE: An upright pole designed and used to support electric cables,
telephone cables, telecommunication cables, cable service cables, which are
used to provide lighting, traffic control, signage, or a similar function.
VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
VILLAGE: The Village of Campton Hills.
WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including:
a) equipment associated with wireless communications; and b) radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration.
"Wireless facility" includes small wireless facilities. "Wireless facility"
does not include: a) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which
the equipment is collocated; or b) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or
fiber optic cable that is between wireless support structure or utility poles
or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to
or directly associated with an antenna.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the Village.
WIRELESS PROVIDER: A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless service
provider.
WIRELESS SERVICES: Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: A person who provides wireless services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. "Wireless support structure" does not include a utility pole. (Ord.
O-18-11, 7-17-2018)
8-1-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every wireless provider or utility that occupies rights-of-way within the
Village shall register on January 1 of each year with the engineer, providing
the registrant's name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy
numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the
registrant in connection with emergencies involving the registrant's facilities
in the right-of-way and a twenty four (24) hour telephone number for each such
person, and evidence of insurance as required in subsection
8-1-5A of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance. A
telecommunications provider that has registered under this section shall be
deemed to have satisfied the registration requirement under this chapter. (Ord.
O-18-11, 7-17-2018)
8-1-4: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required; Exemptions: No person shall construct (as defined in
section
8-1-2 of this chapter) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under,
across, or within any Village right-of-way which: 1) changes the location of
the facility; 2) adds a new facility; 3) disrupts the "right-of-way" (as
defined in section
8-1-2 of this chapter); or 4) materially increases the amount of area or space
occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within
the right-of-way, without first filing an application with the Village Engineer
and obtaining a permit from the Village therefor, except as otherwise provided
in this chapter. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance
of service connections to customer premises where there will be no disruption
of the right-of-way.
No application, approval, or permit shall be required for routine maintenance,
the replacement of small wireless facilities that are substantially similar,
the same size or smaller, if the wireless provider notifies the Village at
least ten (10) days prior to the planned replacement, or the installation,
placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro wireless facilities
that are suspended on cables strung between existing utility poles in
compliance with applicable safety codes. The Village may require a permit to
work within the right-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or
that require lane closures.
   B.   Application For Permit:
      1.   All applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall be filed
on a form provided by the Village and shall be filed in such number of
duplicate copies as the Village may designate. The applicant may designate
those portions of its application materials that it reasonably believes contain
proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by
clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly. The application for a
small wireless facility, along with supporting information and notices, must be
submitted to the Village Engineer.
      2.   The application shall be made by the wireless provider or utility or
its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a minimum, the
following:
         a.   The wireless provider's or utility's name, address and telephone
and telecopy numbers;
         b.   The applicant's name and address, if different than the wireless
provider or utility, its telephone and telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and
interest in the work;
         c.   The names, addresses, telephone numbers and e-mail addresses of
all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with respect to
the application;
         d.   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
         e.   Evidence that the wireless provider or utility has placed on file
with the Village:
            (1)   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the "Illinois Manual
On Uniform Traffic Control Devices", to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
            (2)   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature
of potential emergencies including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the Village and shall
promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with
ILCC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with
this subsection unless the Village finds that additional information or
assurances are needed;
         f.   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
         g.   Evidence of insurance as required in subsection
8-1-5A of this chapter;
         h.   Evidence of posting of the Security Fund as required by this
chapter;
         i.   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
chapter; and
         j.   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
Village.
      3.   In addition to the requirements of subsection B2 of this section,
the permit application shall include the following items as applicable to the
specific facility that is the subject of the permit application:
         a.   In the case of new electric power, communications or natural gas
distribution system installation, evidence that any "certificate of public
convenience and necessity" has been issued by the ILCC that the applicant is
required by law or has elected to obtain;
         b.   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class, and operating pressures;
         c.   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies,
have been satisfied;
         d.   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land
and water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control, and the Metropolitan Water
Reclamation District (other local or State entities with jurisdiction), have
been satisfied;
         e.   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or
types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the
design standard to be followed; or
         f.   In the case of small wireless facilities, include the following:
            (1)   Drawings and site plans for each proposed small wireless
facility covered by the application;
            (2)   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or
utility pole will be installed and photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings;
            (3)   A site specific structural analysis and engineering drawing
for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application, prepared
and stamped by a professional engineer, which demonstrates the utility pole or
Municipally- owned infrastructure is safely capable of supporting the small
wireless facility in all reasonably foreseeable weather conditions without
creating a risk to public health and safety. The structural analysis will also
describe the method by which the facility is designed to fail and demonstrate
that any structural failure to the facility shall not cause harm to any
residential structure;
            (4)   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all
other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
            (5)   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of
each small wireless facility covered by the application;
            (6)   Certification that the collocation complies with this
chapter; and
            (7)   Applications must include the screening and stealth
concealment methods used for each proposed small wireless facility covered by
the application.
      4.   Throughout the entire permit application review period and the
construction period authorized by the permit, any amendments to information
contained in a permit application shall be submitted by the applicant in
writing to the Village within thirty (30) days after the change necessitating
the amendment.
   C.   Fees; Exemptions: Unless otherwise provided by a franchise, license or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall
be accompanied by a fee as set forth in section
3-3-1 of this Code except that for small wireless facilities, the following
fees shall apply:
      1.   All applications for the collocation of a single small wireless
facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be
accompanied by a fee in the amount of six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00). All
applications for the collocation of more than one small wireless facility on an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be accompanied by a
fee in the amount of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) for each small
wireless facility addressed in said application. An application for the
installation of a small wireless facility that will require a new utility pole
must be accompanied by a fee in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
      2.   Applications for small wireless facilities may be submitted on a
consolidated basis provided they involve the same type of small wireless
facility and the same type of structure. The Village may, at its discretion,
remove small wireless facility collocations from the consolidated application
and treat them separately for purposes of deeming the application incomplete or
denied.
The Village shall charge an annual recurring rate for the collocation of small
wireless facilities on Municipally- owned infrastructure located in its right-
of-way equal to either two hundred dollars ($200.00) per utility pole, or the
actual, direct, and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use of
space on the Village utility pole, whichever is greater. If the Village elects
to charge the actual, direct, and reasonable costs related to the wireless
provider's use of space on the Municipally-owned infrastructure, it shall adopt
a fee schedule on an annual basis.
   D.   Action On Applications:
      1.   Application Deadlines For Small Wireless Facilities: Applications
are deemed complete if the Village does not notify the applicant otherwise
within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application. If the application to
collocate a small wireless facility is to be placed on an existing utility
pole, the Village will notify the applicant of its approval or denial within
ninety (90) days. If the Village fails to notify the applicant within that
timeframe, the application will be deemed approved. If the application to
collocate a small wireless facility requires the installation of a new utility
pole, the Village will notify the applicant of its approval or denial within
one hundred twenty (120) days. If the Village fails to notify the applicant
within that timeframe, the application will be deemed approved.
      2.   Review Of Applications; Grant Or Denial Of Permit: Completed permit
applications, containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the
Village Engineer on a nondiscriminatory basis. If the application does not
conform to the requirements of all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules,
or regulations that concern public safety, the Village Engineer shall notify
the applicant of the basis for a denial, including specific code provisions
upon which the denial was based. The applicant may cure the deficiencies and
resubmit a revised application without paying additional application fees. If
the Village Engineer is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the
requirements of this chapter and all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules,
and regulations, the Village Engineer shall issue a permit therefor as soon as
practicable. When reviewing applications for small wireless facilities, the
Village will approve or deny the revised application within thirty (30) days
after the applicant resubmits the application or it will be deemed approved.
      3.   Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications
Retailers' Applications:
         a.   Pursuant to section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the Village
that it intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for
the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of
plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the
purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the Village not less than ten (10) days prior to
the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty (30)
days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The Village
Engineer shall specify the portion of the right- of-way upon which the facility
may be placed, used and constructed.
         b.   In the event that the Village Engineer fails to provide such
specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either: 1)
ten (10) days after service of notice to the Village by the telecommunications
retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction; or
2) twenty five (25) days after service of notice by the telecommunications
retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new construction, the
telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under
this chapter.
         c.   Upon the provision of such specification by the Village, where a
permit is required for work by this chapter, the telecommunications retailer
shall submit to the Village an application for a permit and any and all plans,
specifications and documentation available regarding the facility to be
constructed. Such application shall be subject to the requirements of
subsection D2 of this section.
   E.   Effect Of Permit:
      1.   A permit from the Village authorizes a permittee to undertake only
certain activities in accordance with this chapter on Village rights-of-way,
and does not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to
impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the public
rights-of-way.
      2.   The issuance of a permit by the Village does not excuse the
permittee from complying with other requirements of the Village and all
applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
      3.   Collocation of small wireless facilities must be completed within
one hundred eighty (180) days after the issuance of the permit. If collocation
is not complete, the permit will be void. Permits for small wireless facilities
are valid for five (5) years from the time of issuance.
   F.   Revised Permit Drawings: In the event that the actual locations of any
facilities deviate in any material respect from the locations identified in the
plans, drawings and specifications submitted with the permit application, the
permittee shall submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the Village within
ninety (90) days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised
drawings or plans shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual
facilities deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation
from the permit also deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall
be treated as a request for variance in accordance with this chapter. If the
Village denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall either
remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the facility so that it
conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor.
   G.   Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit:
      1.   Grounds: The Village may revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant
to this chapter for one or more of the following reasons:
         a.   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
         b.   Noncompliance with this chapter;
         c.   Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public
rights-of-way presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health,
safety, or welfare; or
         d.   Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
      2.   Notice Requirements: The Village shall send written notice of its
intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter stating
the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the alternatives
available to the permittee under this chapter.
      3.   Options Of Permittee:
         a.   Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the Village, the permittee shall have the following options:
            (1)   Immediately provide the Village with evidence that no cause
exists for the revocation or suspension;
            (2)   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the Village, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the Village within five (5) working days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation; or
            (3)   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within the public rights-of-way and restore the
rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the Village, providing written proof of
such removal to the Village within ten (10) days after receipt of the written
notice of revocation.
         b.   The Village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend
the time periods provided in this subsection G3.
      4.   Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of
revocation or suspension, the Village may issue a stop work order immediately
upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection
G1 of this section.
      5.   Failure Or Refusal Of Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails to
comply with the provisions of subsection G3 of this section, the Village or its
designee may, at the option of the Village: a) correct the deficiencies; b)
upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or c) after not less than thirty (30) days'
notice to the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem them
abandoned and property of the Village. The permittee shall be liable in all
events to the Village for all costs of removal. (Ord. O-18-11, 7-17-2018)
8-1-5: INSURANCE; INDEMNITY; SECURITY:
   A.   Insurance Requirements:
      1.   Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license or similar agreement, each wireless provider or utility occupying a
right-of-way or constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure and
maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the wireless
provider or utility as named insured and naming the Village, and its elected
and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees, as additional
insureds on the policies listed in subsections A1a(1) and A1a(2) of this
section.
         a.   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to
as X, C, and U coverages) and products- completed operations coverage with
limits not less than:
            (1)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or
death to each person;
            (2)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage
resulting from any one accident; and
            (3)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of
liability;
         b.   Property insurance for replacement costs against all risks; and
         c.   Workers' compensation with statutory limits.
      2.   Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this
subsection may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies.
Any excess or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying
insurance on a following form basis such that when any loss covered by the
primary policy exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or
umbrella policy becomes effective to cover such loss.
      3.   Copies Required: The wireless provider or utility shall provide
copies of any of the policies required by this subsection to the Village within
ten (10) days following receipt of a written request therefor from the Village.
      4.   Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages:
         a.   The insurance policies required by this subsection shall contain
the following endorsement:
            It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be
canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after
receipt by the Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt
requested, of a written notice addressed to the Village Administrator of such
intent to cancel or not to renew.
         b.   Within ten (10) days after receipt by the Village of said notice,
and in no event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the
wireless provider or utility shall obtain and furnish to the Village evidence
of replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this subsection.
      5.   Self-Insurance: A wireless provider or utility may self-insure all
or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by
subsection A1 of this section. A wireless provider or utility that self-insures
is not required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the
requirement for the naming of additional insureds under subsection A1 of this
section, or the requirements of subsections A2, A3 and A4 of this section. A
wireless provider or utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the
Village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure
the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under subsection A1 of
this section, such as evidence that the wireless provider or utility is a
"private self-insurer" under the Workers' Compensation Act.
      6.   Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Wireless Provider's Or
Utility's Liability: The legal liability of the wireless provider or utility to
the Village and any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the
insurance policies or self-insurance required by this subsection shall not be
limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any
amounts thereunder.
   B.   Indemnification: By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-
of-way, a wireless provider or utility shall be deemed to agree to defend,
indemnify and hold the Village and its elected and appointed officials and
officers, employees, agents and representatives harmless from and against any
and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses,
including reasonable attorney fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out
of, resulting from, or alleged to arise out of or result from, the negligent,
careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the
wireless provider or utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents,
contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of
the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the facilities,
whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this
chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however,
that the wireless provider's or utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall
not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or
expenses arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach
of this chapter by the Village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or
representatives.
   C.   Security:
      1.   Purpose: The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a form and
in an amount as set forth in this subsection C. The Security Fund shall be
continuously maintained in accordance with this subsection C at the permittee's
sole cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the
permit. The Security Fund shall serve as security for:
         a.   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements
of this chapter;
         b.   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the Village
occasioned by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules,
regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the Village issued
pursuant to this chapter; and
         c.   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs, or expenses that the Village may pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this chapter to perform that the Village must perform itself or
have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the Village from the permittee pursuant to
this chapter or any other applicable law.
      2.   Form: The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the Village
in the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form
acceptable to the Village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form
acceptable to the Village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided
pursuant to this subsection C2 shall, at a minimum:
         a.   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
Village and the permittee;
         b.   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection
by the Village of any amounts covered by it; and
         c.   Provide a location convenient to the Village and within the State
of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
      3.   Amount: The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient
to provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the Village Engineer, and may also include reasonable,
directly related costs that the Village estimates are likely to be incurred if
the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the construction of
facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple
locations in the Village, with each phase consisting of construction of
facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and where
construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial
completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the Village Engineer
may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single
amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction
under the permit. The amount of the Security Fund for phased construction shall
be equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the
provisions of this subsection C3 for any single phase.
      4.   Withdrawals: The Village, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written
notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal
rights under this subsection C4, may withdraw an amount from the Security Fund;
provided, that the permittee has not reimbursed the Village for such amount
within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the
permittee:
         a.   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
         b.   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due
and unpaid;
         c.   Fails to reimburse the Village for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the Village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
         d.   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the
Village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the
Security Fund.
      5.   Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written
notice from the Village that any amount has been withdrawn from the Security
Fund, the permittee shall restore the Security Fund to the amount specified in
subsection C3 of this section.
      6.   Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest
accrued on the amount in the Security Fund be returned to the permittee by the
Village, upon written request for said withdrawal to the Village; provided,
that any such withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the minimum
balance required in subsection C3 of this section.
      7.   Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the Security Fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the Village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the Village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the Village as a result of said revocation;
provided, that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be
refunded to the permittee.
      8.   Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the Village with respect
to the Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the Village,
whether reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund shall affect
any other right the Village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
Village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any
of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. O-18-11, 7-
17-2018)
8-1-6: UTILITY CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP, IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
   A.   Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the Village no less than
thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the
right-of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility
or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the
former owner under the permit, if any, and all applicable laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and
facilities in the right-of-way.
   B.   Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the Village right-of-
way.
   C.   Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. O-18-11,
7-17-2018)
8-1-7: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   A.   Standards And Principles: All construction in the right-of- way shall
be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations,
and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction
principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles
and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications:
      1.   "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction";
      2.   "Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions";
      3.   "Highway Design Manual";
      4.   "Highway Standards Manual";
      5.   "Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items";
      6.   "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (92 Ill. Adm.
Code section 545);
      7.   "Flagger's Handbook"; and
      8.   "Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations".
   B.   Interpretation Of Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy exists
between or among differing principles and standards required by this chapter,
the Village Engineer shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering
judgment, which principles apply, and such decision shall be final. If
requested, the Village Engineer shall state which standard or principle will
apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the
future. (Ord. O-18-11, 7-17-2018)
8-1-8: PUBLIC SAFETY AND TRAFFIC CONTROL:
The placement of any antenna, wireless facility or small wireless facilities
located in the Village right-of-way may not interfere with the frequencies used
by public safety agencies for public safety communications. Unacceptable
interference will be determined in accordance with industry standards and the
Federal Communications Commission's regulations addressing unacceptable
interference to public safety spectrum. If an antenna, wireless facility or
small wireless facility causes such interference, the owner must take all steps
necessary to correct and eliminate the interference at its own costs. The
Village may terminate a permit for any antenna, wireless facility or small
wireless facility based on such interference if the interference is not
corrected.
The Village may reserve space on its utility pole for future public safety
uses. This reservation of space may preclude the collocation of a small
wireless facility where the Village determines that the utility pole cannot
accommodate both uses.
   A.   Minimum Requirements: The Village minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT's "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices" and this Code.
   B.   Warning Signs, Protective Devices And Flaggers: The wireless provider
or utility is responsible for providing and installing warning signs,
protective devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting all applicable
Federal, State, and local requirements for protection of the public and the
utility workers when performing any work on the public rights- of-way.
   C.   Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   D.   Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to
beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence,
business or institution, the wireless provider or utility shall notify the
resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and
duration of such work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency
repairs pursuant to this chapter, the wireless provider or utility shall
provide such notice as is practicable under the circumstances.
   E.   Compliance: The wireless provider or utility shall take immediate
action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are
brought to the wireless provider's or utility's attention by the Village. (Ord.
O-18-11, 7-17-2018)
8-1-9: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
   A.   Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
      1.   Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         a.   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of- way
line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole
alignment will permit;
         b.   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from
the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') (0.6 m) behind the face of
the curb, where available;
         c.   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4') (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         d.   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         e.   Any ground mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1')
(0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way
line.
      2.   Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         a.   The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (8') (2.4 m) from and parallel to the
right-of-way line;
         b.   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in an existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         c.   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not
more than five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line, and any
aboveground appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the
right-of-way line or as near as practicable.
   B.   Facilities Crossing Highways:
      1.   No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of Village highways
may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement
or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      2.   Cattle Passes, Culverts Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities
shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
      3.   Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at
or as near to a ninety degree (90°) angle to the centerline as practicable.
      4.   Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         a.   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ILCC
rules entitled, "Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines" (83
Ill. Adm. Code 305);
         b.   Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right-of-
way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         c.   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      5.   Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or
communications facility may cross a highway only if:
         a.   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance free service life; and
         b.   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      6.   Markers: The Village may require the utility to provide a marker at
each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current Federal regulations (49 CFR section 192.707
(1989)).
   C.   Location Within Particular Rights-Of-Way: The Village may require that
utilities be located within particular rights-of- way that are not highways,
rather than within particular highways.
   D.   Freestanding Facilities:
      1.   Small Wireless Facilities:
         a.   The Village may not require the placement of a small wireless
facility on a specific utility pole or category of poles. However, should the
application necessitate the instillation of a new utility pole, the Village may
propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility
pole or existing support structure within one hundred feet (100') of the
proposed collocation. Should the applicant reject the proposed relocated
collocation, it must provide a written certification describing the property
rights, technical limits or material cost reasons the alternative location will
not satisfy the wireless provider's needs. The Village may require any
monopole, utility pole or other freestanding facility located within a right-
of-way to be screened from view in compliance with the appearance standards
described in subsection E of this section.
         b.   If all existing monopoles, utility poles and other aboveground
facilities are located on one side of the right- of-way, all new monopoles,
utility poles and other freestanding facilities shall be located on the same
side of the right-of-way as the existing aboveground facilities. If there exist
aboveground facilities on both sides, new freestanding facilities shall be
located on the side where the aboveground facilities most closely match the
scale of the new freestanding facility.
      2.   Other Facilities:
         a.   The Village may restrict the location and size of any monopole,
utility pole or other freestanding facility located within a right-of-way. No
freestanding facility located within a right-of-way may be constructed or
modified so that the height of the freestanding facility is higher by more than
ten feet (10') or more than ten percent (10%), whichever is greater, than any
other existing, freestanding facility located within the right-of-way within
three hundred feet (300') of the proposed facility, measured along the center
line of the respective right-of-way. Where there are no other freestanding
facilities located within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed facility,
the maximum height of the freestanding facility shall be forty five feet (45').
         b.   The Village may require any monopole, utility pole or other
freestanding facility located within a right-of-way to be screened from view.
         c.   If all existing monopoles, utility poles and other aboveground
facilities are located on one side of the right- of-way, all new monopoles,
utility poles and other freestanding facilities shall be located on the same
side of the right-of-way as the existing aboveground facilities. If there exist
aboveground facilities on both sides, new freestanding facilities shall be
located on the side where the aboveground facilities most closely match the
scale of the new freestanding facility.
   E.   Design And Appearance Standards:
      1.   Visual Quality: The Village may discourage the installation of
facilities in particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
      2.   Restrictions: A facility may be constructed only if its construction
does not require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features
visible to the highway user or conflicts with the applicable design standards
set forth below.
      3.   Design Standards:
         a.   Residential Design Standards:
            (1)   Applicability: These design standards shall apply to each
facility located in the right-of-way in a district zoned for residential uses.
            (2)   Purpose: Ensure visually acceptable facility design and to
provide discretion on required and preferred design of small wireless
facilities.
               (A)   Applicants must use architectural treatments and stealth
techniques to reduce potential visual impacts from all small wireless
facilities.
               (B)   All new utility poles installed for the purpose of
mounting a facility must be stealth or camouflaged to blend into the
surrounding environment. Examples of stealth or camouflage designs are
presented in figure 1 of this section.
               (C)   Small wireless facilities and all ancillary equipment
associated with the facility must not emit sound.
               (D)   Cables must be routed directly from the ground through the
pole and equipment enclosures must completely enclose or hide cabling. No
exposed cable is allowed.
               (E)   No flashing lights or unnecessary, non- essential stickers
are allowed to be placed on any facility. Stickers must be designed in the same
color as the pole to which they are attached.
               (F)   In no case shall equipment block the sidewalk or
pedestrian pathway. All installations must maintain accessibility requirements
and standards.
               (G)   All newly installed equipment must be painted with
graffiti-resistant paint to match pole color and surroundings.
               (H)   Colors and materials for small wireless facilities shall
be chosen to minimize the visibility of the facility.
               (I)   Antennas attached to existing poles or Municipally-owned
infrastructure shall be painted and textured to match the existing structure.
               (J)   Any ground-mounted facility shall be painted with non-
reflective matte finish paint using color shades that are comparable or blend
with surrounding natural elements such as soil, trees, or grasslands. Any
ground-mounted facility shall be screened from the yard of the property in
front of which it is located using year-round landscaping materials. The owner
of the ground-mounted facility shall guarantee the landscaping materials for a
period of one year from planting.
               (K)   All disturbed pavement and landscaping shall be replaced
and areas of bare or disturbed soils must be re-vegetated. If replacement
landscape is determined to be infeasible the Village may accept mitigation
funds to use elsewhere. The owner of the ground-mounted facility shall
guarantee the restoration work or reseeding for a period of one year.
               (L)   No facility may display any signage or advertisements
unless expressly allowed by the Village in a written approval, recommended
under FCC regulations or required by law or permit condition. Every facility
shall at all times display signage that accurately identifies the facility
owner and provides the facility owner's unique site number, and also provides a
local or toll-free telephone number to contact the facility owner's operations
center. All required or permitted signage must face toward the street or
otherwise placed to minimize visibility from adjacent sidewalks and structures.
FIGURE 1
SAMPLE STEALTH DESIGNS FOR SMALL CELL UTILITY POLES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/09fc73b1baa9c9185d886b27aa527b40ba0b85e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-868.png]
         b.   Design Standards In Special Aesthetic/Economic Purpose Zones:
            (1)   Applicability: These design standards shall apply to
facilities in the right-of-way located in: a) each area, district, neighborhood
or zone expressly designated in the Village's comprehensive plan as having
special aesthetic or economic impacts on the welfare of the community; and b)
each redevelopment area designed under the Tax Increment Allocation
Redevelopment Act or the Business District Development and Redevelopment Act.
            (2)   Purpose: To protect and promote the Village's unique
character in a manner consistent with State and Federal laws and regulations.
               (A)   Siting of small wireless facilities in special aesthetic/
economic purpose zones must respect the existing character or design ordinance
of established zone.
               (B)   Applicants must include proposed stealth and concealment
measures in their applications.
               (C)   Concealment of all small wireless facilities so that the
facility is completely hidden from view when view from ground-level.
               (D)   Effective camouflage so as to disguise the facility so
that it appears to be something other than a facility and is at the same time
compatible with its surroundings (for example, designed to look like a tree).
               (E)   Small wireless facilities must be designed so that the
facilities' silhouette, mass and color are masked in such a way as to be
virtually indistinguishable from their background.
               (F)   Examples of stealth or camouflage designs are presented in
figure 1 of this section.
         c.   Design Standards In Historic Districts:
            (1)   Applicability: These design standards apply in facilities in
the right-of-way located in any historic district or on any historic landmark.
            (2)   Purpose: To promote the educational, cultural, economic and
general welfare of the Village by identifying, preserving, protecting,
enhancing and encouraging the continued utilization and the rehabilitation of
such areas, properties, structures, sites and objects having a special
historical interest or value to the Village and its citizens.
               (A)   Districts, sites, buildings, structures or objects,
significant in American history, architecture, archeology, engineering or
culture, that are listed, or are eligible for listing, in the National Register
of Historic Places are to be avoided, to the greatest extent possible. Local
landmarked buildings, properties, sites, or historic districts that are so
recognized by an ordinance that meets the requirements of the certified Local
Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office are also
to be avoided, to the greatest extent possible.
               (B)   Applicants must include proposed stealth and concealment
measures in their applications.
               (C)   Applicant must implement said Village- approved design
concepts, and the use of camouflage or stealth materials as necessary in order
to achieve compliance with historic preservation review.
               (D)   Prior to submitting an application, where the applicant
submits an application to site facilities in a historic district, the applicant
must meet with the Village to discuss any potential design modifications
appropriate for the installation.
               (E)   When siting a facility in a historic district, wireless
provider must avoid removing, obscuring or altering any historic material or
significant architectural features. Rehabilitation and make-ready work must not
destroy the distinguishing character of the property or its environment.
               (F)   Deteriorated architectural features should be repaired
rather than replaced, wherever possible by means such as rust removal, calking,
limited paint removal and reapplication of paint.
      4.   Minimizing Visibility: All small wireless facilities not governed by
the preceding design standards must be placed so as to minimize visibility. The
small wireless facility, including all ancillary equipment and appurtenances,
must be a color that blends with the surroundings of the utility pole or
Municipally-owned infrastructure on which it is mounted and use non-reflective
materials which blend with the materials and colors of the surrounding area and
structures. Any wiring must be concealed within the freestanding facility or
covered with an appropriate cover.
      5.   Concealment Elements: A facility may not be installed in a manner
which defeats any existing concealment elements of the utility pole or
Municipally-owned infrastructure to which it is attached.
      6.   Common Ownership: Facilities under common ownership or operated on
the same radio frequency shall be separated as far as practicable.
      7.   Height Limitations: Small wireless facilities are limited to a
maximum height of ten feet (10') above the utility pole or wireless structure
on which it is collocated. The height limit of a new or replacement utility
pole or wireless support structure on which small wireless facilities are
collocated is limited to the higher of: a) ten feet (10') higher than the
tallest existing utility pole within three hundred feet (300') of the new or
replacement utility pole or wireless support structure that is in the same
right-of-way; or b) forty five feet (45') above ground level. The Village shall
designate which intersecting right-of-way within three hundred feet (300') of
the proposed utility pole or wireless support structure shall control the
height limitation.
   F.   Aboveground Facilities: Aboveground facilities may be installed only
if:
      1.   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      2.   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
      3.   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable. Existing utility poles and Municipally- owned infrastructure shall be
used wherever practicable; the installation of additional utility poles or
monopoles is strongly discouraged.
      4.   The Village is not required to install or maintain any specific
utility pole or to continue to install or maintain utility poles in any
location if it makes a non-discriminatory decision to eliminate above-ground
utility poles of a particular type. For Village utility poles with collocated
small wireless facilities in place when the Village makes a decision to
eliminate above-ground utility poles, the Village will, at its discretion,
either maintain the utility pole or install and maintain an alternative utility
pole for the collocation of the small wireless facility, or offer to sell the
utility pole to the wireless provider.
   G.   Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
      1.   Utility facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or
roadway structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means
of accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include,
but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable
supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the
bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are
volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under
significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk, and such
installations are not permitted.
      2.   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure, supporting data demonstrating
the impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         a.   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         b.   The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         c.   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         d.   The proposed method of attachment;
         e.   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         f.   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         g.   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         h.   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved. (Ord. O-18-11, 7-17-2018; amd. Ord. O-18-15, - -2018)
8-1-10: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
   A.   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction
Methods:
      1.   Boring Or Jacking:
         a.   Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the Village
Engineer from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be
excavated no more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of boring or jacking
operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after boring or jacking
operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and
protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced,
and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads
that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
         b.   Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         c.   Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six
inches (6") (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside
diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1") (25 mm).
         d.   Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches
(6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with
auger, or auger and following pipe method.
         e.   Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the Village to be preserved shall be bored under or
around the root system and may be required to be approved by a certified
arborist.
      2.   Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or
maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction".
         a.   Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipeline testing. Only
one-half (1/2) of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless
special permission is obtained from the Village Engineer.
         b.   Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the "Illinois
Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices". Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off road location.
         c.   Drip Line Of Trees: The utility shall not trench within the drip
line of any tree designated by the Village to be preserved.
      3.   Backfilling:
         a.   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of
facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         b.   For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the engineer, the utility, at its expense, shall remove any pavement
and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly
compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and
driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the engineer.
      4.   Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection A4 is
permitted under this chapter, the following requirements shall apply:
         a.   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled as soon as
practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as designated by
the engineer.
         b.   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the Village.
         c.   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
         d.   For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last
three (3) years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to
be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before
the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
JULIE locate.
      5.   Encasement:
         a.   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
Village.
         b.   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of
the highway.
         c.   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or Village approved
jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is
installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the Village. Bell and spigot type
pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.
         d.   In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less,
encasement may be eliminated.
         e.   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with
installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated only
if: 1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair;
and 2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
         f.   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right-of-way.
      6.   Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and
maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum
cover for the type of facility:
 
Type Of Facility                           Minimum Cover
Power or communication line (in general)   30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication line installed by the plowed 24 inches (0.6 m)
method
Gas or petroleum products                  30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line                                 Sufficient cover to provide freeze
                                           protection; minimum 5 feet
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage   Sufficient cover to provide freeze
lines                                      protection; minimum 5 feet
 
   B.   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
      1.   Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
         a.   Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities
within Village rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois Administrative Code 305 (formerly
general order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled "Rules for
Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines" and the National
Electrical Safety Code.
         b.   Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single pole construction, and where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the
installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guywires are equipped with guy guards
for maximum visibility.
         c.   Underground Facilities:
            (1)   Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing; provided,
that special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
            (2)   If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if:
               (A)   The crossing is installed by the use of "moles", "whip
augers", or other approved method which compress the earth to make the opening
for cable installation; or
               (B)   The installation is by the open trench method which is
only permitted prior to roadway construction.
            (3)   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National
Electrical Safety Code.
      2.   Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication
Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         a.   The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         b.   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         c.   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         d.   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not
possible by other means.
      3.   Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within
rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a Village
approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of
Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, part 192,
Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety
Standards (49 CFR 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      4.   Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within
rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI "Standard Code
for Pressure Piping" (liquid petroleum transportation piping systems ANSI-
B 31.4).
      5.   Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Sewer Lines Or Drainage
Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and drainage lines
within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current
"Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois".
      6.   Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall
be provided with a vegetation free area extending one foot (1') (305 mm) in
width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation free area may
be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or
similar material approved by the engineer. With the approval of the engineer,
shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of a vegetation
free area. The housing for ground mounted appurtenances shall be painted a
neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
   C.   Materials:
      1.   General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction", the requirements of the
Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
      2.   Material Storage On Right-Of-Way: All pipe, conduit, wire, poles,
cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way
prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public
or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and
other property. If material is to be stored on the right-of- way, prior
approval must be obtained from the Village.
      3.   Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the wireless provider or
utility to the Village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be
involved in the construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing
facilities.
   D.   Operational Restrictions:
      1.   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of
the Village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other
property.
      2.   These restrictions may be waived by the engineer when emergency work
is required to restore vital utility services.
      3.   Unless otherwise permitted by the Village, the days and hours of
construction are as set out in section
9-1-4 of this Code.
   E.   Location Of Existing Facilities: Any wireless provider or utility
proposing to construct facilities in the Village shall contact JULIE and
ascertain the presence and location of existing aboveground and underground
facilities within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities.
The Village will make its permit records available to a wireless provider or
utility for the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an
excavation or when requested by the Village or by JULIE, a wireless provider or
utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities within
forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance with the
Illinois Underground Utility Facilities Damage Prevention Act 1 . (Ord. O-18-
11, 7-17-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. 220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.
8-1-11: VEGETATION CONTROL:
   A.   Tree Trimming:
      1.   Permit Requirements:
         a.   Tree trimming shall not be considered a normal maintenance
operation, but shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a
permit, in addition to any other permit required under this chapter.
         b.   Applications for tree trimming permits shall include assurance
that the work will be accomplished by competent workers with supervision who
are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree trimming permits shall
designate an expiration date in the interest of assuring that the work will be
expeditiously accomplished.
      2.   Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The Village will
require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The Village may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
   B.   Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The Village may
require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side
arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
   C.   Chemical Use: Spraying of any type of brush killing chemicals will not
be permitted on rights-of-way unless the wireless provider or utility
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the engineer that such spraying is the only
practicable method of vegetation control. (Ord. O-18-11, 7-17-2018)
8-1-12: REMOVAL, RELOCATION OR MODIFICATIONS:
   A.   Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the Village, a
wireless provider or utility shall, at its own expense, temporarily or
permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any facilities
within the rights-of- way whenever the Corporate Authorities have determined
that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary
for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any Village
improvement in or upon, or the operations of the Village in or upon, the
rights-of-way. Wireless providers are required to provide the Village with
written notice of its intent to sell or transfer small wireless facilities.
Such notice must include the name and contact information of the new wireless
provider.
   B.   Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the Village, any
wireless provider or utility that owns, controls, or maintains any unauthorized
facility or related appurtenances within the public rights-of-way shall, at its
own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances from
the public rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in
the following circumstances:
      1.   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      2.   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant
of a license or franchise, if required;
      3.   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
      4.   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
   C.   The Village retains the right and privilege to cut or move any
facilities located within the rights-of-way of the Village, as the Village may
determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public
health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the Village shall attempt
to notify the wireless provider or utility, if known, prior to cutting or
removing a facility and shall notify the wireless provider or utility, if
known, after cutting or removing a facility.
   D.   Upon abandonment of a utility within the public rights-of- way of the
Village, the utility shall notify the Village within ninety (90) days.
Following receipt of such notice, the Village may direct the utility to remove
all or any portion of the utility facility if the Village Engineer determines
that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and
welfare. In the event that the Village does not direct the utility that
abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the
Village, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or
removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person.
With respect to small wireless facilities, a small wireless facility that is
not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered
abandoned. The owner of an abandoned small wireless facility shall notify the
Village within ninety (90) days of it being abandoned and the owner of that
small wireless facility must remove the small wireless facility within ninety
(90) days after sending such written notice to the Village. The Village may
direct the wireless provider to remove all or any portion of the facility if
the Village Engineer determines that such removal will be in the best interest
of the public health, safety and welfare. If the small wireless facility is not
removed within ninety (90) days of such notice, the Village may remove or cause
the removal of the facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment
agreement for Village utility poles or through whatever actions are provided
for abatement of nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery. (Ord.
O-18-11, 7-17-2018)
8-1-13: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
Upon completion of all construction or maintenance of facilities, the wireless
provider or utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and
terrain in a timely manner and to the satisfaction of the Village. This
includes restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway
surfaces shall be made using materials and methods approved by the Village
Engineer. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling,
regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right-
of- way to a condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to
the commencement of the project. (Ord. O-18-11, 7-17-2018)
8-1-14: MAINTENANCE AND REPAIRS:
   A.   General Maintenance Requirements: Facilities on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the
wireless provider or utility in a manner satisfactory to the Village and at the
wireless provider's or utility's expense.
   B.   Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify noncompliance
with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      1.   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right-of-way, the wireless provider or utility shall take immediate steps to
provide all necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public on
the right-of-way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If
a hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is
such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair
operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the
shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of
access to the facility is available.
      2.   In an emergency, the wireless provider or utility shall, as soon as
possible, notify the Village Engineer or his or her duly authorized agent of
the emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for
protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the
necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with
the free movement of traffic, the Village police shall be notified immediately.
      3.   In an emergency, the wireless provider or utility shall use all
means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least
inconvenience to the traveling public.
   C.   Emergency Repairs: The wireless provider or utility must file, in
writing, with the Village a description of the repairs undertaken in the right-
of-way within forty eight (48) hours after an emergency repair. (Ord. O-18-11,
7-17-2018)
8-1-15: VARIANCES:
   A.   Request For Variance: A wireless provider or utility requesting a
variance from one or more of the provisions of this chapter must do so in
writing to the Village Engineer as a part of the permit application. The
request shall identify each provision of this chapter from which a variance is
requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted.
   B.   Authority To Grant Variances: The Village Engineer shall decide whether
a variance is authorized for each provision of this chapter identified in the
variance request on an individual basis.
   C.   Conditions:
      1.   The Village Engineer may authorize a variance only if the wireless
provider or utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that:
         a.   One or more conditions not under the control of the wireless
provider or utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way
line) create a special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision
unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
         b.   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities
that would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
      2.   As a condition for authorizing a variance, the Village Engineer may
require the wireless provider or utility requesting the variance to meet
reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained
within this chapter but which carry out the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. O-
18-11, 7-17-2018)
8-1-16: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in
accordance with the penalty provisions of this Code. There may be times when
the Village will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims,
because the wireless provider or utility will not or cannot perform its duties
under its permit and this chapter. Unless the wireless provider or utility
shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the requested action
is appropriate, the wireless provider or utility shall bear the Village costs
of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or
removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other
administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related
cost apportionment of the Village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a wireless
provider or utility that does not pay the costs apportioned thereto.
   B.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional
or further remedies that the Village may have for enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. O-18-11, 7-17-2018)
CHAPTER 2
DRIVEWAYS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Permit Requirements
8-2-2: Construction By Property Owner; Authority Of Village To Relocate
8-2-3: Location Of Driveways
8-2-4: Number Of Driveways For Residential Property; Turnarounds
8-2-1: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   A permit shall be required for the construction of any new access
driveway or the relocation of any existing driveway in giving access to a
village road, street or highway. This permit shall be issued by the building
and zoning officer. A permit fee as set forth in section
3-3-1 of this code shall be required, payable to the village of Campton Hills
at the time of request. Applications shall be available at the village hall.
(2013 Code § 4-1-1; amd. 2016 Code; Ord. O-16-08, 5-10-2016)
   B.   A temporary access permit shall be as set forth in section
3-3-1 of this code and shall be valid for one hundred eighty (180) days. (2016
Code; amd. Ord. O-16-08, 5-10-2016)
8-2-2: CONSTRUCTION BY PROPERTY OWNER; AUTHORITY OF VILLAGE TO RELOCATE:
The driveway requiring a permit shall be constructed by the property owner at
his or her expense. The village, at its expense, may elect to relocate existing
driveways when the village determines that such relocation is appropriate to
improve safety and/or drainage. (2013 Code § 4-1-2)
8-2-3: LOCATION OF DRIVEWAYS:
A driveway shall be located so as to provide:
   A.   The most favorable vision, grade, and alignment conditions for persons
using the proposed driveway and the existing village road, street or highway.
In the interest of public safety and convenience, the village may restrict the
placement of a driveway to a particular location along the owner's road
frontage. Driveways generally will not be permitted along acceleration or
deceleration lanes or lane tapers. Proposed driveways located in or near no
passing zones shall be especially reviewed to assure that adequate sight
distance is available.
   B.   Free and safe movement of road, street or highway traffic without undue
interference by reason of vehicles using the driveway.
   C.   Reasonable safety and convenience for pedestrians, bicyclists,
motorists and other users of streets, roads or highway. (2013 Code § 4-1-3)
8-2-4: NUMBER OF DRIVEWAYS FOR RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY; TURNAROUNDS:
No more than one driveway shall be permitted for each residential property
except on approval of the corporate authorities. Where a residential driveway
provides access to a high speed highway, the property owner shall be required
to provide facilities on his property to permit vehicles to turn around to
avoid backing into traffic, if feasible to do so. When a property fronts on two
(2) public roads, access shall be permitted only on the lesser traveled road.
(2013 Code § 4-1-4)
TITLE 9
BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER 1
PURPOSE; SCOPE; GENERAL BUILDING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Purpose
9-1-2: Scope Of Provisions
9-1-3: Qualifications Of Building Inspectors
9-1-4: Construction Hours Restricted
9-1-5: Sidewalks
9-1-6: Fire Sprinkler Trigger Points
9-1-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this title is to provide for safety, health and public welfare
through structural strength and stability, means of egress, adequate light and
ventilation and protection to life and property from fire and hazards incident
to the design, construction, repair, alteration, maintenance, removal or
demolition of buildings and structures, and to control the architectural design
of buildings or structures erected, within the corporate limits of the village.
(2013 Code § 11-1-2)
9-1-2: SCOPE OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this title apply to the construction, site work alteration,
equipment, addition, repair, replacement, removal, demolition, location, use,
occupancy and maintenance of all buildings and structures, and shall apply to
existing or proposed buildings and structures, except as otherwise provided in
the village zoning ordinance, or other ordinances or statutes. (2013 Code § 11-
1-3)
9-1-3: QUALIFICATIONS OF BUILDING INSPECTORS:
Only inspectors who are currently certified by the International Code Council
shall engage in review of building plans for buildings or work which is
structural or be responsible for inspections of such buildings or work. (2013
Code § 11-1-3)
9-1-4: CONSTRUCTION HOURS RESTRICTED:
   A.   General Construction And Carpentry: There shall be no outdoor
construction or carpentry activities generating noise at any time other than
the following:
      Monday through Friday: 7:00 A.M. to 7:00 P.M.
      Saturday: 8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M.
      Sunday and national holidays: 8:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M. (2013 Code § 11-1-
16)
Construction activity for emergencies may be allowed during the restricted time
periods only upon issuance of a permit by the building and zoning officer.
(2013 Code § 11-1-16; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   Operation Of Heavy Construction Equipment: There shall be no operation
of heavy construction equipment or excavation or demolition activities
involving the use of excavating or earthmoving equipment including loaders,
backhoes, jackhammers, or similar equipment on Sundays or national holidays or
at any time other than the following:
      Monday through Friday: 7:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M.
      Saturday: 8:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M. (2013 Code § 11-1-16)
Construction activities for emergencies may be allowed during the restricted
time periods only upon issuance of a permit by the building and zoning officer.
(2013 Code § 11-1-16; amd. 2016 Code)
9-1-5: SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Required: Sidewalks shall be installed as required by the zoning
ordinance, subdivision ordinance or any applicable PUD ordinance. (2013 Code §
11-1-17)
   B.   Specifications: Sidewalks shall be located twelve inches (12") from the
street right of way line and shall be constructed in accordance with the
following:
      1.   General requirements: All sidewalks shall be constructed of portland
cement with twenty eight (28) day compression strength of three thousand
(3,000) pounds. Minimum slump shall be three inches (3"). All concrete shall be
air entrained. Other admixtures shall be approved by the building and zoning
officer.
      2.   Residential districts: Minimum width shall be four feet (4');
minimum thickness shall be four inches (4") with a minimum of four inches (4")
of compacted gravel.
      3.   Commercial districts: Minimum width shall be five feet (5'); minimum
thickness shall be five inches (5") with a minimum of four inches (4") of
compacted gravel. (2013 Code § 11-1-18; amd. 2016 Code)
   C.   Completion Requirements: The public sidewalk provided for in this
section shall be completed within six (6) months after the building or
structure for which the building permit was issued is completed and occupied.
After the expiration of the time limit above, if the sidewalks are not
completed, the village may complete or cause the sidewalk to be completed and
apply the proceeds of the completion bond, deposit or other security toward the
costs thereof, refunding any excess to the party posting the same. (2013 Code §
11-1-19)
9-1-6: FIRE SPRINKLER TRIGGER POINTS:
   FIRE SPRINKLER TRIGGER POINTS FOR REQUIRED INSTALLATIONS
   ON NEW CONSTRUCTION OR CHANGE OF USE
Occupancy Trigger Points For Required Installations (New Construction Or Change
          Of Use)
Occupancy                          Trigger Points For Required Installations
                                   (New Construction Or Change Of Use)
A-1, theaters                      All
A-2, restaurants                   All
A-3, other assembly, worship       >3,000 square feet
A-4, arenas, rinks                 >3,000 square feet
A-5, outdoor assembly              >3,000 square feet
B, business                        >3,000 square feet
E, education                       All
F-1, low hazard factory            >3,000 square feet
F-2, moderate hazard factory       >3,000 square feet
H-1, explosives                    All
H-2, flammable liquids - open      All
H-3, flammable liquids - stored    All
H-4, toxic and corrosive materials All
H-5, semiconductor fabrication     All
I-1, assisted living               All
I-2, hospitals, nursing            All
I-3, jails                         All
I-4, daycare                       All
M, mercantile                      >3,000 square feet
R-1, hotels                        >3,000 square feet
R-2, apartments                    All
R-3, other residential             All
R-4 other residential <16          All
S-1, low hazard storage            >3,000 square feet
S-2, moderate hazard storage       >3,000 square feet
Utility                            No requirement
Single-family                      No requirement
 
(2013 Code § 11-1-19)
CHAPTER 2
BUILDING CODES
SECTION:
9-2-1: Codes Adopted
9-2-2: Amendments To Codes
9-2-2-1: Building Code Amendments
9-2-2-2: Mechanical Code Amendments
9-2-2-3: Fuel Gas Code Amendments
9-2-2-4: Fire Code Amendments
9-2-2-5: Property Maintenance Code Amendments
9-2-2-6: Electrical Code Amendments
9-2-2-7: Energy Conservation Code Amendments (Rep. by Ord. O-16-06, 4-19-2016)
9-2-2-8: Residential Code Amendments
9-2-2-9: Plumbing Code Amendments
9-2-2-10: Accessibility Code Amendments
9-2-2-11: Wildland-Urban Interface Code Amendments
9-2-1: CODES ADOPTED:
The international and Illinois codes cited in this section and individually
cited in this chapter are adopted by reference and made a part of this code, as
amended.
International building code/2012 (IBC), except as provided in section
9-2-2-1 of this chapter.
International mechanical code/2012 (IMC), except as provided in section
9-2-2-2 of this chapter.
International fuel gas code/2012 (IFGC), except as provided in section
9-2-2-3 of this chapter.
International fire code/2012 (IFC), except as provided in section
9-2-2-4 of this chapter.
International property maintenance code/2012 (IPMC), except as provided in
section
9-2-2-5 of this chapter.
National electrical code, 2011, NFPA 70, except as provided in section
9-2-2-6 of this chapter.
Illinois energy conservation code.
International residential code/2012 (IRC), except as provided in section
9-2-2-8 of this chapter.
Illinois plumbing code/2014.
Illinois accessibility code/1997.
International wildland-urban interface code/2012 (IWUIC), except as provided in
section
9-2-2-11 of this chapter.
Three (3) copies of each code adopted in this section are on file in the office
of the village clerk for public use and inspection. (Ord. O-16-06, 4-19-2016)
9-2-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODES:
9-2-2-1: BUILDING CODE AMENDMENTS:
The following additions, insertions and changes shall further apply and shall
supersede any and all references listed within the international building code,
2012 edition:
Section 101.1 Insert "village of Campton Hills".
(2013 Code § 11-1-5)
Section 105.8 Add a new section and the following:
Unique Construction: When a project has unique features, unusual construction
sequences or out of the ordinary construction techniques, the building and
zoning department shall have the authority to require additional documentation
to determine code compliance. The building and zoning officer and zoning
officer may also add additional fees to the building permit based on the
additional inspections required or to cover the cost of specialized inspections
or outside inspection or testing agencies.
Unique features or unusual construction sequence is a project where the use of
features or sequences, which create the need for additional inspections other
than those normally, requested by the building and zoning officer. The features
or a sequence of operations, which creates additional inspections, can create
this.
(2013 Code § 11-1-5; amd. 2016 Code)
Section 107.2.5.2 Add a new section and the following:
Compliance With Site Plan
It shall be the responsibility of the builder/developer to submit to the
building and zoning department a spot survey prepared by a registered land
surveyor after the foundation is installed. This survey must be at a scale of
not less than one inch equal to thirty feet (1" = 30'). The survey must also
indicate the elevation above sea level of the top of the foundation wall and
the top of the curb and sidewalk at lot lines extended relative to a United
States geological survey benchmark. No construction will be allowed to proceed
except for underground water and sewer, and related items until the spot survey
is approved by the building and zoning department. This section applies to
principal structures only and not to additions or accessory structures.
Section 109.1 Payment Of Fees: Add the following:
Insert "Building permit fee schedule shall be determined by ordinance by the
village board.".
Section 110.1.1 Add the following:
Plans on the job site require: A copy of approved plans with all revisions
shall be kept on the site of the building or work at the time of inspection.
Section 113 Board Of Appeals: Delete sections 113.1 through 113.3 and insert:
Section 113.1 The Application For Appeal: Any person shall have the right to
appeal a decision of the code official to the board of appeals. An application
for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the
rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the
provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equivalent form of
construction is to be used.
Section 113.2 Membership Of Board: The board of appeals shall be comprised of
the village president and the village board of Campton Hills.
Section 113.3 Open Hearing: All hearings before the board shall be open to the
public and in compliance with the provisions of the open meetings act. The
appellant, the appellant's representative, the code official and any person
whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
Section 113.4 Board Decision: The board shall affirm, modify, or reverse the
decision of the code official by a concurring vote of a majority of its
members. The board can also remand the appeal back to the code official.
Section 113.5 Court Review: Any person, whether or not a previous party of the
appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for appropriate
relief to correct errors of law. Application for review shall be made in the
manner and time required by law following the filing of the decision in the
office of the chief administrative officer.
(2013 Code § 11-1-5)
Section 113.6 Violation Penalties: Insert the following:
The penalties shall be as determined by ordinance by the village board.
   (2013 Code § 11-1-5; amd. 2016 Code)
Section 406.3.4 Change 1/2 inch gypsum board to 5/8-inch gypsum board.
Section 406.3.6 Add a new section and the following:
Gas Curbs: Minimum 4-inch high gas curbs are to be provided in and around the
entire garage floor area in all attached garages. The pitch from rear to front
must not be less than .05 percent.
Table 601 Add the following line:
Tenant Separations: There shall be a minimum of a one- hour fire separation
(vertically and horizontally) separating different tenants.
Section 901.6 Add the following:
All water flow switches, valve supervision, trouble signals, and fire alarm
systems shall transmit an alarm to a location approved by the code official.
Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.10.1 Delete sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.10.1
and add the following:
See section
9-1-6 of the village code for the sprinkler requirements.
Section 903.4.2 Add the following sentence:
Provide a strobe above the fire department connection for all sprinkler and
standpipe systems.
Section 903.6 Add new section 903.6 Sprinkler System Design Criteria:
Sprinkler hydraulic designs for NFPA 13 and NFPA 13R systems shall be designed
with a minimum of a five (5) pound difference between the sprinkler system
design including hose requirements and the available water supply. The five (5)
pound safety factor shall be applied to the water flow test after any
adjustments for a seasonal low.
(2013 Code § 11-1-5)
Section 1029.6 Add the following section to read as follows:
   Notwithstanding anything contained within the IBC to the contrary, any
alteration, repair or addition to windows within a sleeping unit or sleeping
room identified in Section 1029.1 of the IBC shall ensure such alteration,
repair or addition shall cause the applicable sleeping unit or sleeping room to
be compliant with the requirements for emergency escape and rescue openings as
provided in Section 1029 of the IBC.
Chapter 11 Insert the following text:
When there is a conflict between this chapter and the Illinois accessibility
code the stricter of the two codes shall apply.
Section 1612.3 Insert: Village of Campton Hills Flood Plain Study August 3,
2009, July 17, 2012.
Section 1805.0 Footings And Foundations: All references to wood footings and
foundations are deleted. The use of wood footings and foundations is
prohibited.
(2013 Code § 11-1-5)
Chapter 29 Plumbing Systems: Delete the chapter in its entirety.
(2013 Code § 11-1-5; amd. 2016 Code)
Section 3001.2 Add the following:
Referenced standards to be as stringent and comply with the current Illinois
safety act and its rules. For residential conveyance application, the act does
not apply, however the IBC shall apply for new installations, permits and final
acceptance. For applications not covered by the Illinois elevator safety act,
those conveyance applications shall be covered under the IBC.
Section 3002.4 Change as follows:
In all buildings at least one elevator shall be provided for fire emergency
access to all floors in all buildings with an elevator.
Such elevator cars shall be such size and arrangement to accommodate a 24-inch
by 80-inch ambulance stretcher in the horizontal open position and shall be
identified by the international symbol for emergency medical services (star of
life).
(2013 Code § 11-1-5)
The village building official shall require that the provisions of the current
"Illinois plumbing license law", 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 320/1 et seq.,
as presently in force or as the same may be hereafter amended or modified and
the same is hereby incorporated herein by reference and adopted as the standard
for the purposes of this ordinance. Any conflicts concerning the provisions of
these codes shall be determined by the strictest standard contained in the code
provisions.
One elevator to be used in all new buildings shall be sized for stretcher use
by the fire department. Minimum size to be 2500 pounds with a clear inside
dimension to accommodate a 24-inch x 84-inch stretcher. It shall be identified
by the international symbol for emergency medical services (star of life). The
symbol shall not be less than 3 inches high and shall be placed inside of both
sides of the hoist way doorframe.
(2013 Code § 11-1-5; amd. 2016 Code)
All elevators shall comply with the Illinois OSFM rules for elevators.
Section 3301.3. Add a new section and the following:
Mud And Debris Control: Builders are responsible for:
         a.   Mud left on streets by contractors or material suppliers must be
cleaned at least at the end of each day, and more often if the accumulation is
sufficient to cause a hazard.
         b.   Material and debris must be placed in a dumpster at the end of
each day or any confined area such as a garage, etc. Construction materials and
debris shall be secured on the construction site and no building materials or
debris shall be burned in compliance with title 5, chapter 1, Nuisances, of the
village code.
         c.   Crossing landscaped areas, improved parkways, or adjacent
properties is prohibited except an improved parkway may be crossed if a
temporary access permit has been issued.
Compliance with this control will provide and enhance the natural beauty of the
environment. Failure to comply with this control requirement will result in:
         a.   A fine/or penalties.
         b.   Suspension of building permit.
Section 3303.4 Vacant Lots: Delete the section and insert the following:
Restoration Of Demolition Site: All foundations, walls, footings, concrete
floors, and other concrete in areas below grade must be removed. All demolition
debris, including, but not limited to, bricks, concrete, wood and metal shall
be removed, and all voids resulting from the above removal shall be filled to
at least the existing grade with granular materials in accordance with section
213 of the state of Illinois standard specifications for road and bridge
construction; except, that a maximum of twenty (20) percent of nonorganic
rubble may be used as fill material. The area must then be swaled for proper
drain-off. The land must be restored as close as possible to its original
stage. The final top layer of fill shall contain adequate topsoil to sustain
grass and be seeded in a professional manner. Residential fill shall be
approved by the code official.
The only exception to this shall be when the proposed site is 5 or more acres
in size and when the demolition/restoration would, to a large degree, include
the filling of areas over 2 acres in size below existing grade. Provided that
the above conditions are met, the applicant may choose to create a retention/
detention stormwater facility or another type of open space recreation
facility, which obtains its main attractiveness through the use of permanent
surface waters of 2 acres or more in size. The applicant would be required to
provide a facility, which is safe for its intended or potential uses as
provided in other sections of the Campton Hills village code. The applicant
would also have to provide the previously mentioned survey of the facility and
design the facility according to good engineering practices to enable it to
function for indeterminate time periods without extensive maintenance or harm
to neighboring properties, public facilities or groundwater resources. The
ownership and maintenance of the facility shall be negotiated with the village
as part of the review process enabling demolition. The building official based
on their potential merits or impact on the community, shall consider specific
items not directly covered.
Section 3410.2 insert 2007.
Referenced standards:
Delete the references to the international existing building code.
Delete the references to the international plumbing code.
Delete the references to the international private sewage disposal code.
Adopt the following appendices: C, D, F, and I.
(2013 Code § 11-1-5; amd. Ord. O-19-16, 10-1-2019)
9-2-2-2: MECHANICAL CODE AMENDMENTS:
The following additions, insertions and changes shall further apply and shall
supersede any and all references listed within the international mechanical
code, 2012 edition:
Section 101.1 Insert "Village of Campton Hills".
Section 106.5.2 Delete in its entirety.
Insert 106.5.2 "Fee Schedule - Building permit fee schedule shall be determined
by ordinance by the village board.".
Section 106.5.3 Delete in its entirety.
Insert 106.5.3 "Fee Schedule - Building permit fee schedule shall be determined
by ordinance by the village board.".
Section 108.4 Violation Penalties: Insert the following:
Penalties shall be determined by ordinance by the village board.
Section 108.5 Stop Work Orders: Insert the following:
Penalties shall be determined by ordinance by the village board.
(2013 Code § 11-1-6)
Section 109 Means Of Appeal: Delete 109.1 through 109.7 and insert:
See building code amendments to section 113.
(2013 Code § 11-1-6; amd. 2016 Code)
Referenced standards:
Delete the references to the international plumbing code.
Adopt the following appendix: A.
(2013 Code § 11-1-6)
9-2-2-3: FUEL GAS CODE AMENDMENTS:
The following additions, insertions and changes shall further apply and shall
supersede any and all references listed within the international fuel gas code,
2012 edition:
Section 101.1 Insert "Village of Campton Hills".
Section 106.5.2 Delete in its entirety.
Insert 106.5.2 "Fee Schedule - Building permit fee schedule shall be determined
by ordinance by the village board.".
Section 106.5.3 Delete in its entirety.
Insert 106.5.3 "Fee Schedule - Building permit fee schedule shall be determined
by ordinance by the village board.".
Section 108.4 Violation Penalties: Insert the following:
Penalties shall be determined by ordinance by the village board.
Section 108.5 Stop Work Orders: Insert the following:
Penalties shall be determined by ordinance by the village board.
(2013 Code § 11-1-7)
Section 109 Means Of Appeal: Delete 109.1 through 109.7 and insert:
See building code amendments to section 113.
(2013 Code § 11-1-7; amd. 2016 Code)
Referenced standards:
Delete the references to the international plumbing code.
Delete the references to the international private sewage disposal code.
Adopt the following appendices: A, B and C.
(2013 Code § 11-1-7)
9-2-2-4: FIRE CODE AMENDMENTS:
The following additions, insertions and changes shall further apply and shall
supersede any and all references listed within the international fire code,
2012 edition:
Section 101.1 Insert "Village of Campton Hills".
Section 105.8 Unique Construction: When a project has unique features, unusual
construction sequences or out of the ordinary construction techniques, the
building department shall have the authority to require additional
documentation to determine code compliance. The building department may also
add additional fees to the building permit based on additional inspections
required or to cover the cost of specialized inspections or outside inspection
or testing agencies.
(2013 Code § 11-1-8)
Unique features or unusual construction sequence is a project where the use of
features or sequences, which create the need for additional inspections other
than those normally, requested by the building and zoning officer. The
features, or a sequence of operations, which creates additional inspections,
can create this.
Section 108 Board Of Appeal: Delete 108.1 through 108.3 and insert:
"See building code amendments to section 113.".
(2013 Code § 11-1-8; amd. 2016 Code)
Section 109.3 Violation Penalties: Insert the following:
Penalties shall be determined by ordinance by the village board.
Section 111.4 Stop Work Orders: Insert the following:
Penalties shall be determined by ordinance by the village board.
(2013 Code § 11-1-8)
Section 307: See subsection
5-1-2C of the village code for additional open burning requirements.
(2013 Code § 11-1-8; amd. 2016 Code)
Section 901.11 Add the following:
All water flow switches, valve supervision, trouble signals, fire alarm systems
shall transmit an alarm to a location approved by the code official.
Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.10.1 Delete sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.10.1
and add the following:
See section
9-1-6 of the village code for the sprinkler requirements.
Section 903.4.2 Add the following sentence:
Provide a strobe above the fire department connection for all sprinkler and
standpipe systems.
Section 903.6 Add new section 903.6 Sprinkler System Design Criteria:
Sprinkler hydraulic designs for NFPA 13 and NFPA 13R systems shall be designed
with a minimum of a five (5) pound difference between the sprinkler system
design including hose requirements and the available water supply. The five (5)
pound safety factor shall be applied to the water flow test after any
adjustments for a seasonal low.
Section 5704.2.9.6.1 As allowed in the zoning ordinance as may be amended.
Section 5706.2.4.4 As allowed in the zoning ordinance as may be amended.
Section 5806.2 As allowed in the zoning ordinance as may be amended.
Section 6104.2 As allowed in the zoning ordinance as may be amended.
Referenced standards:
Delete the references to the international plumbing code.
Adopt the following appendices: B, C, D, E, F, G, H.
(2013 Code § 11-1-8)
9-2-2-5: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE AMENDMENTS:
The following additions, insertions and changes shall further apply and shall
supersede any and all references listed within the international property
maintenance code, 2012 edition:
Section 101.1 Insert "Village of Campton Hills".
(2013 Code § 11-1-9)
Section 101.2 Scope: Add the following sentence:
The strictest of the provisions shall apply when there is a conflict between
the adopted village code and this code.
(2013 Code § 11-1-9; amd. 2016 Code)
Sections 103.5 Add the following:
Fee Schedule - Fee schedule shall be determined by ordinance by the village
board.
(2013 Code § 11-1-9)
Section 111 Means Of Appeal:
Delete sections 111.1 through 111.8 and insert: See building code amendments
section 113.
Section 302.4 Delete the section and insert:
See title 5, chapter 1, "Nuisances", of the village code.
(2013 Code § 11-1-9; amd. 2016 Code)
Section 304.14 Insert screens from May 1st to October 1st.
Section 602.3 Heat supply required from October 1st to May 1st.
Section 602.4 Heat supply required from October 1st to May 1st.
Referenced standards:
Delete the references to the international plumbing code.
Delete the references to the international zoning code.
(2013 Code § 11-1-9)
9-2-2-6: ELECTRICAL CODE AMENDMENTS:
The following additions, insertions and changes shall further apply and shall
supersede any and all references listed within the national electrical code,
2011 edition, NFPA 70:
General Provision: All new electrical wiring systems or additions to existing
to previously constructed systems shall be rigid conduit, intermediate conduit
(IMC), electric metallic tubing (EMT) or nonmetallic sheathing cable (Romex).
No other form or raceway or system can be used. The use of flexible metallic
conduit can be used in existing structures when approved by the electric
inspector.
General Provision: All conductors shall be copper, the use of aluminum is not
allowed.
Article 314.1 Add the following:
All boxes installed at a conductor splice point, outlet, switch point, junction
point or pull point shall be a minimum of 4 x 4 x 11/2 inch steel. Exception –
ceiling fan boxes.
334.10 Type NM, NMC, and NMS shall be approved for single-family homes only.
334.15(D) Type NM and NMC shall not be permitted to be exposed except in
unfinished attics, and under-floor spaces.
334.40(D) Add the following:
When type NM or NMC is used, a 12 inch loop shall be left before entering a box
or device.
(2013 Code § 11-1-10)
9-2-2-7: ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE AMENDMENTS:
(Rep. by Ord. O-16-06, 4-19-2016)
9-2-2-8: RESIDENTIAL CODE AMENDMENTS:
The following additions, insertions and changes shall further apply and shall
supersede any and all references listed within the international residential
code, 2012 edition:
Section R101.1 Insert "village of Campton Hills".
(2013 Code § 11-1-12)
Section R105.10 Add a new section and the following:
Unique Construction: When a project has unique features, unusual construction
sequences or out of the ordinary construction techniques, the building
department shall have the authority to require additional documentation to
determine code compliance. The building and zoning officer may also add
additional fees to the building permit based on the additional inspections
required, or to cover the cost of specialized inspections, or outside
inspection or testing agencies.
Unique features or unusual construction sequence is a project where the use of
features or sequences, which create the need for additional inspections other
than those normally requested by the building and zoning officer. The features,
or a sequence of operations which creates additional inspections, can create
this.
(2013 Code § 11-1-12; amd. 2016 Code)
Section R106.6 Plans On The Job Site Requirements: A copy of approved plans
with all revisions shall be kept on the site of the building or work at the
time of inspection.
Section R108.1 Payment Of Fees: Add the following:
Insert "Building permit fee schedule shall be determined by ordinance by the
village board.".
(2013 Code § 11-1-12)
Section R112 Board Of Appeal: Delete sections R112.1 through 112.4 and insert:
See building code amendments to section 113.
(2013 Code § 11-1-12; amd. 2016 Code)
Section R113.4 Violation Penalties: Insert the following:
The penalties shall be as determined by ordinance by the village board.
Table 301.2(1): The following information shall be inserted in the table:
Ground snow load                  25
Wind speed                        3 second 90 normal 75
Topographic effects               Yes
Seismic condition                 A
Subject to damage from weathering Severe
Frost line depth                  42 inches
Termite                           Moderate to heavy (termite shields required)
Winter design temperature         -4 degrees
Ice shield underlayment           Yes
Flood hazard                      Village of Campton Hills, August 3, 2009,
                                  July 17, 2012
Air freezing index                2000
Mean annual temp                  50 degrees
 
Section R302.1 Add the following:
All townhouses and two-family dwellings shall be separated with a minimum of a
two-hour fire resistant rated wall assembly.
Section R302.2 Add the following:
The walls between town homes shall have a minimum fire rating of two hours.
This rating shall extend beyond the exterior walls for a minimum of 5 feet when
the exterior walls are offset.
Section R302.6 Separation: Delete the section and insert the following:
Garage Separation: All one and two family dwellings shall be separated from
adjacent interior spaces by a fire partition having a fire resistance rating of
not less than one (1) hour. All beams, columns and support walls supporting
living spaces shall be protected. The door assembly leading from the garage to
the interior space shall carry a one (1) hour fire rating and shall be supplied
with an automatic self-closing device. If an attic opening is located within
the garage, this opening must also carry a one (1) hour fire resistance rating.
Section R309.1 Delete the section and the following:
Floor Surface:
All garage floors shall be concrete.
Curb: A four (4) inch high concrete curb shall be provided between the garage
and residence.
Section R309.5 Fire Sprinklers: Delete the section in its entirety.
Section R309.6 is hereby added to read as follows:
Section R309.6 Free Standing Or Detached Garages: Garages of slab and grade
beam construction without footings and permanent foundation walls may be
permitted if said garage is separated from the main house or building by no
less than ten (10) feet of open space. Said garage shall not be permitted to
any connection to the main house or building unless a complete footing and
foundation system is provided to a depth of no less than forty-two (42) inches
below grade.
(2013 Code § 11-1-12)
Section R310.6 Add the following section to read as follows:
   Notwithstanding anything contained within the IRC to the contrary, any
alteration, repair or addition to windows within a sleeping unit or sleeping
room identified in Section R310.1 of the IRC shall ensure such alteration,
repair or addition shall cause the applicable sleeping unit or sleeping room to
be compliant with the requirements for emergency escape and rescue openings as
provided in Section R310 of the IRC.
Section R313.2 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems In One And Two Family
Dwellings: Delete the section in its entirety.
Section R401.3.1 Add new section:
Gutters: All dwellings shall have gutters. The gutters and downspouts shall be
designed and installed to discharge the water away from the building.
Sections R403 and R404.3.3 All references to wood footings and foundations are
deleted. The use of wood footings and foundations is prohibited.
(2013 Code § 11-1-12)
Section R408.8 New subsection R408.8 is added following subsection R408.7 and
shall read as follows:
"R408.7 Concrete Slush Coats In Crawl Spaces: All crawl spaces shall have a
minimum of two (2) inch slush coat installed in all residential crawl spaces. A
base course shall be installed in accordance with subsection 505.2.2.".
(2013 Code § 11-1-12; amd. 2016 Code)
Section R501.3.1 Add section R501.3.1 Open Web Trusses: The use of open web
wood floor trusses and engineered floor joists is not allowed unless drywalled
on the bottom side with a minimum of one layer of 5/8 inch drywall or any one-
hour fire- rated assembly.
Section R502.7.1 Change as follows:
Joists shall be supported by solid bridging, diagonal bridging (wood or metal)
at intervals not exceeding eight (8) feet. The building official may approve
alternate methods of bridging.
Delete chapters 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, and 32. Refer to state of Illinois
department of public health plumbing code of 2004.
(2013 Code § 11-1-12)
Delete chapters 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41 and insert the 2011 edition
of NFPA 70 with the amendments listed in section 150.09.
(2013 Code § 11-1-12; amd. 2016 Code)
Referenced standards:
Delete the references to the international plumbing code.
Delete the references to the international private sewage disposal code.
Adopt the following appendices: B, C, F, G, H, K, and O.
(2013 Code § 11-1-12; amd. Ord. O-19-16, 10-1-2019)
9-2-2-9: PLUMBING CODE AMENDMENTS:
There are no amendments to the Illinois plumbing code. The strictest of the
provisions shall apply when there is a conflict between the Illinois plumbing
code and this chapter. (2013 Code § 11-1-13)
9-2-2-10: ACCESSIBILITY CODE AMENDMENTS:
There are no amendments to the Illinois accessibility code. The strictest of
the provisions shall apply when there is a conflict between the Illinois
accessibility code and this chapter. (2013 Code § 11-1-14)
9-2-2-11: WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE CODE AMENDMENTS:
The following additions, insertions and changes shall further apply and shall
supersede any and all references listed within the international wildland-urban
interface code, 2012 edition:
Section 101.1 Insert "Village of Campton Hills".
Section 103.1 Insert "Village of Campton Hills".
Section 109.4.7 Insert "See the village of Campton Hills fee schedule.".
Section 114.4 Insert "See the village of Campton Hills fee schedule.".
(2013 Code § 11-1-15)
CHAPTER 3
VACANT STRUCTURES
SECTION:
9-3-1: Definitions
9-3-2: Administration And Enforcement Official
9-3-3: Responsible Parties
9-3-4: Obligations Of Owners
9-3-5: Registration Certificate
9-3-6: Insurance Requirements
9-3-7: Maintenance Standards
9-3-8: Lien Provisions
9-3-9: Request For Waiver
9-3-10: Penalties
9-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings set forth in this section:
OWNER: Every person, entity or service company who, alone or jointly or
separately with others:
   A.   Has the legal or equitable title to any dwelling, dwelling unit,
building, land or structure; or
   B.   Has care, charge, or control of any dwelling, dwelling unit, building,
land or structure in any capacity including, but not limited to, executor,
administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the holder of legal title;
or
   C.   Is a mortgagee under the terms of a mortgage, where the mortgagor is no
longer taking responsibility for the property, and where the mortgage in
question contains a provision authorizing the mortgagee to act to secure or
repair the property; or
   D.   Is a mortgagee in possession of any such property; or
   E.   Is a mortgagee that has instituted foreclosure proceedings against the
mortgagor; or
   F.   Is a trustee or other person appointed by a court invested with
possession or control of any such property.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY: Includes an owner, tenant, occupier, property manager,
lessee or agent.
STATEMENT OF INTENT: A form completed by the "owner", as defined in this
section, of a vacant structure, or the responsible party, which contains
specific information regarding the structure and the owner's plans for
rehabilitation, maintenance, demolition and/or removal.
STRUCTURE: Any physical object or edifice that is built or installed and is
located on and affixed to the land. The term "structure" shall include any part
of a structure.
SUBSTANTIAL REHABILITATION: Any rehabilitation, the cost of which exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the existing structure.
VACANT: A. A structure that is:
      1.   Lacking the habitual presence of human beings, who have a legal
right to be on the premises for ninety (90) consecutive days; or
      2.   One at which substantially all lawful business or construction
activity or residential occupancy has ceased; or
      3.   One which is substantially devoid of contents.
   B.   For the purposes of this chapter, the building and zoning officer of
the village may, in specific instances, except from the definition of vacant
properties those that are actively listed for sale and those properties which
are under active, ongoing rehabilitation or reconstruction and have a building
permit from the village.
VACANT STRUCTURE MAINTENANCE STANDARDS: The maintenance standards to which the
vacant structures are subject under this chapter and as set forth in the
village of Campton Hills building and zoning code and ordinances (including
those codes of the county of Kane which have been adopted by the village by
reference), as amended from time to time.
VACANT STRUCTURE REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE: A document issued by the village for
structures meeting the definition of "vacant" in this section. (2013 Code § 11-
2-1; amd. 2016 Code)
9-3-2: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL:
The village building and zoning officer is authorized to administer and enforce
the provisions of this chapter including, but not limited to, maintaining lists
setting forth the status of vacant structures. The village building and zoning
officer may delegate these powers and duties to an appropriate designee or
inspector. (2013 Code § 11-2-2)
9-3-3: RESPONSIBLE PARTIES:
Every responsible party with respect to any vacant property shall be jointly
and severally liable with every other responsible party for the obligations set
forth in this chapter. Reference to an owner in this chapter shall include all
responsible parties. (2013 Code § 11-2-3)
9-3-4: OBLIGATIONS OF OWNERS:
   A.   Within fourteen (14) days after a structure becomes "vacant", as
defined in section
9-3-1 of this chapter, the owner of the structure shall apply for a vacant
structure registration certificate and pay a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). It
shall be the responsibility of the registered owner to file an amended
registration and pay a new registration fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) within
fourteen (14) days after any changes of the information contained in the
initial application, including occupancy or transfer. During the period of
registration, the owner shall provide access to the village to conduct
inspections of the structure, both interior and exterior, if deemed necessary
by the village, and, following reasonable notice, to determine compliance with
this chapter and any other relevant codes and ordinances of the village.
   B.   The owner of a vacant structure shall comply with all regulations of
the village. To this end, the owner shall apply for all building and zoning
permits necessary to bring the structure into compliance within fourteen (14)
days of obtaining a vacant structure registration certificate.
   C.   The owner of a vacant structure shall, within fourteen (14) days after
receipt of the vacant structure registration certificate, complete the removal
of all:
      1.   Combustible materials from the structure in compliance with the
applicable fire prevention regulations;
      2.   Waste, rubbish or debris from the interior of the structure; and
      3.   Waste, rubbish, debris or excess vegetation including grass in
excess of ten inches (10") from the yards surrounding the vacant structure in
accordance with this code.
   D.   The owner of a vacant structure shall immediately lock, barricade or
secure all doors, windows and other openings in the structure to prevent entry
by unauthorized persons, in accordance with the vacant structure maintenance
standards of this chapter. The owner shall, as needed, provide additional
security in the event of increased danger to human life or the public welfare,
as determined by the village. (2013 Code § 11-2-4)
   E.   The obligations of the owner of a vacant structure are continuing
obligations which are effective throughout the time of the vacancy. (2013 Code
§ 11-2-4; amd. 2016 Code)
9-3-5: REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE:
   A.   Application For Certificate: Application by the owner of a vacant
structure for a vacant structure certificate shall be made on a form provided
by the building and zoning officer. The application shall include a "statement
of intent" which will set forth information as to:
      1.   The expected period of vacancy (including the date of initial
vacancy);
      2.   The plan for regular maintenance during the vacancy to comply with
the vacant structure maintenance standards of this chapter and all of the
applicable property maintenance, building and zoning codes of the village;
      3.   A plan and time line for the lawful occupancy, rehabilitation,
removal or demolition of the structure;
      4.   Measures to be taken to ensure that the structure will be kept
weathertight and secure from trespassers and that it will be safe for entry by
police officers, firefighters and code or building inspectors in time of
exigent circumstances or emergency as well as at times of other inspections;
      5.   Measures to be taken to assure that the premises remains free from
nuisance conditions and in good order in conformance with the vacant structure
maintenance standards; and
      6.   A list of all persons authorized to be present in the structure and
provide notices of trespass to the police authorizing the arrest for trespass
of individuals not on the list. The owner shall update the authorized person
list as needed. (2013 Code § 11-2-5)
   B.   Placement On Structure: The owner or owner's agent shall affix to the
vacant structure a copy of the vacant structure registration certificate in a
front window so that it is able to be read by law enforcement or village
personnel as needed. (2013 Code § 11-2-8)
9-3-6: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
It shall be the responsibility of the owner or owner's agent to maintain
liability insurance on all vacant and registered properties under his control.
Proof of evidence of such insurance shall be filed with the village. Minimum
insurance amounts shall be determined by the building and zoning officer on an
individual basis. (2013 Code § 11-2-7)
9-3-7: MAINTENANCE STANDARDS:
A vacant structure shall be subject to the maintenance standards as set forth
in the applicable provisions of the building and zoning codes of the village.
(2013 Code § 11-2-6)
9-3-8: LIEN PROVISIONS:
All fees, costs or charges assessed or incurred by the village pursuant to this
chapter shall be a lien upon the real estate upon which the vacant structure is
situated. The lien shall be superior to all other liens and encumbrances except
real estate taxes. The village building and zoning officer shall file a notice
of lien, within one year after such cost and expense is incurred, in the office
of the Kane County recorder. The lien may be enforced by proceeding to
foreclose, as in case of mortgages or mechanic's liens. (2013 Code §§ 11-2-3,
11-2-9)
9-3-9: REQUEST FOR WAIVER:
   A.   Any owner of a vacant residential property of one to three (3) units,
who is a natural person with insufficient income or resources to fulfill all of
the obligations imposed herein, may petition the village building and zoning
officer for a waiver of the registration fee, a reduction of the minimum amount
of liability insurance, and/or a waiver of some or all of the property
rehabilitation requirements (hereinafter "financial requirements") under this
chapter for a period of time not to exceed twelve (12) months. Application for
a waiver of financial requirements shall be in writing on forms provided by the
village. The decision of the village building and zoning officer, to be made
within fourteen (14) days after receiving the petition, shall be made in
writing and forthwith shall be mailed or delivered to the petitioner. An appeal
of the decision may be made to the village administrator, in writing, within
fourteen (14) days of the mailing or delivery of the decision. Individuals who
are granted a waiver under this section remain obligated to keep the registered
property secure and safe, and the exterior property areas free from debris,
with grass regularly mowed. (2013 Code § 11-2-10; amd. 2016 Code)
   B.   A request for a waiver from the other provisions of this chapter for
good cause, as set forth in the waiver request, shall be made by the owner to
the president and board of trustees, in writing, and submitted to the village
clerk. The waiver request shall be heard at a meeting of the corporate
authorities within thirty (30) days of receipt by the village clerk, and the
decision of the village board shall be in writing and mailed or delivered to
the petitioner. (2013 Code § 11-2-10)
9-3-10: PENALTIES:
Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed that set out in section
1-4-1 of this code per violation per day. Each day that said violation
continues shall be considered a new and separate violation. Prosecution under
this section is a remedy cumulative to any and all other remedies at law and
equity including, but not limited to, the village remedies under 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-15. (2013 Code § 11-2-9; amd. 2016 Code)
CHAPTER 4
HISTORIC LANDMARK PROTECTION
SECTION:
9-4-1: County Ordinance Adopted
9-4-1: COUNTY ORDINANCE ADOPTED:
The provisions of the Kane County historic landmark protection ordinance are
hereby adopted by reference as part of this chapter. (2013 Code § 10-1-1)
CHAPTER 5
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-5-1: Title, Applicability, And Interpretation
9-5-1-1: Title
9-5-1-2: Applicability; Purpose
9-5-1-3: Interpretation
9-5-2: Definitions
9-5-3: Applications
9-5-3-1: Preliminary Consultation
9-5-3-2: Preliminary Plat
9-5-3-3: Preliminary Plat Submittal Requirements
9-5-3-4: Engineering Plans
9-5-3-5: Final Plat
9-5-3-6: Exceptions
9-5-3-7: Agreements And Guarantee Of Improvements
9-5-3-8: Construction Of Required Improvements
9-5-3-9: Acceptance Of Required Land Improvements
9-5-3-10: Outside Consultants
9-5-3-11: Fees
9-5-3-12: Indemnity
9-5-4: Required Improvements
9-5-4-1: General Requirements
9-5-4-2: Minimum Standards And Specifications
9-5-4-3: Oversize Design
9-5-4-4: Off-Site Improvements
9-5-4-5: Lot Design
9-5-4-6: Slope And Grade
9-5-4-7: Blocks
9-5-4-8: Easements
9-5-4-9: Rights-Of-Way
9-5-4-10: Utilities
9-5-5: Required Dedications
9-5-5-1: Dedication Of School Sites
9-5-5-2: Dedication Of Park Sites
9-5-5-3: Common Open Space
9-5-6: Conservation Design
9-5-6-1: Applicability
9-5-6-2: Intent
9-5-6-3: General Requirements
9-5-6-4: Development Standards
9-5-6-5: Perimeter Yard
9-5-6-6: Common Open Space
9-5-1: TITLE, APPLICABILITY, AND INTERPRETATION:
9-5-1-1: TITLE:
This Chapter is known, cited, and referred to as the "Subdivision Ordinance,"
"Subdivision Regulations," or "regulations" of the Village of Campton Hills.
(Ord. O-20-13, 11-4-2020)
9-5-1-2: APPLICABILITY; PURPOSE:
   A.   Applicability:
The layout, design, and engineering of all subdivisions shall comply with the
provisions of these regulations and other applicable Village, county, state,
and federal requirements, except as may be varied or waived in accordance with
the provisions of this Chapter. No person may subdivide land except in
accordance with this Chapter and with applicable laws of the State of Illinois.
Pursuant to the authority granted under the provisions of the Illinois
Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/11.12-4 through 5/11.12-12) the regulations set forth
herein shall apply to any division of land within the Village and to any
division of land within one and one-half (1.5) miles of the incorporated limits
of the Village. No land within the territorial jurisdiction of the Village
shall be subdivided or re-subdivided, and no subdivision heretofore platted
shall be vacated unless approved by the Village Board in accordance with
procedures set forth herein.
No building permit for a structure shall be issued for any parcel or lot
created by subdivision after the effective date of this Chapter, unless said
parcel or lot is in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter. No
construction of any public or private improvements required by this Chapter
shall take place or commence except in conformity with these regulations.
Land divisions specifically exempted by the Plat Act are also exempt from this
Chapter except where a new parcel is created entirely or partially from the
division of one or more existing lots or parcels. In this instance, a plat of
survey shall be prepared and signed by a registered Illinois Land Surveyor and
shall be submitted to the Village which shall review it to determine
conformance with the Village's zoning regulations. Such a plat shall not be
recorded until approved by the Village.
   B.   Purpose: This Chapter is adopted for the following purposes:
      1.   To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and welfare of
the Village.
      2.   To guide the future growth and development of the Village in
accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and any additional adopted land use
policies of the Village.
      3.   To provide for open spaces through efficient design and layout of
the land while preserving the density of land as established in the Zoning
Ordinance.
      4.   To protect natural areas and wildlife habitats and to maintain the
diversity of flora and fauna throughout the Village.
      5.   To preserve environmentally sensitive areas to promote environmental
and ecological benefits, including natural resource protection, wildlife
management and habitat preservation, and water quality protection.
      6.   To preserve the historic character of development within the
Village.
      7.   To mitigate pollution of air, soil, and surface waters; to assure
the adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table; and to
encourage proper management of natural resources throughout the Village.
      8.   To provide safe circulation of traffic throughout the Village, avoid
congestion and hazards in the roadways, create safe pedestrian traffic
movements, and to provide for the proper location and width of roads.
      9.   To guide public and private policy and action in facilitating
adequate provision for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks,
playgrounds, recreation and other public requirements.
      10.   To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for
subdivisions and resubdivisions; to further the orderly layout and use of land;
and to ensure proper legal description and monumenting of subdivided land.
(Ord. O-20-13, 11-4-2020)
9-5-1-3: INTERPRETATION:
In interpreting and applying of these regulations, they are held to be the
minimum requirements for the promotion and effectuation of the purposes set
forth herein. Where these regulations impose greater restrictions or
requirements than one imposed or required by other provisions of laws, rules,
regulations, covenants, or agreements, these regulations control. Where any
easements, covenants, deed restrictions, or agreements between parties impose
restrictions greater than those imposed by this chapter, those easements,
covenants, deed restrictions, or agreements will control. However, the Village
will not enforce any private easements, covenants, deed restrictions, or
agreements. (Ord. O-20-13, 11-4-2020)
9-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions apply:
                                   A tract of land bounded by roads, or by a
                                   combination of roads and public parks,
BLOCK:                             cemeteries, railroads rights-of-way, shore
                                   lines of waterways, or corporate boundary
                                   lines of a village.
                                   Any form of security, including a cash
                                   escrow deposit, letter of credit, surety
BOND:                              bond, collateral, property or instrument of
                                   credit, in an amount and form satisfactory
                                   to the Village.
                                   A plan for the Village, including graphic
                                   and written elements, indicating the long
                                   range physical development of the Village or
                                   any of its parts, including any part of such
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:                plan separately adopted, any amendment to
                                   such plan and parts thereof, any binding
                                   boundary agreements with other jurisdictions
                                   adopted by the Planning and Zoning
                                   Commission and the Village Board of
                                   Trustees.
                                   A drawing and any accompanying information
                                   which shows existing and proposed
CONCEPT PLAN:                      development conditions as described in this
                                   chapter and shall include those matters set
                                   forth in subsection
                                   9-5-3-1A of this Chapter.
                                   Certificate of deposit or irrevocable letter
                                   of credit, or other good and sufficient
CONSTRUCTION GUARANTEE:            security as approved by the appropriate
                                   legal authority of the Village to guarantee
                                   the proper installation of public and quasi-
                                   public improvements.
                                   A condition in a contract such as a deed or
COVENANT:                          lease, nonperformance or violation of which
                                   gives rise to a cause of action for breach.
                                   A minor road having one open end and being
CUL-DE-SAC:                        permanently terminated by a vehicle
                                   turnaround.
                                   Any person subdividing, erecting structures
DEVELOPER:                         or causing to have made any improvements to
                                   the land. May also be referred to as
                                   applicant or subdivider herein.
                                   The total improvement of land through
                                   building and development of housing,
DEVELOPMENT:                       commercial and recreational uses in a
                                   coordinated manner, including the division
                                   or resubdivision, of any tract or parcel of
                                   land.
                                   Acceptable illustrations depicting the
DRAWINGS:                          project, plot of land, plat or similar
                                   documents from the applicant.
                                   A grant by a property owner for the use of a
EASEMENT:                          strip of land by the general public, a
                                   corporation, or certain persons for a
                                   specific purpose or purposes.
                                   A professional engineer, registered and
                                   licensed as such in the State of Illinois,
ENGINEER, DESIGN:                  responsible for the design of site
                                   improvement plans and specifications for a
                                   project or subdivision.
                                   A professional engineer, registered and
                                   licensed as such in the state responsible
ENGINEER, PROJECT:                 for assuring that the site improvements are
                                   constructed and/or installed according to
                                   approved plans and specifications and
                                   according to standard engineering practice.
                                   The map or plan or record of a subdivision
FINAL PLAT:                        and any accompanying material, as described
                                   in this chapter.
                                   That side of a lot abutting on a road or way
FRONTAGE:                          and ordinarily regarded as the front of the
                                   lot, but it shall not be considered as the
                                   ordinary side of a corner lot.
                                   A map approved by the Kane County Board upon
                                   which is designated all existing and
HIGHWAY MAP, OFFICIAL:             proposed expressways, major arterials and
                                   collector roads in the county, and revised
                                   annually by the Kane County Division of
                                   Transportation.
IEPA:                              The Illinois Environmental Protection
                                   Agency.
                                   All required improvements including, but not
                                   limited to roads, road lighting, road signs,
                                   permanent monuments, grading and surface and
                                   subsurface drainage ways and facilities,
IMPROVEMENTS:                      retention and detention basins, soil erosion
                                   control, community water distribution
                                   systems and water supply facilities,
                                   community sewage systems, community sewage
                                   treatment plants and sanitary sewers,
                                   fencing and required landscaping.
                                   A septic tank, seepage tile sewage disposal
                                   system, or any other approved sewage
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM: treatment device as described and allowed
                                   for in the county sewage treatment and
                                   disposal system rules and regulations.
                                   A tract, plot, or portion of a subdivision
                                   or other parcel of land intended as a unit
LOT:                               for the purpose, whether immediate or
                                   future, of transfer of ownership or for
                                   building development.
                                   Any parcel or area of land or water set
                                   aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for
                                   either passive or active recreational use.
OPEN SPACE:                        Public open space is any such parcel or area
                                   owned or leased, operated and maintained by
                                   a political jurisdiction. Private open space
                                   is any such area or parcel under private
                                   ownership and management.
                                   Any person, group of persons, firm or firms,
                                   corporation or corporations, or any other
OWNER:                             legal entity having legal title to or a
                                   sufficient proprietary interest in the land
                                   sought to be subdivided under this chapter.
                                   The preliminary drawing or drawings, and all
PRELIMINARY PLAT:                  accompanying information required in this
                                   chapter, indicating the proposed manner of
                                   layout of the subdivision.
                                   Design drawings checked in the field and
                                   which are revised to show as-constructed
                                   locations, elevation, grading and specify
                                   size and materials of improvements and
                                   utilities. The drawing provides a schematic
                                   verification that the intent of the accepted
RECORD DRAWING:                    civil engineering improvement plans have
                                   been met, thereby substantiating that the
                                   health, safety and welfare aspects of the
                                   engineering design have been adequately
                                   provided by the construction of the project.
                                   Also, the drawing serves as a reference tool
                                   for future location and maintenance
                                   operations related to the improvements.
                                   A strip of land occupied or intended to be
                                   occupied by a road, walk, crosswalk,
                                   railroad, electric transmission line, oil or
                                   gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm
                                   sewer main, shade trees, or for another
                                   special use. The usage of the term "right-
                                   of-way" for land-platting purposes shall
                                   mean that every right-of-way hereafter
                                   established and shown on a final plat is to
RIGHT-OF-WAY:                      be separate and distinct from the lots or
                                   parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not
                                   included within the dimensions or areas of
                                   such lots or parcels. Rights-of-way intended
                                   for roads, walks, crosswalks, water mains,
                                   sanitary sewers, storm drains, shade trees,
                                   or any other use involving maintenance by a
                                   public agency shall be dedicated to public
                                   use by the maker of the plat on which such
                                   right-of-way is established.
                                   Ownership by the same person, corporation,
                                   firm, entity, partnership, or unincorporated
                                   association; or ownership by different
                                   corporations, firms, partnerships, entities,
SAME OWNERSHIP:                    or unincorporated associations, in which a
                                   stockholder, partner, or associate, or a
                                   member of his family owns an interest in
                                   each corporation, firm, partnership, entity,
                                   or unincorporated association.
                                   A graphic exhibit that shows basic resource
SKETCH PLAN:                       features, proposed land uses, roadway layout
                                   and general drainage features.
                                   A certified member of the Illinois Soil
                                   Classifiers Association (ISCA) and/or a
                                   certified professional soil classifier
                                   member of American Registrar of Certified
                                   Professionals in Agronomy, Crops and Soils
                                   (ARCPACS) who, by reason of his special
SOIL CLASSIFIER:                   knowledge of the physical, chemical and
                                   biological sciences applicable to soils; and
                                   of the methods and principles of soil
                                   classification as acquired by soils
                                   education and soil classification experience
                                   in the formation, morphology, description
                                   and mapping of soils is qualified to
                                   practice soil classifying.
                                   The division of a lot into two (2) or more
SUBDIVISION:                       lots, the consolidation of two (2) or more
                                   lots, or a change in the boundary of one or
                                   more lots.
                                   Staff of the Village of Campton Hills,
                                   including the Village Administrator, Village
VILLAGE STAFF:                     Engineer, Building Official, Village Clerk,
                                   and any outside consultants hired to serve
                                   in the role of a Village staff person. (Ord.
                                   O-20-13, 11-4-2020)
 
9-5-3: APPLICATIONS:
9-5-3-1: PRELIMINARY CONSULTATION:
   A.   The subdivider will meet with Village Staff for the purpose of
presenting a Concept Plan, including but not limited to the following:
      1.   Written notification in the form of a letter of intent from the
subdivider to the Village Staff establishing the subdivider's intent to develop
the land.
      2.   The Concept Plan shall also contain the name, address, fax, phone
and email of the applicant, and shall identify the location of the property. It
shall also include general subdivision information that describes or outlines
the existing conditions of the site and the proposed development as necessary.
This information must include data on existing covenants, zoning
classification, land characteristics, and available community facilities and
utilities; and information describing the subdivision proposal, such as number
of residential, commercial and industrial lots and units broken down by type
and bedroom count (residential only), overall density, typical lot width and
depth, minimum average lot sizes, general land use categories and their
locations surrounding the property, location of any proposed major streets,
public utilities, existing natural features, such as woodland and/or ponds,
school, playground and park areas and other public areas (as applicable),
proposed protective covenants, and proposed utilities and street improvements.
      3.   A plan on a topographic survey that shows, in simple sketch form,
the proposed layout of streets, lots, and other features in relation to
existing conditions. The sketch plan may be a free-hand sketch made directly on
a print of the topographic survey. The sketch plan must include the existing
topographic data and contours of not less than five foot (5') intervals. This
may be attached to USGS topographic data.
      4.   Tentative engineering proposals regarding water supply, sewage
disposal, stormwater drainage, and street improvements.
   B.   The Village staff will discuss the proposed subdivision with the
subdivider and so advise of any Village plans or projects that might affect the
proposed subdivision, the procedural steps, design and improvement standards,
and the general planning requirements. As part of the review the Village staff
will evaluate the following:
      1.   Check the existing zoning of the tract and advise the subdivider if
a zoning change is necessary or desirable.
      2.   Determine the adequacy of existing or proposed schools, parks and
other public spaces in the vicinity of the proposed subdivision.
      3.   Inspect the site or otherwise determine its relationship to major
streets, utility systems, and adjacent land uses and determine any unusual
problems in regard to topography, utilities, flooding, etc.
      4.   Refer the developer to the appropriate governmental entities, which
may include: fire protection districts, highway districts, sanitary districts
and school districts.
      5.   Advise the developer of the Comprehensive Plan, which delineates the
areas to be served by either public and/or private water and/or sanitary sewer
service. This will determine the feasibility of the proposed subdivision, the
sizes of the utilities and the lots therein. (Ord. O-20-13, 11-4-2020)
9-5-3-2: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
   A.   Action By Subdivider: The subdivider will prepare a preliminary plat,
which will include all of the property owned or controlled by the applicant,
which properties are adjacent to the proposed subdivision, together with
improvement plans and other supplementary material, as specified, to be
submitted to the Village Staff with the applicable application and filing fee.
   B.   Action By Planning And Zoning Commission:
      1.   The Village staff will review the preliminary plan for compliance
with these regulations and other ordinances of the Village. The Village Staff
recommendation will then be forwarded to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      2.   The Planning and Zoning Commission will consider the preliminary
plat within forty five (45) days of receipt of the Village Staff
recommendation. The applicant and the Planning and Zoning Commission may
mutually agree to extend this period. The Planning and Zoning Commission will:
         a.   Recommend approval or disapproval of the proposed preliminary
plat and submit its written recommendations, which include the recommendations
of the Village Staff, to the Village Board.
         b.   Alternatively, if the Planning and Zoning Commission finds that
changes, additions, or corrections are required on the preliminary plat, the
Planning and Zoning Commission will advise the subdivider in writing. The
subdivider may resubmit the preliminary plat to the Planning and Zoning
Commission, without paying an additional fee, for consideration at the next
regular meeting. The Planning and Zoning Commission will, at said meeting,
recommend approval or disapproval of the preliminary plat and submit its
recommendations in writing, which include the recommendations of the Village
Staff, to the Village Board and the subdivider.
   C.   Action By Village Board: The Village Board of Trustees will consider
the preliminary plat within forty five (45) days of receipt of the preliminary
plat after receiving the recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
The applicant and the Village Board may mutually agree to extend such
timeframe. The Village Board will:
      1.   Approve or disapprove the proposed preliminary plat.
      2.   Alternatively, if the Village Board finds that changes, additions,
or corrections are required on the preliminary plat, the Village Board will
advise the subdivider in writing and may remand the matter to the Planning and
Zoning Commission for further consideration as provided in subsection B above.
If the matter is not remanded to the Planning and Zoning Commission, the
subdivider may resubmit the preliminary plat to the Village Board without
paying an additional fee. The Village Board will, at the meeting where the
revised plat is considered, approve or disapprove the preliminary plat.
   D.   Validity: Approval of the preliminary plat is valid for one year,
unless upon application of the subdivider, the Village Board grants an
extension. The application for said extension does not require an additional
filing fee or the submittal of additional copies of the preliminary plan.
Extensions shall be requested in one-year increments and are limited to a total
of five (5) years upon which the preliminary plat will no longer be valid and a
complete resubmittal, review and approval will be required.
   E.   Notice Of Approval: Upon approval or disapproval of the preliminary
plat by the Village Board, the appropriate following notice must be stamped on
and required signatures affixed to the preliminary plat:
NOTICE OF APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT
Notice is hereby given that the preliminary plat of a subdivision shown hereon
has received conditional approval by the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Campton Hills, Illinois, and upon compliance by the subdivider with
requirements of qualifications governing the approval of preliminary plats and
with other revisions and stipulations that may be required, the Board of
Trustees will receive the final plat for consideration when submitted by the
subdivider in such form and within such time as required by the subdivision
regulations of the Village.
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Campton Hills, Illinois.
Date
By   
President
Attest   
Village Clerk
NOTICE OF DISAPPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT
Notice is hereby given that the preliminary plat of a subdivision shown hereon
has been disapproved by the Board of Trustees of the Village of Campton Hills,
Illinois. The reasons for the disapproval are as follows:
(To be completed by the Village Board)
The Board of Trustees of the Village of Campton Hills, Illinois.
Date
By   
President
Attest   
Village Clerk
   F.   Distribution Of Approved Preliminary Plans: Prints of such approved
preliminary plat will be distributed by Village staff as follows:
      1.   One print to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      2.   One print to each affected governmental entity, which may include:
fire protection districts, highway districts, sanitary districts and school
districts.
      3.   One print and one digital copy to the Village staff.
      4.   Two (2) prints retained by the Village staff for filing and
departmental use.
      5.   One print returned to the subdivider.
      6.   Other parties of interest as determined by the Village staff. (Ord.
O-20-13, 11-4-2020)
9-5-3-3: PRELIMINARY PLAT SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
The preliminary plat must be prepared by an individual or legal entity
acceptably qualified, trained and experienced in the layout of subdivisions.
The following graphic and descriptive items are must be provided as part of the
preliminary plat application. If any information is not provided, unless it has
been specifically waived, or improper information is supplied by the applicant,
it may be cause for disapproval of a preliminary plat.
   A.   Application For Approval: Written application by the property owner, or
his/her agent, or a contract purchaser, with written consent of the property
owner, on forms furnished by the Village must accompany each preliminary plan
and contain the following information:
      1.   Name For File Identification:
         a.   Name of subdivision, if property is within an existing
subdivision.
         b.   Proposed name, if not within a previously platted subdivision.
The proposed name cannot duplicate the name of any plat previously recorded in
Kane County.
         c.   Name of property if no subdivision name has been chosen.
      2.   Location And Description: Location of property by government lot,
section, township, range, and county.
      3.   Basic Facts And Proposals:
         a.   Size of tract in acres and existing lots, if any, in square feet.
         b.   Existing zoning classification of property and any rezoning
proposed to be requested.
         c.   Number of lots proposed in subdivision.
         d.   Area of lots proposed.
         e.   Proposed linkage to water and sewer facilities.
         f.   Any other proposals, such as parcels of land intended to be
dedicated, conveyed or reserved for public use, and the conditions proposed for
such disposal and use.
         g.   Drainage area that goes through the property being subdivided
from the outside of the developed land.
      4.   Information As To Ownership, Preparation Of Plat And Submission:
         a.   Name and address, including telephone number of legal owner or
agent of property and citation of last instrument conveying title to each
parcel of property involved in the proposed subdivision, giving grantor,
grantee, date and land records reference.
         b.   Citation of any existing legal rights of way or easements
affecting the property.
         c.   Existing covenants on the property, if any.
         d.   Name and address, including telephone number of the professional
responsible for the subdivision design must be shown on the preliminary plat as
submitted; registered Illinois professional engineer responsible for the design
of public improvements, and registered Illinois land surveyor responsible for
surveys.
   B.   Conservation Features Inventory: The ESA Environmentally Sensitive
Areas Overlay District applies to all areas designated as "Regulated Green
Infrastructure," "Green Infrastructure Evaluation Zone," "Recharge Areas," and
"Ecological Networks" on the Future Land Use Plan contained in the Village of
Campton Hills adopted Comprehensive Plan per the Zoning Ordinance or as may be
provided in the adopted Green Infrastructure Report. A conservation features
inventory (CFI) must be included in an application for any new subdivision in
the ESA Overlay District.
   C.   Accompanying Documentation Required: The preliminary plan of
subdivision must be accompanied by:
      1.   A statement that the proposed subdivision (where contiguous) is or
is not to be annexed to the Village.
      2.   A preliminary engineering plan for water, sewer and storm sewers. If
individual septic systems are to be provided, a soils information plan shall be
provided which shall be a colored rendering, displaying soils with a severe
limitation in red; moderate limitation in yellow; and slight limitation in
green, per Table 13 Sanitary Facilities - Septic Tank Absorption Fields
category located within the Soil Survey of Kane County, Illinois, USDA-Natural
Resources Conservation Service, drawn at a scale of one hundred feet (100') to
the inch and accompanying data showing the following:
         a.   Existing topography with reference to National Geodetic Vertical
Datum (NGVD);
         b.   The boundaries of each soil type and identification of soil types
by their name and number according to the Kane County Soil Survey
classification system provided by the U.S.D.A.-Natural Resources Conservation
Service; and
         c.   A legend of each soil type listed according to their limitation
as set forth in the Kane County Soil Survey.
      3.   A soil survey map shall be provided graphically identifying the
location of septic fields for each lot on the plan. Every lot must have a
septic field area that can accommodate a septic system equivalent to two (2)
times the disposal requirements for a five bedroom home, in accordance with the
criteria for sizing seepage field based upon soil classifications and other
applicable provisions of the then current Kane County Health Department rules
and regulations for individual sewage disposal systems. If the subdivision
contains soils which are moderate to severe in areas of the septic system, the
Village may require additional soil test pits to ascertain more accurately the
limiting nature of the soils or ground water conditions for the construction of
septic fields. Said testing must be completed by a certified soil scientist.
The soil survey map shall be signed by a Certified Soils Classifier.
      4.   Soil borings must be performed to determine the bearing capacity and
ground water limits in the proposed septic and building area. Said borings must
be performed by a geotechnical testing company.
         a.   Copies of the completed reports prepared by the testing
laboratory must be filed with the Village Staff and Planning and Zoning
Commission.
         b.   The Village is not liable for costs connected with the tests,
borings, or interpretations of results of such work.
      5.   Location of all existing farm and storm drainage tiles by persons
qualified to do such work. All existing drain tile lines encountered during the
investigation must be repaired to their original condition. A topographic map
must be submitted showing the following:
         a.   Location of slit trenches with each trench corresponding to the
tile investigation report.
         b.   Location of each drain tile with a flow direction arrow and tile
size.
         c.   A summary of the tile investigation report showing trench
identification number, tile size, material and quality, percentage of tile
filled with water, percentage of restricted siltation, depth of ground cover,
and soil texture at grade.
         d.   Name, address and phone number of person conducting tile location
investigation.
      6.   Any easements, covenants, deed restrictions, or private agreements.
      7.   A certified wetland report identifying the limits of any regulated
wetlands within fifty feet (50') of the site.
      8.   Copy of the land use opinion report provided by the Kane-DuPage Soil
and Water Conservation District.
      9.   Copy of IHPA Consultation.
      10.   Evidence of compliance with the Illinois Endangered Species
Protection Act including Copy of IDNR EcoCat and any additional consultation
required.
      11.   Copies of Draft Dormant SSA Documents (providing the ability of the
Village to access for maintenance of stormwater and other common lots if HOA/
POA does not or if HOA/POA dissolves).
      12.   Sight distance studies at access points.
      13.   Traffic Impact Study if the proposed subdivision creates fifteen
(15) lots or more.
      14.   Copies of basis of design for lift stations, booster stations, etc.
      15.   Copies of correspondences with County and/or IDOT regarding access.
      16.   Copies of correspondence with any other applicable agencies such as
County Health Department, ACOE and IDNR-OWR.
      17.   Statement of intent regarding fees and dedications.
      18.   Copy of a letter from School District contact.
      19.   Phasing Map or Plan.
      20.   Preliminary Stormwater Management Calculations.
      21.   Water Recharge Map and Report
   D.   Drawings And Data Required: The preliminary plat and required
accompanying maps must be drawn clearly and legibly at a scale of not more than
two hundred feet (200') to the inch. A CD, thumbdrive and/or cloud-based files
containing copies of all maps, data and items submitted shall be provided to
the Village with each submittal. The preliminary plat must show all existing
conditions and the proposed subdivision plan including the following:
      1.   Identification And Description:
         a.   Name of the subdivision; not a duplication of a name of any plat
heretofore recorded in the Village or in Kane County, Illinois.
         b.   Location by section, township and range, or by other approved
legal description, including present tract designation according to official
County records and PIN number.
         c.   Survey prepared and certified by a registered land surveyor
showing boundary, existing right of way width and easements.
         d.   Name, phone, e-mail and address of the site planner and/or
engineer.
         e.   Name, phone, e-mail and address of the property owner and/or
subdivider.
         f.   Locations and names of adjacent subdivisions and owners of
adjoining parcels of land within one hundred feet (100') of the subdivision.
      2.   Existing Conditions: Data required as a basis for the preliminary
plan must include existing conditions as follows, except when otherwise waived
by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
         a.   Boundary lines.
         b.   Total acreage.
         c.   Existing zoning districts, both of the proposed subdivision and
all abutting lots.
         d.   Locations, widths, and names of all exiting or previously platted
streets or other rights of way showing type of improvement (if any), railroad
and utility rights-of-way, parks and other public open spaces, permanent
buildings and structures, easements and section and corporate lines within the
tract and to a distance of one hundred feet (100') beyond the tract.
         e.   Location and size of existing sewer lines, water mains, culverts
or other underground facilities within the tract and to a distance of one
hundred feet (100') beyond the tract, also indicating such data as locations
and surface and invert grade elevations of catch basins, manholes, and fire
hydrants. If water mains and sewers are not on or adjacent to the tract,
indicate the direction and distance to, and the size of the nearest usable
facilities. The location of existing field drainage tiles, inlets, and outfalls
of said tiles within the boundaries of said tract.
         f.   A location map drawn at a scale of not less than one inch equals
one thousand feet (1,000') or larger, showing boundary lines of adjoining lots
within an area bounded by nearest arterial streets or other natural boundaries,
but not less than one-half mile beyond the subdivision boundaries in
subdivisions located beyond the Village limits, identifying type of use of
surrounding land and alignment of existing streets.
         g.   Topographic data including existing contours at vertical
intervals of not more than two feet (2'). In unusual topographical conditions,
such vertical intervals may be required to be altered as determined by the
Village Staff, (topographic data must refer to NAVD88).
         h.   The delineation of all floodplains and wetlands, including base
flood elevations available through public records.
         i.   Other conditions on tract such as, but not limited to,
watercourses, marshes, rock outcrops, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees
eighteen inches (18") or more in caliper at three feet (3') above ground level,
houses barns, shacks and other significant features.
         j.   Locations of or reference to locations of existing monuments or
survey markers used in preparation of survey and grade elevation of each bench
mark.
         k.   Highway or other major improvements planned by public authorities
for future construction on or near the tract.
         l.   Location, width, and purpose of existing easements.
         m.   Other conditions on adjacent land: approximate direction and
gradient of ground slope, including any embankments or retaining walls,
character and location of buildings, railroads, power lines, and towers.
         n.   Tributary drainage area that goes through the property being
subdivided from the outside of the developed land and location(s) where runoff
currently exits the site.
         o.   Significant historical, architectural, and archaeological sites
or structures.
      3.   Subdivision Design Features: Subdivision design features must be as
follows:
         a.   The preliminary plat must be in substantial accord with the
Comprehensive Plan and adopted land use policies.
         b.   The zoning districts proposed for the subdivision.
         c.   Right-of-way and roadway widths, street names, which does not
duplicate the name of any street used in the Village or its environs unless
such street is an extension of or in line with an already named street in which
event that name shall be used. Showing proposed through streets extended to the
boundaries of the subdivision and approximate grades and gradients. Typical
roadway cross sections must be provided.
         d.   Location and width of all proposed easements.
         e.   Location of utilities, if not shown on other exhibits.
         f.   Layout, total number of lots, lot dimensions, lot numbers, and
block numbers. A table must be presented which identifies the minimum and
average lot width and depth.
         g.   Sites, if any, to be reserved or dedicated for schools, parks,
playgrounds, or other public uses. Such sites must be designated by letter or
number.
         h.   Proposed location of water wells, septic systems or sewer lines
and storm water drains and proposed method of sewage and waste disposal
including sufficient information to show the intent of surface drainage and
detention and/or retention facilities conforming to minimum standards of the
Village and the County stormwater requirements.
         i.   Site grading plan including building pads, top of foundation
elevations, and roadway centerline grades. Locations designated for proposed
septic fields must be shown demonstrating no or minimal disturbance to the
existing grade. Subsurface drainage systems must also be designated if
required.
         j.   A landscape plan containing the following elements must be
submitted that shows the following, when applicable:
            (1)   Entryway signs and landscaping containing the height, size,
location and material for the sign and generalized planting plan.
            (2)   Screening treatments for double frontage lots.
            (3)   Perimeter fencing, type, size, and material along with any
associated landscape screening.
            (4)   Landscaping and planting plan for stormwater management
facilities.
            (5)   Restoration plan for disrupted site flora.
            (6)   Parkway tree planting plan or planting of trees within ten
feet (10') of the right-of-way showing. A minimum of one tree per lot is
required.
         k.   Phasing.
         l.   Road, sidewalk and bike path and/or trail cross sections.
         m.   Typical lot with setbacks and typical easements.
         n.   Legal description of land to be subdivided.
         o.   Proposed percentage of lot coverage.
         p.   Proposed percentage of impervious areas including area of normal
water surface in a detention basin. (Ord. O-20-13, 11-4-2020)
9-5-3-4: ENGINEERING PLANS:
   A.   Engineering Plans Required: As part of the approval of the final plat,
the subdivider must submit to the Village staff complete sets or engineering
plans and specifications (the number of sets will be determined by the Village)
for the required land improvements along with a single estimate of the cost of
the proposed improvements. The plans and specifications must bear the signature
and seal of the designer and include the following:
      1.   A topographic map of the proposed subdivision at a minimum scale of
one inch equals one hundred feet (100') or larger, the limits of which must
extend at least one hundred feet (100') beyond the limits of the proposed
development and a grading plan of the subdivision showing the proposed grades,
the top of foundation of the proposed structures, the direction of flow of
surface runoff, the finished grade of all corners of a lot, etc.
      2.   A soils survey map, prepared by a certified soils scientist, which
shows the soil conditions on the property where septic fields could be
installed based on examination of soils test pits taken in appropriate
intervals with a minimum of three (3) per lot. The soil pits cannot be located
within proposed right of ways, open space, proposed building pad areas or other
areas where septic systems would not be located.
      3.   Construction drawings with a minimum horizontal scale of one inch
equals fifty feet (50') and a vertical scale of one inch (1") equals five feet
(5'). Existing and proposed construction are to be shown on these drawings.
Cross sections are required every twenty five feet (25') for all streets
without curb and gutter.
      4.   Complete set of specifications covering the work to be done.
      5.   Any off-site easement or dedication plats with legals, title reports
and easement language
      6.   Title commitment.
      7.   Off-site improvement plans.
      8.   Stormwater Management Report with all supporting calculations for
stormwater system design (minor and major), meeting all requirements of the
Countywide Stormwater Management Ordinance.
      9.   Signed, sealed and dated Engineer's Estimate of Probable
Construction Cost referenced to Final Engineering Plans with twenty percent
(20%) contingency.
      10.   Stormwater management permit application.
      11.   Final landscape plan.
      12.   Final homeowners or property owners' association covenants,
restrictions and conditions.
      13.   Storm sewer calculations.
      14.   Sanitary sewer calculations or septic suitable areas for each lot.
      15.   County and/or IDOT approval regarding access and any applicable
improvement plans.
      16.   Approval by all applicable agencies such as County Health, ACOE,
IDNR- OWR, IEPA, etc.
      17.   Copy of all applicable IEPA permit applications.
      18.   Striping and signage plan.
      19.   Traffic control plan, as applicable.
      20.   Photometrics, as applicable.
      21.   Establish compliance with applicable Kane County Stormwater
ordinances.
      22.   A geotechnical soils report prepared by a professional soils
engineer identifying the bearing capacity and anticipated water table for each
lot and identifying any potential areas within the proposed rights of way which
would need subgrade stabilization or remediation. The report must also identify
the presence of subsurface rock that would affect the installation of
underground improvements or proposed buildings.
   B.   Engineering Plans Approval:
      1.   The Village Staff and other public officials having jurisdiction
will approve such engineering and specifications or set forth the revisions
necessary for approval. The Village staff approval and the revised engineering
plans will accompany the final plat through approval.
      2.   The Village will charge the subdivider for review of plans for
required surface and underground improvements on a time plus material basis as
established by the Village. This fee must be paid by the subdivider prior to
the Village staff approval of the engineering plans. (Ord. O-20-13, 11-4-2020)
9-5-3-5: FINAL PLAT:
   A.   Action By Subdivider:
      1.   Application for approval of the final plat, which includes all
engineering drawings, must be submitted to the Village staff accompanied by the
required fees, including the engineering review fee.
      2.   The final plat must conform substantially to the preliminary plat,
as approved, and if desired by the subdivider it may constitute only that
portion of the approved preliminary plat that he/she proposes to record and
develop at the time. Such portion must conform to all requirements of these
regulations and the State Plat Act.
      3.   Any subdivision, which is dependent upon access to a road under the
jurisdiction and control of the Illinois Department of Transportation or Kane
County Highway Department, will not receive final plat approval unless and
until written approval for the requisite access permit has been secured from
the appropriate jurisdictional body (Illinois Department of Transportation and/
or Kane County Highway Department). The subdivider is encouraged to obtain said
written approval simultaneously with, or prior to preliminary subdivision
approval to ensure that the permitting agency does not require changes in the
overall plan which would result in a substantive difference between the
preliminary plan and the final plat when submitted for approval.
      4.   Any subdivision or any portion of one that is not served by a public
sewer system, will not receive final plat approval unless and until written
approval for a sewage disposal system for the subdivision, or the lots thereof,
has been secured from the Kane County Health Department. The subdivider is
encouraged to obtain said written approval simultaneously with, or prior to
preliminary subdivision approval to ensure that the permitting agency does not
require changes in the overall plan which would result in a substantive
difference between the preliminary plan and the final plat when submitted for
approval.
   B.   Action By Planning And Zoning Commission: The Planning and Zoning
Commission will consider the final plat within forty five (45) days of receipt
of a complete application. The applicant and the Planning and Zoning Commission
may mutually agree to extend this period. The Planning and Zoning Commission
will recommend approval or disapproval to the Village Board. If the Planning
and Zoning Commission recommends approval, it will affix the certifying
signature of its chairman to the plat. If it recommends disapproval, it will
set forth the reasons in the record and provide the applicant with a copy.
   C.   Action By Village Board:
      1.   The Village staff will forward the information on to the Village
Board with the Planning and Zoning Commission recommendation for approval,
approval with conditions, or denial.
      2.   The final plat will be considered by the Village Board within forty
five (45) days after the meeting at which the final plat and all drawings, maps
and other documents required have been submitted for its final determination.
The applicant and the Village Board may mutually agree to extend this period.
      3.   Upon approval by the Village Board, the subdivider with submit one
mylar reproducible print and three CD's and contact prints of the approved
final plat to the Village staff, and three CD's and three (3) copies of the
approved supporting documents. The cost of such prints and copies of documents
is paid by the subdivider.
         a.   One CD and one contact print of the final plat, when applicable,
one copy of the accompanying protective covenants, and one copy of the
supporting documents will be delivered to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
         b.   One CD and contact print and all specifications, drawings and
estimates will be delivered to the Village Staff.
         c.   One CD and one transparency print and one contact print and all
other documents will be retained by the Village.
   D.   Filing Of Final Plat: Upon approval by the Village Board, the Village
Staff will record the plat with the Kane County Recorder. The final plat, in
the form approved by the Village Board, and as filed with the Kane County
Recorder, will be filed for local record by the Village staff. Such local file
copy shall bear the appropriate documentation number as assigned by the Kane
County Recorder.
   E.   Drawings And Data For Final Approval: The final plat must be accurately
drawn in ink on tracing mylar drafting film, in a manner that clear and legible
transparent or contract prints or photo static copies can be made, and include
the information in this section. The final plat must be at a minimum scale of
one hundred feet (100') to the inch on sheets not to exceed twenty two inches
by thrity four inches (22" by 34"). Where necessary, the plat may be drawn on
several sheets accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire subdivision.
For large subdivisions, the final plat may be submitted for approval
progressively in contiguous sections satisfactory to the Planning and Zoning
Commission. Final plat content shall include the following:
      1.   All perimeter boundary lines, relevant section or township lines,
and adjoining property within fifty feet (50') of the site.
      2.   Layout of streets showing right-of-way widths and street names,
which do not duplicate the name of any street heretofore used in the Village or
its environs unless such street is an extension of or in line with an already
named street, in which event that name must be used, and showing proposed
through streets extended to the boundaries of the subdivision.
      3.   Location and width of all proposed easements, including public
utility easements, access easements, municipal utility easements, drainage
easements, stormwater management easements, landscape easements, sign
easements, private drainage easements and pedestrian way and bicycle path
easements. Easements must be lettered on the plat.
      4.   Sites to be reserved or dedicated for schools, parks, playgrounds,
or other public uses, or for the exclusive use of property owners within the
subdivision. Such areas must be designated by letter or number and by legal
description. Any areas to be dedicated for public use shall indicate the
purpose thereon, along with any area to be reserved for common use of all
property owners.
      5.   Accurate angular and lineal dimensions for all lines, angles, radii,
and arcs used to describe all boundaries including perimeter survey of tracts,
streets, easements, areas to be reserved or dedicated for public use, and other
important features. The final plat must show accurately the location of all
permanent lot markers as actually installed.
      6.   True angles and distances to the nearest established street lines
and official monuments (not less than two (2), which must be accurately
described in the plat by location and size) to which all dimensions, angles,
bearings, and similar data on the plat must be referred.
      7.   An identification system for all blocks and lots using consecutive
numbers for lots within a block.
      8.   Municipal, township, or section lines accurately correlated to the
lines of the subdivision by distances and angles.
      9.   Accurate location of all monuments which must be placed at all block
corners, angle points, and at intermediate points, as required by the Village
Staff, and installed in such a manner that they may be located by a licensed
surveyor.
      10.   Name of subdivision.
      11.   Location by section, township and range.
      12.   Title, scale, north arrow, preparation and revision dates including
field work completion date.
      13.   Certification by a registered Illinois land surveyor, certifying to
the accuracy of the survey and plat and that it is in accordance with the
current Illinois minimum standards for a boundary survey, and that monuments
and markers shown hereon exist as located and described, or are to be set in
accordance with the plat act and that the plat is an accurate depiction of said
survey and subdivision. Certificate shall also include a statement regarding
the flood zone of the subject property, including the FIRM community panel
number and effective date and also a statement regarding the property's
proximity or annexation to the Village of Campton Hills.
      14.   Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements, or dedications
as may be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or Village Board
in the enforcement of these regulations or as required by the Illinois Plat Act
including but not limited to: notarized certification by owners of record and
any mortgage holder of record, of the adoption of the plan and the dedication
of streets and other public areas, school district certificate(s) (as
applicable), Surface Water Drainage Certificate, relevant highway authority
certificate, Village Engineer certificate, Village treasurer certificate,
County Clerk Certificate and unless direct access to adjacent roads is
approved, a note restricting direct access of perimeter lots shall be
indicated.
      15.   An accurate legal description of the boundary of the subject
property.
      16.   Lot yard lines.
      17.   The address of the firm who prepared the plat. Unless practicing
under the legal name of a professional land surveyor, the firm that has
prepared the plat must be registered with the Illinois Department of Regulation
as a Professional Design Firm and affix its PDF registration number on the
plat.
      18.   Protective covenants meeting the approval of the Village Board
shall be made part of the final plat and recorded with the recorder of Kane
County, Illinois. Recorded covenants shall include a provision prohibiting
amendments without prior written approval of the Village Board. Existence of
other covenants or declarations pertaining to common responsibilities of
individual owners shall be cited and referenced on the plat.
      19.   A legend for all abbreviations and symbols used.
      20.   Total development area, total residential lot areas and total right
of way areas.
      21.   Location, width and name of all streets within and adjoining the
plat, notation as to whether streets were previously dedicated (heretofore
dedicated) or dedicated in this plat (hereby dedicated). Right of way proposed
for the Village must state "Right-of-way hereby dedicated to the Village of
Campton Hills for roadway and utility purposes".
      22.   Wasco Sanitary District Certificate. (Ord. O-20-13, 11-4-2020)
9-5-3-6: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   The Village Board may grant exceptions to the standards and
requirements of this Chapter, including other applicable referenced sections of
the Village Code, where there are particular difficulties or unnecessary
hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of said standards and
requirements.
   B.   Applications for subdivision exceptions and variances will be reviewed
concurrently with the related subdivision application, except as otherwise
provided by the Village Board on a case by case basis. Every application for a
subdivision exception will first be considered at a public meeting of the
Planning and Zoning Commission, which will formulate a recommendation regarding
the application for exception as part of its recommendation on the subdivision
itself. Thereafter, the Village Board will consider the exception at a public
meeting.
   C.   In considering requests for exceptions, Village staff will provide a
report to the Village Board with a recommendation on the proposed exception or
variance based on applicant's information regarding the hardship causing the
need for the exception or variation.
   D.   The Village Board may impose additional conditions as deemed necessary
to protect the public health, safety, welfare, and resources. (Ord. O-20-13,
11-4-2020)
9-5-3-7: AGREEMENTS AND GUARANTEE OF IMPROVEMENTS:
The following agreements and guarantees are required prior to the approval and
recording of a final plat of subdivision.
   A.   Action By The Subdivider: Prior to the filing of an application for a
final plat, the subdivider must submit the following to the Village staff:
      1.   Statement Of Agreement: A statement of agreement that:
         a.   The required land improvements will be completed by the owner or
subdivider in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the
Village staff.
         b.   All improvements except for the final surface must be completed
by the owner or subdivider within two (2) years of the commencement of
construction. Construction must commence within one year following approval of
the final plat by the Village Board.
         c.   No dwelling may be occupied until the binder course has been
applied to the roadway. The final wearing surface will not be applied until the
elapse of one winter season. The roadways remain the responsibility of the
developer until accepted by the Village.
         d.   The subdivider is responsible for the maintenance of the public
improvements as installed until the improvements are completed according to the
approved plans and formally accepted by the Village. Until acceptance, the
subdivider is responsible for snowplowing of the roads and shoveling sidewalks,
as applicable.
      2.   Performance Surety: The Village staff will not certify the approval
of the Village Board on the final plat until the requirements of this section
have been completed.
         a.   Prior to the approval of the final plat of any subdivision, the
subdivider must deposit with the Village performance security in the form of
cash, bond, letter of credit, or other surety acceptable to the Village Board
in an amount not less than one hundred twenty percent (120%) of either the
subdivider's design engineer estimate of the costs for constructing and
installing all of the public and other required improvements (including,
without limitation, stormwater management infrastructure, sediment and erosion
control measures, and landscaping), or the actual cost as shown by all
contracts for construction and installation of all of the public and other
required improvements, whichever is greater. The performance security is for
the purpose of insuring the construction of all of the public and other
required improvements in accordance with the final engineering plans and all
applicable requirements of law.
         b.   The performance security remains in effect at all times until all
of the public and other required improvements have been approved by the Village
staff and the public improvements have been accepted by the Village. If the
public and other required improvements have not been completed and accepted or
approved by the Village thirty (30) days prior to the date on which the
security by its terms is to expire, then the developer must deliver on or
before that date replacement security which by its terms will extend through
the date the public and other required improvements are accepted or approved by
the Village. If the developer fails to so deliver the security, then the
Village has the right at that time, without prior notice to developer, to draw
down the full amount of the existing security.
         c.   If the developer fails or refuses to complete the construction of
any of the public or other required improvements covered by the performance
security, or fails to correct any defect or deficiency in the improvements upon
request by the Village, or fails to increase the security upon the Village's
request, or in any other manner fails or refuses to meet fully the obligations
under the performance security, or the applicable annexation or development
agreement or other approval, then the Village may, in its sole and absolute
discretion, draw on or retain all or any part of the performance security.
         d.   The performance security as approved may be reduced from time to
time as improvements are completed upon recommendation of the Village staff and
approval of the Village Board, provided that one hundred twenty percent (120%)
of the estimated cost of the balance of public improvements or a minimum of
twenty percent (20%) of the original performance security (whichever is
greater) at all times is retained by the Village to secure the completion of
all public improvements and receipt of the following:
            (1)   Written request by owner, developer or subdivider requesting
reduction.
            (2)   An itemized list of the subdivision improvements guaranteed
by the performance security including the design engineer's original opinion of
probable cost for each item, the security amount for each item, the value of
the work completed to date, the value of the work remaining, the requested
reduction amount and the proposed value of the security remaining.
            (3)   A complete or partial "as-built" survey including improvement
elevation and location information.
            (4)   The affidavit and sworn statements of the owner, developer or
subdivider, together with partial and/or full waivers of lien from all
contractors, subcontractors and material suppliers for those items guaranteed
by the performance guarantee.
In no event will the amount of the performance security be reduced to a level
that (i) would not allow the Village to complete the installation of the public
and other improvements required for the subdivision, in the sole and absolute
opinion of the Village staff or (ii) is less than the guaranty security
required by subsection B below.
         e.   If at any time, the Village determines that the performance
security is not sufficient to cover the costs of the remaining public
improvements, the developer is required to increase the amount of the
performance security in an amount determined by the Village to secure the
remaining public improvements.
         f.   The performance surety will not be released until all required
improvements have been inspected and accepted by the Village.
   B.   Guarantee Of Completed Improvements:
      1.   Upon completion of the public improvements, the subdivider must
notify the Village staff in writing and request an inspection of the
improvements. The subdivider will submit, with the request, an as-built plan
covering the improvements to be accepted.
      2.   After the improvements have been inspected by the Village staff and
found to be complete according to the approved plans and specifications, the
public improvements may be accepted by the Village Board.
      3.   The subdivider must guarantee the public improvements against
defective workmanship and/or materials for a period of two (2) years from the
date of acceptance.
      4.   As a precondition to the acceptance of the public improvements by
the Village Board, the subdivider is required to post cash, letter of credit,
or other surety acceptable to the Village Board in the amount of twenty percent
(20%) of the cost of the original public improvements or two thousand dollars
($2,000.00), whichever is greater.
      5.   These funds will be held by the Village and be made available to the
Village to repair defects in material or workmanship which the subdivider fails
to repair or replace within thirty (30) days of receipt of written notice in
the event of an emergency repair. After the two (2) year guarantee period, all
remaining funds will be released to the subdivider.
   C.   Subdivisions Outside Corporate Limits: Such agreements, as set forth
above, are not required for subdivisions located in the unincorporated areas
within one and one-half (1.5) miles beyond the Village limits when there is
evidence that agreements are entered into between the owner or subdivider and
Kane County. However, when the Village standards for public improvements are of
higher quality than Kane County standards, such agreements may be required by
the Village.
   D.   Governmental Accounting Standards Board Statement 34: Upon transfer of
the public subdivision improvements to the village, the owner, developer, or
subdivider shall provide a detailed inventory to the village of such public
subdivision improvements, which shall include the engineer's as built
quantities of improvements, their estimated fair market value and their
estimated approximate useful life in accordance with Governmental Accounting
Standards Board Statement 34.
   E.   Transfer Of Private Subdivision Improvements: All stormwater detention/
retention facilities and other private subdivision improvements, after
completion, inspection and approval by the Village Engineer and satisfactory
repair or completion of all deficiencies shall be transferred by the owner,
developer or subdivider, without cost, by bill of sale to and accepted for
ownership, maintenance and operation by a homeowners'/property owners
association or other entity acceptable to the Village for future operation,
maintenance, repair and replacement under such conditions as may be approved by
the Village. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, the owner,
developer or subdivider shall be responsible for warranty work on all
subdivision improvements during the warranty period (two (2) years from date of
acceptance). (Ord. O-20-13, 11-4-2020)
9-5-3-8: CONSTRUCTION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Installation Required:
      1.   Prior to beginning any work as contemplated by the plans and
specifications, the subdivider shall meet with Village staff for a pre-
construction meeting.
      2.   After approval of the final plat by the Village Board, and after
approval of the plans and specifications by the Village staff and Village Board
for the required improvements, the subdivider must install street, utility,
public, common, and other public improvements. Building permits will not be
issued until the following items have been satisfied:
         a.   Binder course of asphalt is installed.
         b.   All erosion control measures are installed and functional.
         c.   All storm sewers are installed and functional.
         d.   All ditch lines and detention basins are graded, vegetated, and
functional.
         e.   All street signs are installed.
      3.   All public improvements must be installed and approved by the
Village within two (2) years from the commencement of construction. The Village
Board may, upon the written request of the subdivider, and upon the
recommendation of the Village staff, extend the two (2) year period for the
completion of the required improvements provided, that the subdivider has
posted suitable, acceptable surety to ensure the completion of the balance of
the improvements.
   B.   Deeding Of Improvements: All underground public improvements up to the
property line must be deeded over to the Village and will become the property
of the Village after approval by the Village staff and accepted by resolution
of the Village Board. All labor and material for installing underground public
improvements must be furnished by the subdivider. All testing required for
acceptance must be done by the subdivider under the supervision of the Village
staff. (Ord. O-20-13, 11-4-2020)
9-5-3-9: ACCEPTANCE OF REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Upon the completion of construction of any required public
improvements, in conformance with approved engineering plans and
specifications, the subdivider must prepare and submit to the Village staff
four (4) sets plus one reproducible set on mylar of as-built plans and
certification by Engineer of Work or Project Engineer that such public
improvements have been satisfactorily completed in accordance with the approved
engineering plans and specifications. Prior to Village Board acceptance, the
owner, developer or subdivider shall submit the following material:
      1.   Electronic copy of the record drawings on compact disc in
Microstation, CAD and Adobe pdf format.
      2.   GPS And GIS Utility System Updates: The owner, developer or
subdivider shall either with his own personnel or paying the Village shall
collect and provide GPS information and update the Village's GIS system with
data to be loaded into the Village's existing utility GIS layers.
      3.   A bill of sale conveying ownership of all public subdivision
improvements to the Village, in a form satisfactory to the Village Attorney.
      4.   A title insurance policy for all property conveyed to the Village
indicating that the property is free and clear of any and all liens and
encumbrances.
      5.   A copy of the bill of sale conveying the ownership of all private
subdivision improvements to the homeowners' or property owner's association (or
other acceptable entity previously approved by the Village) for future
operation, maintenance, repair and replacement under such conditions as
approved by the Village.
      6.   A Warranty Security: The performance security can only be released
upon the satisfactory completion of the required improvements and upon the
filing of a warranty security and acceptance by the Village Board.
      7.   A recorded copy of the homeowners' or property owner's association,
if any, bylaws (codes, covenants and restrictions) including all exhibits.
      8.   A copy of any public utility service agreements for the provision of
service to public subdivision improvements to be conveyed to the Village that
will become the responsibility of the Village upon acceptance.
      9.   A copy of the IEPA's Notice of Termination (NOT) for termination of
coverage under the general permit for stormwater discharges associated with
construction site activities.
      10.   Written confirmation from the surveyor of record that all required
survey monuments have been installed pursuant to the plat, engineering policy
and construction details.
      11.   Copy of Wasco Sanitary Sewer Acceptance of Water and/or Sewer
Infrastructure.
   B.   If any final plat of subdivision contains public streets or
thoroughfares which are therein dedicated as such, whether located within the
corporate limits of the Village or all or in part outside of said corporate
limits, the approval of the final plat by the Village Board or the subsequent
annexation of the property to the Village does not constitute an acceptance,
irrespective of any act or acts by an officer, agent, or employee of the
Village with respect to such streets or improvements. The acceptance of such
streets or thoroughfares must be made by the adoption of a resolution by the
Village Board, after a certificate has been issued by the Village staff
certifying that all improvements required to be constructed or installed in or
upon such streets or thoroughfares, in connection with the approval of the plat
of subdivision, have been fully completed and the construction or installation
has been approved by the Village staff.
   C.   When all items are found to meet the requirements of the Village and
the approved plans and specifications, the Village Engineer shall schedule the
acceptance for the next regular board meeting. The acceptance of the public
subdivision improvements shall be made only by the adoption of a resolution by
the Village Board after all the provisions of this section have been met. (Ord.
O-20-13, 11-4-2020)
9-5-3-10: OUTSIDE CONSULTANTS:
During the plat review process and during installation and acceptance of the
required improvements, the Village may engage professional assistance other
than the staff, in order to properly review or observe the improvement proposed
by the applicant. The applicant will be notified in writing that such
professional assistance will be engaged. Prior to such review or observation,
the applicant may meet with the Village staff in order to discuss the activity
and anticipated time line and estimate of expenses. The applicant must
reimburse the Village for costs associated with such professional review
assistance. (Ord. O-20-13, 11-4-2020)
9-5-3-11: FEES:
Along with the preliminary plat application, the applicant will deposit an
escrow with the Village a minimum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) and a
maximum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) as determined by the Village Board
in accordance with sections
3-2-1 through
3-2-6 of the Village Code. The amount will be used to provide reimbursement to
the Village for Village expenditures for all staff and outside consultants'
time to review and approve plans, specifications, and other documents and for
construction supervision of the approved subdivision improvements. The account
with the deposited funds will be maintained until the subdivision improvements
have been approved. Additional deposits may be required periodically, as
determined by the Village, to maintain a positive balance in the account until
the subdivision has been accepted. (Upon final subdivision acceptance and
completion of the two (2) year maintenance period all remaining funds will be
returned to the applicant.) (Ord. O-20-13, 11-4-2020)
9-5-3-12: INDEMNITY:
The following language must appear on all improvement plans:
   A.   Hold Harmless: The contractor, as a condition of the contract, hereby
agrees to assume the entire responsibility and liability for, and defense of,
and to pay and indemnify and hold the owner, the engineer, the Village, their
engineers, agents, and employees harmless from all claims for damages or injury
or death resulting therefrom to any and all persons, including employees or
agents or any person or firm engaged in work upon the project, arising out of
the conduct of the contractor arising out of the performance of this agreement
or any work relevant thereto, or arising out of any Federal, State, or local
statute, rule, regulation, or ordinance, including, but not limited to, the
provisions of the Occupational Safety and Health Standards Act (OSHA).
   B.   Costs, Fees And Expenses: All costs, fees, and expenses, including, by
way of example and without limitation, reasonable attorney fees, court costs,
court reporter fees, transcript costs, subpoena fees and costs, witness fees,
service costs, and document reproduction costs incurred by the Village as a
result of any claims for damage or injury as enumerated above must be paid by
the contractor.
   C.   Insurance: The contractor(s) must name the Village of Campton Hills and
any consultant doing construction observation for the Village as additional
named insured on all liability insurance policies and provide the Village with
certificates of insurance prior to commencement of any work. (Ord. O-20-13, 11-
4-2020)
9-5-4: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
9-5-4-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The design of a subdivision must conform to the Zoning Ordinance and
any other applicable ordinances, these regulations, all ordinances pertaining
to the control of land development, and to all applicable rules, regulations,
specifications, and standards of the Village, County, and the State. No
deviation from approved plans and specifications may be made without approval
of the Village.
   B.   Where a subdivision lies within one and one-half (1.5) miles of the
corporate limits, the subdivision must also conform to all applicable
ordinances and plans of the Village. In all instances where a requirement of
this Chapter, or other applicable ordinance of the Village, is similar to, or
in conflict with other provisions of the ordinances of the County, the most
restrictive provision applies.
   C.   If the owner places restrictions on any of the land contained in the
subdivision greater than those required by the Zoning Ordinance or this
Chapter, such restrictions or a reference thereto may be required to be
indicated on the final plat, or the Village Board may require that restrictive
covenants be recorded with the Kane County Recorder.
   D.   The design of each subdivision must take into consideration the
preservation, capabilities and limitation of topography, drainage, soils,
vegetation, and other features and irreplaceable assets of the site. The use of
lands unsuited to development because of, but not limited to, flood,
inundation, and soil characteristics will not be approved unless the
development of the lands meets the requirements of the ordinances and
regulations of the Village.
   E.   Each subdivider and/or developer is required to furnish and install
fences at the boundaries of the subdivision when the Village Board determines
that a hazardous or nuisance condition may or could exist. The fences must be
constructed according to the standards established by the Village and in
accordance with the Zoning Ordinance. Fence improvements will be made part of
the improvement plans and construction guarantee provisions. (Ord. O-20-13, 11-
4-2020)
9-5-4-2: MINIMUM STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
All construction of improvements covered by this Chapter must be in accordance
and materials used must be in compliance with the methods and materials
required in the appropriate sections of the latest editions, amendments or
revisions of the following:
   A.   "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction," Illinois
Department of Transportation;
   B.   "Bureau of Design and Environmental Manual," Illinois Department of
Transportation;
   C.   "Highway Standards," Illinois Department of Transportation;
   D.   "Culvert Manual," Illinois Department of Transportation;
   E.   "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices," U.S. Department of
Transportation and Illinois Department of Transportation Supplement;
   F.   "Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Construction in Illinois,
" Illinois Society of Professional Engineers et al.;
   G.   "Illinois Design Standards for Sewage Works," I.E.P.A., Division of
Water Pollution Control;
   H.   "Technical Policy Statements," I.E.P.A., Division of Public Water
Supply;
   I.   "Recommended Standards for Water Works, Great Lakes Upper Mississippi
River Board of State and Provincial Health and Environmental Managers ("10
States Standards");
   J.   "Illinois Urban Manual", NRCS & IEPA. In addition, on-site clearing and
grading shall be restricted to avoid environmentally sensitive areas;
   K.   "Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control,"
I.E.P.A. ("Yellow Book");
   L.   "U.S. Soil Conservation Service Field Engineering Handbook";
   M.   Municipal standards and specifications as adopted;
   N.   The Kane County Division of the Transportation Road Standards;
   O.   The Kane County Health Department Private Sewage Disposal System Code.
(Ord. O-20-13, 11-4-2020)
9-5-4-3: OVERSIZE DESIGN:
Where required in the overall utility planning, as evidenced by the master
plans for water distribution, sanitary sewers, and stormwater management, any
public improvement required to be larger than necessary to serve the immediate
subdivision adequately, the Village may enter into an agreement to repay the
subdivider the construction cost resulting from the increased design. All
engineering, insurance, and inspection costs must be paid by the subdivider.
This applies, but is not limited, to collector sewers, lift stations, disposal
facilities, wells, pumping stations, water mains, storage tanks, culverts,
storm sewers, etc. (Ord. O-20-13, 11-4-2020)
9-5-4-4: OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS:
If it is determined that any existing infrastructure including, but not limited
to, water distribution systems, sanitary sewers or other wastewater treatment
facilities, storm sewers, or other stormwater management facilities and roads,
which may be situated either in part or entirely off-site, is inadequate to
facilitate a proposed subdivision when one hundred percent (100%) built-out,
then improvements to any one or all of such facilities may be required. (Ord.
O-20-13, 11-4-2020)
9-5-4-5: LOT DESIGN:
   A.   The lots must be arranged so that there will be no foreseeable
difficulties, for reasons of topography, soils, flooding or other conditions,
in securing permits to build on all lots in compliance with the Zoning
Ordinance, these regulations, and the sewage treatment and disposal system
rules and regulations. Subdivisions cannot contain leftover pieces, corners, or
remnants of lands.
   B.   All lots must meet the minimum depth, width, and area requirements of
the applicable district in the Zoning Ordinance. Where the Kane County Health
Department requires a larger lot size because of connection to septic, the lot
sizes must be increased by twenty five percent (25%) more area than that
required by the County (i.e., one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the
size required by the County). In no circumstances may a lot be reduced below
the lot width and area required by the Zoning Ordinance unless a variance or
exception is approved separately.
   C.   Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and
industrial purposes must be adequate to provide for the off-road service and
parking facilities required by the applicable district of the Zoning Ordinance.
   D.   Excessive depth in relation to width must be avoided. A proportion of
2.5:1 is considered a desirable maximum for lot widths of one hundred feet
(100') or more. Side lot lines must be substantially at right angles or radial
to road lines. Lots at right angles to each other should be avoided wherever
possible.
   E.   Where a watercourse separates the buildable area of a lot from the road
by which it has access, provisions must be made for installation of a culvert
or other structure of design approved by the Village.
   F.   Lots must be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all
building sites and individual lot drainage must be coordinated with the general
storm drainage pattern for the area. Drainage must be designed so as to avoid
concentration of storm drainage water from each lot to adjacent lots.
Stormwater management system must be designed so as to avoid conveyance of
public runoff through private property. Public runoff should remain in the
public road stormwater system.
   G.   Every lot must front or abut on a dedicated public road. Lots with an
access only to existing private drives or private roads are permitted only in
unusual circumstances subject to approval by the Village staff and the Village
Board. The fronting of residential lots on major roads and county highways is
prohibited.
   H.   Double frontage and reversed frontage lots must be avoided except where
necessary to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation and
where limited-access highway, railroad right-of-way, major road, county
highway, or similar situation exists, in which case double frontage lots are
preferred, provided suitable screen-planting contained in a no-access
reservation along the property line and right-of-way is provided.
   I.   The creation of new flag lots is prohibited. (Ord. O-20-13, 11-4-2020)
9-5-4-6: SLOPE AND GRADE:
   A.   The minimum and maximum slopes along a residential lot line must be as
follows:
      1.   Side lot line the slopes must be equal to or greater than two
percent (2%) but no greater than ten percent (10%).
      2.   Street lot line slopes (those parallel to the street) must have
minimum and maximum grades equal to the street on which they front.
      3.   Rear lot lines must have a minimum slope equal to or greater than
two percent (2%) but no greater than ten percent (10%).
   B.   The minimum and maximum slopes within a residential lot must be as
follows:
      1.   All slopes must be directed away from the structure equal to or
greater than two percent (2%) but no greater than ten percent (10%).
      2.   On lots where there is a structure with a lookout or walkout
basement, the side slopes (parallel to the structure) must be equal to or
greater than two percent (2%) but no greater than one foot vertical for every
four feet of horizontal distance (1:4).
      3.   The Village may allow slopes up to one foot vertical for every three
feet of horizontal distance (1:3) for special situations and only on a case by
case basis.
   C.   If the grade differential between adjoining rear yards cannot be
accommodated, then a retaining wall no higher than thirty inches (30") measured
from the ground at the highest point must be incorporated into the grading
plan. The retaining wall will be offset from property line to allow for one lot
owner to perform any maintenance tasks associated with the wall including
mowing grass at the foot of the wall.
   D.   All grades must be at the proposed grade plus or minus 0.1 foot, and
all slopes cannot deviate from the proposed slope by more than ten percent
(10%), but in no case shall any slope be less than two percent (2%). (Ord. O-
20-13, 11-4-2020)
9-5-4-7: BLOCKS:
The length, width, and shape of blocks must be such as are appropriate for the
locality and the type of development contemplated, but block length in
residential areas cannot exceed one thousand five hundred feet (1,500'), nor
have less than sufficient width to provide two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate
depth between road lines, except for blocks with one tier of lots which meet
the double frontage requirements of this Section. (Ord. O-20-13, 11-4-2020)
9-5-4-8: EASEMENTS:
   A.   Utility Easements: Utility easements must be provided at the rear of
all lots and along the side and front lot lines when required. On wooded sites,
utility easements must be located so as to minimize environmental damage.
Utility easements must be at least ten feet (10') wide, and normally centered
upon the rear or side lot lines. Evidence must be furnished to the Village that
easements and any easement provisions to be incorporated on the final plat or
in the deeds have been reviewed by the individual utility companies or
organizations responsible for furnishing the services. The wording of utility
easements on the final plat must be in accordance with the Village standards.
   B.   Drainage And Stormwater Management Easements:
      1.   Stormwater Management Easements: Stormwater management easements
shall be required in all areas for purposes of operating and maintaining
stormwater runoff management facilities such as detention and/or retention
basins and appurtenant structures and overland flood routes. As determined by
the Village Engineer, the final plat shall include the provisions for
stormwater management easements, in substantially the following form:
A NON-EXCLUSIVE EASEMENT IS HEREBY RESERVED FOR AND GRANTED TO THE HOMEOWNERS'
OR PROPERTY OWNER'S ASSOCIATION AS MAY BE FURTHER DEFINED IN THE HOMEOWNERS' OR
PROPERTY OWNER'S ASSOCIATION BYLAWS AND DECLARATIONS AND THEIR RESPECTIVE
SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, WITHIN THE AREAS SO DESIGNATED ON THE PLAT AND MARKED
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT EASEMENT (SME) FOR THE COLLECTION CONVEYANCE AND STORAGE
OF STORMWATER IN AREAS TO BE MAINTAINED BY THE OWNER OF THE LOT(S) OR OUTLOT(S)
ON WHICH THE FACILITIES EXIST IN ACCORDANCE WITH MUNICIPAL ORDINANCES AND THE
APPROVED FINAL ENGINEERING IMPROVEMENT PLANS; TOGETHER WITH THE RIGHT OF ACCESS
THERETO FOR THE PERSONNEL AND EQUIPMENT NECESSARY AND REQUIRED FOR SUCH USES
AND PURPOSES, AND TOGETHER WITH THE RIGHT TO CUT, TRIM, OR REMOVE TREES, BUSHES
AND ROOTS AS MAY BE REASONABLY REQUIRED INCIDENTAL TO THE RIGHTS HEREIN GIVEN,
AND THE RIGHT TO ENTER UPON THE PROPERTY FOR ALL SUCH PURPOSES. ENCROACHMENT OF
ANY KIND INCLUDING LANDSCAPING, FENCES, SHEDS OR ACCESSORY STRUCTURES WITHIN
SAID EASEMENT IS PROHIBITED UNLESS THE MUNICIPAL ENGINEER HAS DETERMINED SAID
ENCROACHMENT WILL NOT INTERFERE WITH THE PROPER FUNCTION OF SAID FACILITIES.
THE VILLAGE SHALL HAVE THE RIGHT, BUT NOT THE OBLIGATION, TO ENTER WITH
PERSONNEL AND EQUIPMENT UPON SAID EASEMENT AT ANY TIME FOR THE PURPOSES OF
ACCESS TO AND INSPECTION OF THE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES LOCATED WITHIN
SAID EASEMENT. IF THE OWNER FAILS TO MAINTAIN SAID FACILITIES AND, AFTER
RECEIPT OF NOTICE FROM THE VILLAGE OF SAID FAILURE, THE OWNER FAILS TO MAKE
REQUIRED REPAIRS IN A REASONABLE PERIOD OF TIME, EXCEPT IN THE CASE OF AN
EMERGENCY THE VILLAGE MAY MAKE THE REQUIRED REPAIRS. THE VILLAGE MAY SEEK
REIMBURSEMENT FROM THE OWNER FOR THE COSTS INCURRED BY THE VILLAGE TO MAKE THE
REPAIR AND/OR FILE A LIEN ON THE PROPERTY.
      2.   Drainage Easements: Areas where a subdivision is traversed by a
water course, drainage way, channel or stream, the drainage easement shall
conform substantially with the lines of such water course and shall include
further width as will be necessary for the purpose of adequately maintaining or
improving the water course. Said easements shall not be used for any other
purposes except that utilities may cross this easement, provided that the
crossing does not alter the intended use of the easement. Drainage easements
are for the express purpose of providing easements for water courses, drainage
ways, channels or streams. Public storm sewers should be contained within
municipal utility easements. Private storm sewers and drainage swales should be
contained within private storm water easements. Detention/retention areas and
overland flood routes should be contained within stormwater management
easements. As determined by the Village Engineer, the final plat shall include
the provisions for drainage easements, in substantially the following form:
AN EXCLUSIVE EASEMENT IS HEREBY RESERVED FOR AND GRANTED TO THE PROPERTY
OWNER'S ASSOCIATION AS MAY BE FURTHER DEFINED IN THE PROPERTY OWNER'S
ASSOCIATION BYLAWS AND DECLARATIONS AND THEIR RESPECTIVE SUCCESSORS AND
ASSIGNS, WITHIN THE AREAS SO DESIGNATED ON THE PLAT AND MARKED DRAINAGE
EASEMENT (DE) OVER THOSE AREAS WHERE THE SUBDIVISION IS TRAVERSED BY A WATER
COURSE, DRAINAGE WAY, CHANNEL OR STREAM. THE DRAINAGE EASEMENT CONFORMS
SUBSTANTIALLY TO THE LINES OF SUCH WATER COURSE AND INCLUDES FURTHER WIDTH AS
WILL BE NECESSARY FOR THE PURPOSE OF ADEQUATELY MAINTAINING OR IMPROVING THE
WATER COURSE. TOGETHER WITH THE RIGHT OF ACCESS THERETO FOR THE PERSONNEL AND
EQUIPMENT NECESSARY AND REQUIRED FOR SUCH USES AND PURPOSES, AND TOGETHER WITH
THE RIGHT TO CUT, TRIM, OR REMOVE TREES, BUSHES AND ROOTS AS MAY BE REASONABLY
REQUIRED INCIDENTAL TO THE RIGHTS HEREIN GIVEN, AND THE RIGHT TO ENTER UPON THE
PROPERTY FOR ALL SUCH PURPOSES. NO PERMANENT BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES OR FENCES
SHALL BE CONSTRUCTED OR MAINTAINED ON, ACROSS OVER OR THROUGH SAID EASEMENT
WITHOUT PRIOR WRITTEN CONSENT OF THE GRANTEE AND THE VILLAGE OF SPRING GROVE.
SAID EASEMENTS SHALL NOT BE USED FOR ANY OTHER PURPOSES EXCEPT THAT UTILITIES
MAY CROSS THIS EASEMENT, PROVIDED THAT THE CROSSING DOES NOT ALTER THE INTENDED
USE OF THE EASEMENT. THE VILLAGE SHALL HAVE THE RIGHT, BUT NOT THE OBLIGATION,
TO ENTER WITH PERSONNEL AND EQUIPMENT UPON SAID EASEMENT AT ANY TIME FOR THE
PURPOSES OF ACCESS TO AND INSPECTION OF THE WATERCOURSES, DRAINAGE WAYS,
CHANNELS AND STREAMS LOCATED WITHIN SAID EASEMENT. IF THE OWNER FAILS TO
MAINTAIN SAID FACILITIES AND, AFTER RECEIPT OF NOTICE FROM THE VILLAGE OF SAID
FAILURE, THE OWNER FAILS TO MAKE REQUIRED REPAIRS IN A REASONABLE PERIOD OF
TIME, EXCEPT IN THE CASE OF AN EMERGENCY THE VILLAGE MAY MAKE THE REQUIRED
REPAIRS. THE VILLAGE MAY SEEK REIMBURSEMENT FROM THE OWNER FOR THE COSTS
INCURRED BY THE VILLAGE TO MAKE THE REPAIR AND/OR FILE A LIEN ON THE PROPERTY.
      3.   Native and perennial gardens are required/allowed where landscaping
within public rights-of-way and easements is used for stormwater bioretention/
infiltration.
      4.   Drainage easements must be separate and distinct from utility
easements.
      5.   Drainage and stormwater management facility easements must be
adequately maintained so as to provide for removal of accumulation of
vegetation, silt, debris, or other material which may interfere with the flow
characteristics of drainage ways or the essential features of retention or
detention facilities.
   C.   Landscaping: A screen planting easement may be required between
residential and commercial or industrial lots, or along lot lines to discourage
the undesirable development of residential lots fronting on traffic arteries.
If such easement is to be used for public utilities, the easement must be of
sufficient width to accommodate appropriate screen plantings without
interfering with utility service or maintenance.
Landscape Easement: Areas designated on the plat for the express purpose of
providing a landscape berm and protective screen planting to secure a
reasonably effective physical barrier between different land uses to minimize
adverse conditions of sight and sound. This berm and other protective screen
planting shall not interfere with sight lines at street intersections.
Additional landscaping shall be planted in the berm easement to result in an
effective six foot (6') screen. These easements shall be separate and distinct
from public and municipal utility easements, drainage and stormwater management
easements. As determined by the Village Engineer, the final plat shall include
the provisions for landscaping easements, in substantially the following form:
A NON-EXCLUSIVE EASEMENT IS HEREBY RESERVED FOR AND GRANTED TO THE HOMEOWNERS'
OR PROPERTY OWNER'S ASSOCIATION AS MAY BE FURTHER DEFINED IN THE HOMEOWNERS' OR
PROPERTY OWNER'S ASSOCIATION BYLAWS AND DECLARATIONS AND THEIR RESPECTIVE
SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, WITHIN THE AREAS SO DESIGNATED ON THE PLAT AND MARKED
LANDSCAPE EASEMENT (LE) TO INSTALL, REPAIR, REMOVE, REPLACE, INSPECT, AND
MAINTAIN LANDSCAPE BERMS, PLANTINGS AND STRUCTURES AS DEPICTED ON THE
SUBDIVISION LANDSCAPE PLAN IN, UNDER, ACROSS, ALONG AND UPON THE SURFACE OF THE
LANDSCAPE EASEMENT INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION ALL NECESSARY FACILITIES
APPURTENANT THERETO, TOGETHER WITH THE RIGHT OF ACCESS THERETO FOR THE
PERSONNEL AND EQUIPMENT NECESSARY AND REQUIRED FOR SUCH USES AND PURPOSES. NO
PERMANENT BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES OR FENCES SHALL BE CONSTRUCTED OR MAINTAINED
ON, ACROSS OVER OR THROUGH SAID EASEMENT THAT ARE NOT SHOWN ON THE PLANS NOR
SHALL VEGETATION BE REMOVED EXCEPT TO REPLACE DEAD OR DISEASED VEGETATION WITH
LIKE SPECIES WITHIN SAID EASEMENT WITHOUT PRIOR WRITTEN CONSENT OF THE GRANTEE
AND THE VILLAGE OF CAMPTON HILLS. THE GRADES OF THE SUBDIVIDED PROPERTY
APPROVED BY THE MUNICIPAL ENGINEER SHALL NOT BE ALTERED IN ANY MANNER BY THE
INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF LANDSCAPE PLANTINGS SO AS TO INTERFERE WITH THE
PROPER OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE THEREOF OR WITH THE SURFACE DRAINAGE THEREON.
THE VILLAGE SHALL HAVE THE RIGHT, BUT NOT THE OBLIGATION, TO ENTER WITH
PERSONNEL AND EQUIPMENT UPON SAID EASEMENT AT ANY TIME FOR THE PURPOSES OF
ACCESS TO AND INSPECTION OF THE LANDSCAPING FACILITIES LOCATED WITHIN SAID
EASEMENT. IF THE OWNER FAILS TO MAINTAIN SAID FACILITIES AND, AFTER RECEIPT OF
NOTICE FROM THE VILLAGE OF SAID FAILURE, THE OWNER FAILS TO MAKE REQUIRED
REPAIRS IN A REASONABLE PERIOD OF TIME, EXCEPT IN THE CASE OF AN EMERGENCY THE
VILLAGE MAY MAKE THE REQUIRED REPAIRS. THE VILLAGE MAY SEEK REIMBURSEMENT FROM
THE OWNER FOR THE COSTS INCURRED BY THE VILLAGE TO MAKE THE REPAIR AND/OR FILE
A LIEN ON THE PROPERTY.
   D.   Temporary Turnaround Easements: Temporary turnaround easements must be
reserved for road purposes until the extension of the road is publicly
dedicated. The temporary easement will then be considered automatically
released for such use and purpose. The dimensions of such turnaround must meet
the requirements for temporary "T" turnarounds of this Chapter.
   E.   Pedestrian Way Easements: Easements or dedications must be provided for
pedestrian ways and bicycle paths where appropriate. Pedestrian way and bicycle
path easements must be maintained to permit their continued use. Easements
shall extend one foot (1') minimum on either side of the pedestrian way or
bicycle path section. As determined by the Village Engineer, the final plat
shall include the provisions for pedestrian way easements, in substantially the
following form:
THE HOMEOWNERS' OR PROPERTY OWNER'S ASSOCIATION AS MAY BE FURTHER DEFINED IN
THE HOMEOWNERS' OR PROPERTY OWNER'S ASSOCIATION BYLAWS AND DECLARATIONS AND
THEIR RESPECTIVE SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, ARE HEREBY GIVEN EASEMENT RIGHTS OVER
ALL AREAS ON THE PLAT MARKED "PEDESTRIAN WAY EASEMENT" (PWE), "BICYCLE PATH
EASEMENT" (BPE) OR "PEDESTRIAN WAY AND BICYCLE PATH EASEMENT" (PW AND BPE) TO
CONSTRUCT, INSTALL, RECONSTRUCT, REPAIR, REMOVE, REPLACE, INSPECT, MAINTAIN AND
OPERATE PEDESTRIAN AND BICYCLE TRAILS, PAVED OR UNPAVED, FOR THE USE AND
ENJOYMENT OF THE GENERAL PUBLIC. THE ABOVE NAMED ENTITIES ARE HEREBY GRANTED
THE RIGHT TO ENTER UPON EASEMENTS HEREIN DESCRIBED FOR THE USES HEREIN SET
FORTH AND THE RIGHT TO CUT, TRIM, OR REMOVE ANY TREES, SHRUBS OR OTHER PLANTS
WITHIN THE EASEMENT AREAS HEREIN GRANTED WHICH INTERFERE WITH THE CONSTRUCTION,
INSTALLATION, RECONSTRUCTION, REPAIR, REMOVAL, REPLACEMENT, INSPECTION,
MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION THEREOF. NO TEMPORARY OR PERMANENT BUILDINGS,
STRUCTURES, FENCES OR OBSTRUCTIONS SHALL BE PLACED ON OR OVER SAID EASEMENTS
THAT INTERFERE WITH THE RIGHTS HEREIN GRANTED. THE VILLAGE SHALL HAVE THE
RIGHT, BUT NOT THE OBLIGATION, TO ENTER WITH PERSONNEL AND EQUIPMENT UPON SAID
EASEMENT AT ANY TIME FOR THE PURPOSES OF ACCESS TO AND INSPECTION OF THE
PEDESTRIAN WAY AND BICYCLE PATH FACILITIES LOCATED WITHIN SAID EASEMENT. IF THE
OWNER FAILS TO MAINTAIN SAID FACILITIES AND, AFTER RECEIPT OF NOTICE FROM THE
VILLAGE OF SAID FAILURE, THE OWNER FAILS TO MAKE REQUIRED REPAIRS IN A
REASONABLE PERIOD OF TIME, EXCEPT IN THE CASE OF AN EMERGENCY THE VILLAGE MAY
MAKE THE REQUIRED REPAIRS. THE VILLAGE MAY SEEK REIMBURSEMENT FROM THE OWNER
FOR THE COSTS INCURRED BY THE VILLAGE TO MAKE THE REPAIR AND/OR FILE A LIEN ON
THE PROPERTY.
   F.   Municipal Utility Easements: Municipal utility easements shall be
required in all areas, other than in the right-of-way, where storm sewer or
other underground utilities to be maintained by the Village are located.
Municipal utility easements must not be less than fifteen feet (15') wide,
seven and one-half (7.5) of which may be shown on each of two (2) adjacent
lots. Easements that contain multiple utility lines must be a minimum of twenty
feet (20') wide, dependent upon depth of utilities and other contributing
factors. As determined by the Village Engineer, the final plat shall include
the provisions for municipal utility easements, in substantially the following
form:
AN EXCLUSIVE EASEMENT IS HEREBY RESERVED FOR AND GRANTED TO THE VILLAGE OF
CAMPTON HILLS, ILLINOIS AND ITS RESPECTIVE SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, WITHIN THE
AREAS SO DESIGNATED ON THE PLAT AND MARKED MUNICIPAL UTILITY EASEMENT (MUE) TO
CONSTRUCT, INSTALL, RECONSTRUCT, REPAIR, REMOVE, REPLACE, INSPECT, MAINTAIN AND
OPERATE UNDERGROUND TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS AND LINES IN, UNDER,
ACROSS, ALONG AND UPON THE SURFACE OF THE MUNICIPAL UTILITY EASEMENT INCLUDING
WITHOUT LIMITATION STORM SEWERS, ELECTRIC LINES, STREET LIGHTS AND ALL
NECESSARY FACILITIES APPURTENANT THERETO, TOGETHER WITH THE RIGHT OF ACCESS
THERETO FOR THE PERSONNEL AND EQUIPMENT NECESSARY AND REQUIRED FOR SUCH USES
AND PURPOSES, AND TOGETHER WITH THE RIGHT TO INSTALL REQUIRED SERVICE
CONNECTIONS UNDER THE SURFACE OF EACH LOT TO SERVE IMPROVEMENTS THEREON;
TOGETHER WITH THE RIGHT TO CUT, TRIM, OR REMOVE TREES, BUSHES AND ROOTS AS MAY
BE REASONABLY REQUIRED INCIDENTAL TO THE RIGHTS HEREIN GIVEN, AND THE RIGHT TO
ENTER UPON THE PROPERTY FOR ALL SUCH PURPOSES. OBSTRUCTIONS, INCLUDING FENCES
AND OTHER STRUCTURES, SHALL NOT BE PLACED OVER GRANTEE'S FACILITIES OR IN,
UPON, OR OVER THE PROPERTY WITHIN SAID EASEMENT WITHOUT PRIOR WRITTEN CONSENT
OF THE GRANTEE AND THE VILLAGE. SAID EASEMENT MAY BE USED FOR LANDSCAPING,
GARDENS, DRIVEWAYS AND PARKING EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE DESIGNATED ON THE PLAT. THE
GRADES OF THE SUBDIVIDED PROPERTY APPROVED BY THE MUNICIPAL ENGINEER SHALL NOT
BE ALTERED IN ANY MANNER BY THE INSTALLATION OF ANY OF THE FACILITIES OF SAID
GRANTEE SO AS TO INTERFERE WITH THE PROPER OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE THEREOF OR
WITH THE SURFACE DRAINAGE THEREON. SBC/AT&T, NICOR, COMMONWEALTH EDISON
COMPANY, COMCAST/MEDIACOM, AND HOLDERS OF FRANCHISES GRANTED BY THE VILLAGE OF
CAMPTON HILLS, ILLINOIS AND THEIR RESPECTIVE SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, SHALL HAVE
THE RIGHT FOR PERPENDICULAR CROSSINGS OF THE MUE WITH ELECTRIC, NATURAL GAS AND
COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES WITH A TWO-FOOT VERTICAL SEPARATION AND FOUR-FOOT
HORIZONTAL SEPARATION FROM MUNICIPAL UTILITIES.
   G.   Public Utility Easements: Areas used by "Franchise" public utility
companies such as electric, natural gas, cable television, telephone, etc. for
utility distribution or transmission installations; such easements shall be
located along the rear lot lines, side lot lines or front lot lines. They shall
occupy not less than ten feet (10') of which five feet (5') may be shown on
each of two (2) adjacent lots. Public utility easements shall not be used for
drainage. These provisions may not eliminate the requirement to include public
utility company "boiler plate" language. As determined by the Village Engineer,
the final plat shall include the provisions for public utility easements, in
substantially the following form:
A NON-EXCLUSIVE EASEMENT IS HEREBY RESERVED FOR AND GRANTED TO SBC, NICOR,
COMMONWEALTH EDISON COMPANY, COMCAST, THE VILLAGE OF CAMPTON HILLS ILLINOIS AND
HOLDERS OF FRANCHISES GRANTED BY THE VILLAGE OF CAMPTON HILLS, ILLINOIS AND
THEIR RESPECTIVE SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, WITHIN THE AREAS SO DESIGNATED ON THE
PLAT AND MARKED PUBLIC UTILITY EASEMENT (PUE) TO CONSTRUCT, INSTALL,
RECONSTRUCT, REPAIR, REMOVE, REPLACE, INSPECT, MAINTAIN AND OPERATE UNDERGROUND
TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS AND LINES IN, UNDER, ACROSS, ALONG AND
UPON THE SURFACE OF THE UTILITY EASEMENT INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, GAS
MAINS, TELECOMMUNICATION CABLES, ELECTRIC CABLES, CABLE TELEVISION LINES AND
ALL NECESSARY FACILITIES APPURTENANT THERETO, TOGETHER WITH THE RIGHT OF ACCESS
THERETO FOR THE PERSONNEL AND EQUIPMENT NECESSARY AND REQUIRED FOR SUCH USES
AND PURPOSES, AND TOGETHER WITH THE RIGHT TO INSTALL REQUIRED SERVICE
CONNECTIONS UNDER THE SURFACE OF EACH LOT TO SERVE IMPROVEMENTS THEREON;
TOGETHER WITH THE RIGHT TO CUT, TRIM, OR REMOVE TREES, BUSHES AND ROOTS AS MAY
BE REASONABLY REQUIRED INCIDENTAL TO THE RIGHTS HEREIN GIVEN, AND THE RIGHT TO
ENTER UPON THE PROPERTY FOR ALL SUCH PURPOSES. OBSTRUCTIONS, INCLUDING FENCES
AND OTHER STRUCTURES, SHALL NOT BE PLACED OVER GRANTEE'S FACILITIES OR IN,
UPON, OR OVER THE PROPERTY WITHIN SAID EASEMENT WITHOUT PRIOR WRITTEN CONSENT
OF THE GRANTEE AND THE VILLAGE. SAID EASEMENT MAY BE USED FOR LANDSCAPING,
GARDENS, DRIVEWAYS AND PARKING EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE DESIGNATED ON THE PLAT. THE
GRADES OF THE SUBDIVIDED PROPERTY APPROVED BY THE MUNICIPAL ENGINEER SHALL NOT
BE ALTERED IN ANY MANNER BY THE INSTALLATION OF ANY OF THE FACILITIES OF SAID
GRANTEES SO AS TO INTERFERE WITH THE PROPER OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE THEREOF
OR WITH THE SURFACE DRAINAGE THEREON.
   H.   Access Easements: Areas used by the Village of Campton Hills, the
Homeowners' or Property Owner's Association of the subject property,
"Franchise" public utility companies such as electric, natural gas, cable
television, telephone, etc. for access to easement areas granted for their use
as defined under other easement provisions. Easement Access is to be provided
in locations that are not occupied by utilities, drainage swales, overland
flood routes, stormwater management facilities, or any other appurtenances that
would require other easements. The purpose of using an easement access, in lieu
of other easements provisions that include access, is to avoid restriction of
septic areas, as would be the case with other easement types (D.E., P.U.E.,
M.U.E., etc.). As determined by the Village Engineer, the final plat shall
include the provisions for access easements, in substantially the following
form:
A NON-EXCLUSIVE EASEMENT IS HEREBY RESERVED FOR AND GRANTED TO THE VILLAGE OF
CAMPTON HILLS, ILLINOIS, THE HOMEOWNER' OR PROPERTY OWNER'S ASSOCIATION AS MAY
BE FURTHER DEFINED IN THE HOMEOWNER' OR PROPERTY OWNER'S ASSOCIATION BYLAWS AND
DECLARATIONS, TO SBC/AT&T, NICOR, COMMONWEALTH EDISON COMPANY, COMCAST/
MEDIACOM, AND HOLDERS OF FRANCHISES GRANTED BY THE VILLAGE OF CAMPTON HILLS,
ILLINOIS AND THEIR RESPECTIVE SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, WITHIN THE AREAS SO
DESIGNATED ON THE PLAT AND MARKED "MUNICIPAL UTILITY EASEMENT ACCESS", "PUBLIC
UTILITY EASEMENT ACCESS", "UTILITY EASEMENT ACCESS", "STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
EASEMENT ACCESS", "DRAINAGE EASEMENT ACCESS", "PRIVATE STORMWATER EASEMENT
ACCESS", OR SIMILAR DESIGNATION, FOR ACCESS PURPOSES OVER AND UPON SUCH AREAS
FOR THE PERSONNEL AND EQUIPMENT NECESSARY AND REQUIRED FOR SUCH USES AND
PURPOSES AS DEFINED IN PROVISIONS FOR OTHER EASEMENT AREAS INTENDED TO BE
SERVICED BY SUCH ACCESS EASEMENTS. TOGETHER WITH THE RIGHT TO CUT, TRIM, OR
REMOVE TREES, BUSHES AND ROOTS AS MAY BE REASONABLY REQUIRED INCIDENTAL TO THE
RIGHTS HEREIN GIVEN, AND THE RIGHT TO ENTER UPON THE PROPERTY FOR ALL SUCH
PURPOSES. OBSTRUCTIONS, INCLUDING FENCES AND OTHER STRUCTURES, SHALL NOT BE
PLACED IN, UPON, OR OVER THE PROPERTY WITHIN SAID EASEMENT WITHOUT PRIOR
WRITTEN CONSENT OF THE GRANTEE AND THE VILLAGE. THE GRADES OF THE SUBDIVIDED
PROPERTY APPROVED BY THE MUNICIPAL ENGINEER SHALL NOT BE ALTERED IN ANY MANNER
BY THE INSTALLATION OF ANY OF THE FACILITIES OF SAID GRANTEES SO AS TO
INTERFERE WITH THE PROPER OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE THEREOF OR WITH THE SURFACE
DRAINAGE THEREON.
   I.   Private Utility Easements: Areas used for the purposes of operating and
maintaining utilities (such as pump systems) to be privately maintained and not
utilized for stormwater drainage or municipal facilities and/or appurtenances.
As determined by the Village Engineer, the final plat shall include the
provisions for private utility easements, in substantially the following form:
A NON-EXCLUSIVE EASEMENT IS HEREBY RESERVED FOR AND GRANTED TO THE HOMEOWNERS'
OR PROPERTY OWNER'S ASSOCIATION AS MAY BE FURTHER DEFINED IN THE HOMEOWNERS' OR
PROPERTY OWNER'S ASSOCIATION BYLAWS AND DECLARATIONS AND THEIR RESPECTIVE
SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, WITHIN THE AREAS SO DESIGNATED ON THE PLAT AND MARKED
PRIVATE UTILITY EASEMENT (PRUE) TO CONSTRUCT, INSTALL, RECONSTRUCT, REPAIR,
REMOVE, REPLACE, INSPECT, MAINTAIN AND OPERATE UNDERGROUND UTILITIES IN, UNDER,
ACROSS, ALONG AND UPON THE SURFACE OF THE PRIVATE UTILITY EASEMENT INCLUDING
WITHOUT LIMITATION PUMP SYSTEMS, ELECTRIC, WATER PIPE SYSTEMS, AND ALL
NECESSARY FACILITIES APPURTENANT THERETO, TOGETHER WITH THE RIGHT OF ACCESS
THERETO FOR THE PERSONNEL AND EQUIPMENT NECESSARY AND REQUIRED FOR SUCH USES
AND PURPOSES, AND TOGETHER WITH THE RIGHT TO INSTALL REQUIRED SERVICE
CONNECTIONS UNDER THE SURFACE OF EACH LOT TO SERVE IMPROVEMENTS THEREON;
TOGETHER WITH THE RIGHT TO CUT, TRIM, OR REMOVE TREES, BUSHES AND ROOTS AS MAY
BE REASONABLY REQUIRED INCIDENTAL TO THE RIGHTS HEREIN GIVEN, AND THE RIGHT TO
ENTER UPON THE PROPERTY FOR ALL SUCH PURPOSES. OBSTRUCTIONS, INCLUDING FENCES
AND OTHER STRUCTURES, SHALL NOT BE PLACED OVER GRANTEE'S FACILITIES OR IN,
UPON, OR OVER THE PROPERTY WITHIN SAID EASEMENT WITHOUT PRIOR WRITTEN CONSENT
OF THE GRANTEE AND THE VILLAGE. SAID EASEMENT MAY BE USED FOR LANDSCAPING AND
GARDENS, EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE DESIGNATED ON THE PLAT. THE GRADES OF THE
SUBDIVIDED PROPERTY APPROVED BY THE MUNICIPAL ENGINEER SHALL NOT BE ALTERED IN
ANY MANNER BY THE INSTALLATION OF ANY OF THE FACILITIES OF SAID GRANTEE SO AS
TO INTERFERE WITH THE PROPER OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE THEREOF OR WITH THE
SURFACE DRAINAGE THEREON. THE VILLAGE SHALL HAVE THE RIGHT, BUT NOT THE
OBLIGATION, TO ENTER WITH PERSONNEL AND EQUIPMENT UPON SAID EASEMENT AT ANY
TIME FOR THE PURPOSES OF ACCESS TO AND INSPECTION OF THE PRIVATE UTILITY
FACILITIES LOCATED WITHIN SAID EASEMENT. IF THE OWNER FAILS TO MAINTAIN SAID
FACILITIES AND, AFTER RECEIPT OF NOTICE FROM THE VILLAGE OF SAID FAILURE, THE
OWNER FAILS TO MAKE REQUIRED REPAIRS IN A REASONABLE PERIOD OF TIME, THE
VILLAGE MAY MAKE THE REQUIRED REPAIRS AND SEEK REIMBURSEMENT FROM THE OWNER FOR
THE COSTS INCURRED BY THE VILLAGE TO MAKE THE REPAIR AND/OR FILE A LIEN ON THE
PROPERTY.
   J.   Private Stormwater Management Easements: Private Stormwater Easement:
Areas used for the purposes of operating and maintaining stormwater drainage
and storm sewers to be privately maintained and not utilized for drainage
effecting the general public or municipal facilities and/or appurtenances. As
determined by the Village Engineer, the final plat shall include the provisions
for private stormwater management easements, in substantially the following
form:
A NON-EXCLUSIVE EASEMENT IS HEREBY RESERVED FOR AND GRANTED TO THE HOMEOWNERS'
OR PROPERTY OWNER'S ASSOCIATION AS MAY BE FURTHER DEFINED IN THE HOMEOWNER' OR
PROPERTY OWNER'S ASSOCIATION BYLAWS AND DECLARATIONS AND THEIR RESPECTIVE
SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, WITHIN THE AREAS SO DESIGNATED ON THE PLAT AND MARKED
PRIVATE STORMWATER EASEMENT (PSE) TO CONSTRUCT, INSTALL, RECONSTRUCT, REPAIR,
REMOVE, REPLACE, INSPECT, MAINTAIN AND OPERATE UNDERGROUND STORM SEWER AND
DRAINAGE SWALES IN, UNDER, ACROSS, ALONG AND UPON THE SURFACE OF THE PRIVATE
STORMWATER EASEMENT INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION STORM SEWERS, DRAINAGE SWALES
AND ALL NECESSARY FACILITIES APPURTENANT THERETO, TOGETHER WITH THE RIGHT OF
ACCESS THERETO FOR THE PERSONNEL AND EQUIPMENT NECESSARY AND REQUIRED FOR SUCH
USES AND PURPOSES, AND TOGETHER WITH THE RIGHT TO INSTALL REQUIRED SERVICE
CONNECTIONS UNDER THE SURFACE OF EACH LOT TO SERVE IMPROVEMENTS THEREON.
TOGETHER WITH THE RIGHT TO CUT, TRIM, OR REMOVE TREES, BUSHES AND ROOTS AS MAY
BE REASONABLY REQUIRED INCIDENTAL TO THE RIGHTS HEREIN GIVEN, AND THE RIGHT TO
ENTER UPON THE PROPERTY FOR ALL SUCH PURPOSES. OBSTRUCTIONS, INCLUDING FENCES
AND OTHER STRUCTURES, SHALL NOT BE PLACED OVER GRANTEE'S FACILITIES OR IN,
UPON, OR OVER THE PROPERTY WITHIN SAID EASEMENT WITHOUT PRIOR WRITTEN CONSENT
OF THE GRANTEE AND THE VILLAGE. SAID EASEMENT MAY BE USED FOR LANDSCAPING AND
GARDENS, EXCEPT AS OTHERWISE DESIGNATED ON THE PLAT. THE GRADES OF THE
SUBDIVIDED PROPERTY APPROVED BY THE MUNICIPAL ENGINEER SHALL NOT BE ALTERED IN
ANY MANNER BY THE INSTALLATION OF ANY OF THE FACILITIES OF SAID GRANTEE SO AS
TO INTERFERE WITH THE PROPER OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE THEREOF OR WITH THE
SURFACE DRAINAGE THEREON. THE VILLAGE SHALL HAVE THE RIGHT, BUT NOT THE
OBLIGATION, TO ENTER WITH PERSONNEL AND EQUIPMENT UPON SAID EASEMENT AT ANY
TIME FOR THE PURPOSES OF ACCESS TO AND INSPECTION OF THE PRIVATE STORMWATER
FACILITIES LOCATED WITHIN SAID EASEMENT. IF THE OWNER FAILS TO MAINTAIN SAID
FACILITIES AND, AFTER RECEIPT OF NOTICE FROM THE VILLAGE OF SAID FAILURE, THE
OWNER FAILS TO MAKE REQUIRED REPAIRS IN A REASONABLE PERIOD OF TIME, EXCEPT IN
THE CASE OF AN EMERGENCY THE VILLAGE MAY MAKE THE REQUIRED REPAIRS. THE VILLAGE
MAY SEEK REIMBURSEMENT FROM THE OWNER FOR THE COSTS INCURRED BY THE VILLAGE TO
MAKE THE REPAIR AND/OR FILE A LIEN ON THE PROPERTY.
   K.   Sign Easements: Area used for the purpose of a permanent subdivision or
property identification sign. As determined by the Village Engineer, the final
plat shall include the provisions for sign easements, in substantially the
following form:
A NON-EXCLUSIVE EASEMENT IS HEREBY RESERVED FOR AND GRANTED TO THE HOMEOWNERS'
OR PROPERTY OWNER'S ASSOCIATION AS MAY BE FURTHER DEFINED IN THE HOMEOWNERS' OR
PROPERTY OWNER'S ASSOCIATION BYLAWS AND DECLARATIONS AND THEIR RESPECTIVE
SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, WITHIN THE AREAS SO DESIGNATED ON THE PLAT AND SIGN
EASEMENT (SE) TO INSTALL, REPAIR, REMOVE, REPLACE, INSPECT, AND MAINTAIN A
PERMANENT SUBDIVISION, PROPERTY OR BUSINESS IDENTIFICATION SIGN IN, UNDER,
ACROSS, ALONG AND UPON THE SURFACE OF THE SIGN EASEMENT INCLUDING WITHOUT
LIMITATION ALL NECESSARY FACILITIES APPURTENANT THERETO, TOGETHER WITH THE
RIGHT OF ACCESS THERETO FOR THE PERSONNEL AND EQUIPMENT NECESSARY AND REQUIRED
FOR SUCH USES AND PURPOSES. NO PERMANENT BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES OR FENCES SHALL
BE CONSTRUCTED OR MAINTAINED ON, ACROSS OVER OR THROUGH SAID EASEMENT WITHOUT
PRIOR WRITTEN CONSENT OF THE GRANTEE AND THE VILLAGE OF CAMPTON HILLS. THE
GRADES OF THE SUBDIVIDED PROPERTY APPROVED BY THE MUNICIPAL ENGINEER SHALL NOT
BE ALTERED IN ANY MANNER BY THE INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF THE SIGN OF
SAID GRANTEES SO AS TO INTERFERE WITH THE PROPER OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE
THEREOF OR WITH THE SURFACE DRAINAGE THEREON.
   L.   Wasco Sanitary District Easements: Owner, developer or subdivider must
contact Wasco Sanitary District for easement requirements and provisions which
shall be shown on the preliminary and final plats of subdivision. (Ord. O-20-
13, 11-4-2020)
9-5-4-9: RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
   A.   General Requirements:
      1.   All road and road right-of-way improvements must be designed in
substantial relation to topographic conditions, drainage, public convenience,
safety, and the proposed uses of the land to be served by such roads. All road
and road right-of-way improvements must conform to the applicable standards of
the Illinois Department of Transportation, the Kane County Division of the
Transportation, and the local Township Highway Commissioner.
      2.   A public road must be provided for convenient access to all property
and lots within a subdivision. Private roads and easements of access are
prohibited except unless approved by the Village Board in consideration of
topography, existing natural features, and/or terrain and after consultation
with the Township Highway Commissioner. All private roads must be built to
Village specifications and standards with Village inspection approval provided
during construction.
      3.   Roads must be laid out in conformity to road or highway plans
officially adopted by the Village, County, or the Illinois Division of
Highways. Wherever such a planned road or highway runs through a proposed
subdivision, it must be provided for in the place, and with the width
indicated, on said plan. However, no more than one hundred twenty foot (120')
right-of-way width dedication is required for any road. Any additional right-
of-way specified on said plan must be reserved for circulation purposes by
easement provisions to be acquired at a later date by the public agency
involved.
      4.   Where roads are not a part of the official map or officially adopted
road or highway plans, the arrangement of the roads in a subdivision must
either provide for the alignment and continuation or appropriate projection of
existing principal roads in surrounding areas or conform to an approved plan
for the development that meets a particular situation where topography or other
conditions make continuation of or conformance to existing roads impracticable.
   B.   Roadway Classifications: All existing and planned roads must be
classified according to the following:
      1.   Major roads are those whose primary purpose is to carry high volumes
of traffic, with trip lengths generally over one mile. All marked state and
federal routes, and those county and township roads and other roads so
designated by the County are considered major roads and subject to County
standards.
      2.   Collector roads are those whose purpose is to collect and distribute
medium to low traffic volumes between major and local roads. Collector roads
should be inter-neighborhood roads and particularly related to serving specific
traffic generating facilities such as schools, churches, commercial, or
employment areas, and other areas of greater traffic generation. All county
highways and some township roads are considered collector roads.
      3.   Local roads are those whose primary purpose is to provide access to
abutting property. They should be laid out so as to discourage through traffic.
All roads other than major and collectors are considered local roads.
The Village Engineer shall be responsible for determining roadway
classifications.
   C.   Right-Of-Way Widths: Where not otherwise specified, road right-of-way
widths must be as follows; however, these may be modified by the Village on a
case-by-case basis.
 
Right-of-Way     Total ROW Width Pavement Width Driving Lane(s) Parking Lane(s)
Type
Local Curb &     66'             30'            2               0
Gutter
Local No Curb &  66'             24'            2               0
Gutter
Collector        80'             36'            2               1
Collector Curb & 80'             36'            2               1
Gutter
 
   D.   Reserve Strips And Half Roads: Reserve or "spite" strips controlling
access to roads are prohibited. Half roads are not permitted, except to provide
right-of-way for officially adopted, planned roads. Whenever an existing half
road is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the road must
be platted within such tract to be subdivided or the existing half road must be
vacated prior to final approval.
   E.   Cul-De-Sac Streets: Cul-de-sacs are discouraged and may only be
permitted where exceptional conditions exist in topography. If a cul-de-sac is
included within any development, the developer shall pay the cul-de-sac impact
fee as set forth in Chapter 20.02, "Fees." Where cul-de-sacs may be allowed,
they shall conform to the following standards:
      1.   No more than one cul-de-sac per each one hundred (100) lots
(inclusive of the lot proposed to front on the cul-de-sacs) shall be permitted
in any residential subdivision.
      2.   The maximum length of a cul-de-sac shall be five hundred feet (500')
as measured from its origin with the right-of-way of the intersecting street
through the center point of the bulb to the end of the right-of-way.
      3.   The bulb of a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum right-of-way of one
hundred twenty feet (120') in diameter.
      4.   The bulb of a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum pavement diameter as
measured from the back of curb, of ninety feet (90').
      5.   A maximum of six (6) lots shall have frontage on the bulb of a cul-
de-sac in any residential district.
      6.   The use of cul-de-sac streets shall be prohibited in commercial
districts.
   F.   Geometries: The geometries of all road improvements must conform to the
following, unless necessitated by exceptional topography or other conditions
and approved by the Village Engineer:
      1.   The grade of all roads cannot exceed seven percent (7%). The grade
of all cul-de-sacs cannot exceed five percent (5%). A combination of steep
grades and curves must be avoided. The minimum longitudinal grade is one-half
percent (0.5%). Ditches must maintain a minimum grade of one percent (1%).
      2.   The minimum sight distance must be in accordance with the standards
set forth in the Kane County DOT Access Control Regulations. The minimum
centerline radius must be one hundred fifty feet (150') for local roads, three
hundred feet (300') for collector roads and five hundred feet (500') for major
roads.
      3.   The minimum vertical curve length required is calculated by
multiplying the algebraic difference in grades times the thirty (30) mph "K"
factor, unless otherwise specified. Minimum vertical curve shall be fifty feet
(50') in length. Grade breaks are allowed up to one percent (1%) algebraic
difference.
      4.   A tangent of at least one hundred feet (100') in length must be
introduced between vertical and horizontal reverse curves on local roads and at
least three hundred feet (300') on major and collector roads.
      5.   The intersection of local roads with major arterials and collector
roads must be designed so that there is no jog in the centerline alignment. The
intersection of local roads within a subdivision must also be designed without
a jog.
      6.   All road intersections must be at right angles unless unusual
topographic or other sight conditions require a lesser angle.
      7.   All corner radii must be a minimum of twenty five feet (25'). ROW
corner cuts may be required where residential collectors meet similar or larger
streets. ROW at residential street/lot corners should be rounded behind the
twenty five foot (25') curb radii.
   G.   Design And Construction Standards:
      1.   Street Pavements: Pavements shall be designed and constructed so as
to obtain a minimum twenty (20) year service life with minimal maintenance
after acceptance of the pavement by the Village of Campton Hills. The design
engineer should consider such factors as construction and end use traffic
loading sub-base IBR, etc., in determining the structural make-up of the
pavement section.
         a.   Pavement Materials and Minimum Thickness: The following two (2)
pavement sections are the minimum acceptable to the Village. Their use must be
supported by calculations to substantiate the use of the minimum pavement
section.
            (1)   Rigid Pavement:
               (A)   A minimum of nine inches (9") Portland Cement Concrete
pavement (PCC) designed in accordance with IDOT standards. All Portland Cement
Concrete shall be treated with a protective coat application.
               (B)   Concrete pavements shall be reinforced in accordance with
IDOT standards.
               (C)   Concrete pavement shall have a minimum four inch (4") of
sub-base granular material, Type B. Milled asphalt meeting aggregate sub-grade
specifications cannot be used for sub-base granular material, Type B.
               (D)   Portland Cement Concrete shall have minimum fourteen (14)
day compressive strength pf 3500 psi.
               (E)   In cases where an additional cross section may be needed
for the subgrade, the use of nine inches (9") of aggregate material meeting
aggregate sub-grade gradation (i.e. crushed concrete) and a three inches (3")
milled asphalt cap may be used. Milled asphalt or the blending of asphalt
millings with crushed concrete or other crushed aggregate material is not
allowed for use in either the sub-grade or sub-base material.
            (2)   Flexible Base Pavement:
               (A)    Flexible base pavements shall have minimum of four inch
(4") Sub-base Granular Material, Type B. Milled asphalt meeting Aggregate Sub-
grade specifications cannot be used for Sub-base granular Material Type B.
               (B)   Hot-Mix Asphalt Base Course, four inches (4").
               (C)   Hot-Mix Asphalt Binder Course, IL-19.0, N50, two and one-
half inches (2 1/2").
               (D)   Hot-Mix Asphalt Surface Course, Mix "C", N50, one and one-
half inches (1 1/2").
               (E)   In cases where an additional cross section may be needed
for the sub-grade, the use of nine inches (9") of aggregate material meeting
aggregate sub-grade gradation 9 i.e. crushed concrete) and a three inches (3")
milled asphalt cap may be used. Milled asphalt or the blending of asphalt
millings with crushed concrete or other crushed aggregate material is not
allowed for use in either the sub-grade or sub-base material.
Note: All asphalt is to be laid by a self-propelled mechanical spreader.
         b.   Sub-grade: All sub-grade material shall have a minimum Illinois
Bearing Ratio (IBR) of 3.0. All unsuitable sub-grade material, including sub-
grade material having an IBR less than 3.0 shall be removed and replaced with a
suitable fill material, or the pavement must be designed to compensate for the
soil condition. The soil support IBR values selected for use by the engineer
shall represent a minimum value for the soil to be used.
Structural design procedures acceptable under this section require the
determination of the sub-grade support strength. Regardless of the design
method used, a soils report shall be submitted by a soils testing laboratory,
approved by the Village Engineer, in which sub-grade support strength is
recommended. The soils report shall provide recommendation for sub-grade
improvements. Field compaction tests, where required by the Village Engineer to
verify conformance with the soils report recommendations, shall be provided at
the owner/developer's expense. Proof rolling of sub-grade materials in
accordance with applicable articles of Section 300 of the IDOT Standard
Specifications will be required for all pavement construction. When required,
soil borings shall extend seven feet (7') or at least one foot (1') below the
proposed storm sewer invert elevations, whichever is greater. Pavement cores
shall be provided in all areas where the existing pavement is to be
rehabilitated/resurfaced.
         c.   Pavement Design Shall Include:
            (1)   Maximum allowable pavement grade = seven percent (7%) and
minimum allowable pavement grade = one half percent (0.5%).
            (2)   Driveway grades shall have a minimum slope of one percent
(1%) and a maximum slope of eight percent (8%). All driveway grades in excess
of five percent (5%) shall substantiate that vehicular bottom clearances are
met.
            (3)   The minimum intersection curb radius:
               (A)   Two minor streets: twenty five feet (25').
               (B)   Minor and collector streets: thirty feet (30').
               (C)   Two collector streets: forty feet (40').
               (D)   Truck routes or zoned manufacturing: forty five feet
(45').
         d.   Ramping and sloping of sidewalks at intersections shall be in
accordance with the specifications and standards as set forth by the Illinois
Department of Transportation, the American Disabilities Act (ADA), and the
Illinois Disability Code.
Note: All concrete shall be treated with a protective coat application of
linseed oil or curing compound equivalent for temperatures over forty degrees
(40°).
      2.   In commercial and industrial areas and other areas where heavy
traffic is likely, roads must meet a minimum pavement structural number of 2.0
for local roads and 3.3 for collector roads or as determined by a structural
analysis per IDOT standards.
      3.   The roads must be graded to conform as near as practical to the
typical cross-section and approved by the Village before the base course can be
applied. Drainage facilities must be completed prior to the installation of
base course material.
      4.   The base course material must conform to specifications as shown on
the typical cross-section sheet and deposited on the prepared sub-grade with an
approved mechanical spreader or spreader box. The base course must be approved
by the Village before the bituminous binder course is applied.
      5.   After spreading the material to required width, the base course must
be rolled with pneumatic-tired roller to a compacted thickness after rolling of
not less than twelve inches (12"). A bituminous surface plant mix conforming to
state specifications must then be constructed on the prepared surface.
      6.   Subsequent to the construction of the sub-grade, road base, and
bituminous surface, the following must be submitted to the Village from a
certified testing company:
         a.   A report showing satisfactory subgrade compaction.
         b.   A core report showing satisfactory thickness and compaction for
the base course.
         c.   Material quantity tickets from the source showing the total
amount of base course material and bituminous surfacing placed on the road.
         d.   A report for the bituminous surface showing the density,
thickness, and quality.
      7.   Stream crossings are limited to the minimum necessary to provide
safe circulation and ensure two (2) ingress/egress locations, subject to
approval by the Village Staff and Village Board. Stream crossings must be
located to minimize stream disturbance. Bridges or culverts of sufficient size
must be used for all perennial stream crossings to preserve stream channel
width and natural stream substrates.
      8.   When land adjacent to an existing road is subdivided and the
existing road is not improved to a standard as high as that required for
proposed subdivision roads, the subdivider is required to improve the existing
road if it is used for access to the proposed subdivision.
      9.   When warranted by a traffic study, or as determined by the Village
Staff, turning lanes (consisting of a taper and a full width auxiliary lane)
for either right or left turns must be provided at the developer's expense.
      10.   When Village staff has determined that any other existing
infrastructure is inadequate then improvements to any one or all of such
facilities are required.
   H.   Curb And Gutter: Curb and gutter street drainage systems may be
required if the Village staff and the Village Board determine a need for such.
This is determined on a case-by-case basis.
   I.   Road Lighting: Installation of road lights are required in accordance
with design and specification standards approved by the Village. Residential
road lighting facilities must be provided at all road intersections and at
closer intervals if the subdivision density is three (3) dwelling units per
acre or more, and at the entrance of subdivisions. Commercial and industrial
road lighting facilities must comply with applicable Village code, and shall be
placed on alternative sides of the road. The subdivider must arrange for and
pay any installation costs required by the public service company for the
erection of the required road lights.
Each owner, developer or subdivider shall provide for adequate lighting of
public streets in accordance with engineering design policies and construction
details and requirements established by the Village Engineer, Commonwealth
Edison or any other subsequent power supplier, and this chapter, subject to the
approval of the Village Board. It shall be the responsibility of the owner,
developer or subdivider to pay all costs of installation of such lighting and
to pay for all operation costs (power, lamp, etc.) until the public subdivision
improvements are accepted by the Village Board.
   J.   [Reserved].
   K.   Bicycle And Equestrian Trails: Where bicycle and equestrian trails are
included, they must be constructed within easements or dedicated rights of way
when required as part of the subdivision improvements. Such trails are separate
and distinct from sidewalks and dedicated roads, and must be installed in
accordance with the following:
      1.   Bicycle Trails:
         a.   The trail must not be closer than seventy five feet (75') to any
house, barn, or garage.
         b.   The trail must not be closer than five feet (5') to any property
line or fence.
         c.   The trail must have a minimum of eight inches (8") of gravel
base.
         d.   The surface may be four inches (4") of limestone screenings or
two inches (2") of asphalt, class I-11 or I-11 modified.
         e.   The trail must be a minimum of eight feet (8') wide.
      2.   Equestrian Trails: The design and specifications for equestrian
trails will be determined on a case-by-case basis according to use and site
conditions.
   L.   Additional Roadway Improvements:
      1.   Road signs of the type approved by the Village must be installed on
the northeast corner of each intersection and indicate the road names as shown
on the final plat.
      2.   Guardrails must be placed along the shoulder of any roadway as set
forth by Village or the Township Highway Commissioner.
      3.   All earth surfaces within the right-of-way disturbed by the
construction operations must be graded, fertilized, seeded, or sodded, and
mulched in accordance with the standard specifications. Provision must be made
to assure the healthy growth of such landscaping.
   M.   Mailboxes: All mailboxes shall be installed by the owner, developer or
subdivider at his expense, and shall be installed in accordance with the
regulations of the US Postal Service.
   N.   Parkway Trees: Parkway trees (minimum two- and one-half inch (2.5")
trunk diameter (DBH)) shall be planted along all streets and cul-de-sacs
constructed with the development. Such trees shall be planted at the center of
the parkway at a rate of not less than one tree for each fifty feet (50') of
frontage. The owner, developer, or subdivider shall replace any parkway trees
that fail to survive for a three (3) year period after acceptance of the public
improvements. All landscaping materials, including lawns, shrubs and trees
shall be maintained by the applicable homeowner/property owners' association or
the property owners that abut said parkway or island. Trees shall not be
planted or maintained in such a manner as to interfere with or block overhead
utility lines, utility poles, lamp posts, traffic flow, traffic signs or any
standing structure. (Ord. O-20-13, 11-4-2020)
9-5-4-10: UTILITIES:
   A.   Wastewater Systems:
      1.   All subdivisions relying on individual on-site wastewater treatment
and disposal systems (septic systems) must comply to these requirements and the
Kane County individual sewage treatment and disposal systems rules and
regulations.
      2.   In subdivisions not relying on septic systems, there must be a
complete wastewater collection system, including a service connection for each
lot and a sewage treatment plant, land application treatment system or such
other disposal facilities. All municipal type sewerage systems must be designed
and constructed in accordance with applicable State, County, and local plans,
standards and regulations and in accordance with accepted modern sanitary
engineering practices.
All wastewater collection systems shall meet the requirements of the Wasco
Sanitary District.
      3.   No municipal type sewerage system is permitted in an area to be
serviced by the orderly extension of municipal sewerage facilities and no
community or individual sewerage system will be permitted which will interfere
with any municipal plans for the orderly extension of municipal sewerage
facilities.
      4.   Provision must be made for the maintenance and operation of such
treatment plant or facility and shall be stated on the final plat and
covenants, if any, and incorporated in the deed of each lot if charges are to
be made to the property owners.
   B.   Water Supply And Distribution: All community water supply systems must
provide all appurtenances and stubs to each lot and must be designed and
constructed in accordance with plans and standards for the State, County, or
Village. Individual water supplies are permitted only when they meet all
applicable State and County regulations.
All water supply and distribution improvements shall meet the requirements of
the Wasco Sanitary District.
   C.   Drainage And Storm Sewer Facilities: A storm water control system is
required to serve adequately the area being platted, considering, but not
limited to, the following:
      1.   The County Stormwater Ordinance. If the Village adopts a stormwater
ordinance, such ordinance applies.
      2.   The design of the drainage system must consider and show:
         a.   Watershed area of which the subdivision is a part.
         b.   Calculations as to volume and frequency of water to be handled
after extreme rainstorms.
         c.   A scheme of culverts, field tiles, storm drains, and storm water
management facilities sufficient in size to eliminate flooding or uncontrolled
ponding of water either on site or off site. The final engineering plans shall
provide culvert sizes and slopes for each lot driveway on roads with street
ditches. Culverts shall be appropriately sized for at minimum, a ten (10) year
storm event, with adequate cover provided. Culverts crossing streets shall be
sized for a minimum twenty five (25) year storm event with adequate cover
provided. Calculations shall be provided substantiating culvert sizes and
slopes based on tributary drainage area.
         d.   The use of existing drainage channels whenever possible.
      3.   Ditches and swales must meet the following standards:
         a.   With grades to four percent (4%), ditches must be seeded and
covered with mulch or excelsior blanket. Ditches may be required to have sod
bottoms and banks and ditch checks may be required at critical points.
         b.   With grades from four percent (4%) to eight percent (8%), ditches
must have sod channels and ditch checks. Ditches may be required to be lined
with rock or paved with concrete gutters.
         c.   With grades greater than eight percent (8%), ditches must be rock
lined or paved with concrete gutters.
         d.   Corrugated metal or equal culverts with safety end treatments and
grates must be provided at all road or driveway intersections, sized to
eliminate flooding or ponding, but not less than fifteen inches (15") in
diameter, and with a minimum subgrade cover of six inches (6").
         e.   Street ditches shall: (i) have sufficient energy dissipation at
the outlet to prevent scouring of the streambank, bed, or downstream land.
Armoring of the stream channel should not be considered in lieu of energy
dissipation. Energy dissipation is essential to avoid transferring scour and
stability problems further downstream. (ii) To the extent possible, open-
channel drainageways should have permanently deep-rooted vegetated side slopes
and inverts with velocities sufficiently limited to prevent scouring.
         f.   Manmade swales and ditches shall meet the following minimum
standards. Ditches and culverts may be used in lieu of storm sewers if curbs
and gutters are not required. Ditches shall meet the following minimum
standards: (i) minimum longitudinal grade of two percent (2.0%); (ii) maximum
longitudinal grade of ten percent (10%); (iii) minimum depth of twenty-four
inches (24") below the shoulder of the street; (iv) swale cross sections shall
be trapezoidal with two foot (2') minimum bottom. Maximum bank slope of 4:
1 under normal conditions with 6:1 slope recommended on the lot owner's side of
the ditch; (v) the storm system shall be designed with "positive street and
swale drainage" such that in the event of a complete storm system failure,
storm water runoff will be directed overland to the storm water detention area
in a manner to minimize property damage due to flooding. Whenever practicable,
all areas of the property must be provided an emergency overland flow path that
will pass the entire calculated one hundred (100) year flow at a stage at least
one foot (1') below the lowest foundation grades in the vicinity of the flow
path (one foot (1') minimum freeboard), even when one hundred (100) year storm
sewer is provided, regardless of the size of the drainage area. Emergency
overland flow paths shall be provided in drainage easements, which cannot be
obstructed.
      4.   The following criteria will be used in planning and designing the
ground water drainage system. The underlying objective is to provide capacity
for ground water or nuisance flows in a pipe or tile in order to keep yards and
ditches from becoming wet in dry weather.
         a.   Ground water or nuisance flow systems must be designed by using
the information found in the University of Illinois Cooperative Extension
Service Circular #1226, Illinois drainage guide for sizing of drain tiles.
Drainage coefficients for sub-surface drains of one-half inch (.5") per day or
less must be used when designing ground water drainage systems for wet or
perched water table soils in order to not increase base flows in receiving
streams.
         b.   All septic system curtain drains and all sump pumps must be
connected to a new ground water (also called nuisance or subsurface) drainage
system. The new ground water drainage system must be routed around stormwater
storage basins and cannot drain into old existing agricultural drain tiles.
They must be connected to an existing or proposed wet pond or stream, or
extended off site to a stream. All new ground water drainage system pipes, both
on site and off site, must be placed within a minimum ten foot (10') wide
drainage easement. No footing tiles may be connected by gravity to a ground
water drainage system.
         c.   Ground water drainage systems must be kept separated, in general,
from storm sewer systems to avoid hydraulic surcharging of the ground water
drainage system. However, ground water systems may drain into storm sewer
systems or utilize the same pipe as the storm sewer system provided all
essential design criteria of a separate ground water system can be met and both
of the following are met:
            (1)   The storm sewer system drains to an on-site wet pond,
wetland, or stream.
            (2)   The ground water drainage system will not be hydraulically
surcharged by storm water flows, including the prevention of hydraulic
overloading of sump pump services and septic system curtain drains.
   D.   Underground Wiring:
      1.   All lines for telephone, electricity, television, and other similar
services distributed by wire or cable to be placed underground entirely
throughout the subdivided area unless otherwise approved by the Village Board.
      2.   Such conduits or cables must be placed within easements or within
public ways where necessary, provided only that overhead lines may be permitted
where it is determined that overhead lines will not constitute a detriment to
the health, safety, welfare, and character of the subdivision.
      3.   All such facilities placed in dedicated public ways or easements
must be planned so as not to conflict with other underground utilities.
      4.   Electrical transformers and telephone junction boxes cannot be
placed in any portion of a designated drainage or storm water control facility.
      5.   All such facilities must be constructed in accordance with standards
approved by the Illinois Commerce Commission and in conformance with the
franchise of said utilities.
   E.   Storm Sewer And Stormwater Management:
      1.   Design Requirements:
         a.   Auger: Auguring will be required at all roadway crossings unless
otherwise permitted by the Village Engineer. Steel casing and "Cascade" spacers
(or approved equal) shall be utilized. Following completion of the auger, the
casing shall be filled with pea gravel or sand, and the ends shall be blocked
and mortared shut (refer to Village casing pipe detail).
         b.   Catch Basins: Catch basins shall consist of four foot (4')
minimum interior diameter reinforced concrete structures with a three foot (3')
sump (refer to restrictor structure detail).
         c.   Cover Depth: All storm sewer and sump lines must have a minimum
cover of two feet (2').
         d.   Video Note On All Plans: Engineering plans must contain the
following note: "A current color video record and a type written transcription
of the internal inspection of the newly constructed storm sewer system shall be
submitted prior to refunding of site improvement escrow retention monies by the
Village of Campton Hills. All public storm sewer shall be videotaped. When the
proposed storm sewer system is to connect to an existing storm sewer system
abutting the property, the existing sewer must also be televised and reported.
The contractor shall coordinate the televising of existing contiguous sewers
with the Village of Campton Hills. All lines shall be flushed and cleaned prior
to videotaping."
         e.   Flared End Sections: All flared end sections greater than or
equal to twelve inches (12"), that will receive or discharge storm water, shall
have a removable grate system to prevent entry. This grate system shall be made
from steel stock that is hot-dipped galvanized after fabrication.
         f.   Extension Of Sewer System: The storm sewer must be extended to
the limits of the subdivision or lot and must be sized to accept all tributary
areas.
         g.   Capacity Calculations: Design engineer shall provide calculations
to substantiate the available capacity of the existing receiving storm sewer/
stream in light of the design discharge from the proposed development. Note on
all plans which sewer lines are to be public and private. All proposed storm
sewer systems shall be designed for a ten (10) year storm event per the Kane
County Stormwater Ordinance as adopted and modified by the Village
         h.   Frame And Grate: Frames and grates shall be provided as
appropriate for the structure location (i.e. depressed curb, barrier curb,
overflow route, rear yard...). All grates to be located near a paved surface
shall be "bicycle safe". Calculations may be required to demonstrate that the
proposed grates allow for an inflow that does not exceed the design capacity
for the downstream pipe (refer to standard details).
         i.   Inlets: Inlets shall consist of a two foot (2') minimum interior
diameter reinforced concrete structure. Inlets shall be placed at the sag of
vertical curves in roadways, at low points in parking areas, and at other
locations as necessary to minimize stormwater ponding and/or flow across
roadways or intersections. Storm sewer inlets shall be placed not more than
five hundred feet (500') apart in pavement and shall not exceed two hundred
fifty feet (250') in grassy areas.
         j.   Release Structure/Restrictor: The release structure shall be of a
weir wall orifice design or as approved by the Village Engineer.
         k.   Underground Storage System: (i) Underground chambers must be
large enough to allow the chamber to be manually cleaned. (ii) Access points
for ingress and ventilation purposes are to be provided in the chamber at a
maximum spacing of one hundred feet (100') and at the ends of the chamber.
(iii) Underground storage chambers are to be clearly labeled on the engineering
plans as "Private Storm Water Storage Facility." These chambers are to be
maintained by the developer until an owners' association has been established.
(iv) Poured in place reinforced concrete chamber designs must be signed and
sealed by an Illinois Licensed Structural Engineer. (v) All reinforcement steel
shall be epoxy coated and all concrete shall be treated with a protective
concrete coating, on the interior and exterior of the chamber. (vi) For precast
concrete construction, geo-textile fabric must be placed over the top of the
structure, and all joints must be grouted. (vii) All structural steel members
used shall be Corten or hot dipped galvanized. All connections shall have a
like treatment. (viii) A minimum of twelve inches (12") of topsoil plus sod
must be placed to cover the underground storage facility when constructed under
pervious surface.
         l.   Separation Requirements: A minimum ten foot (10') horizontal
separation shall be established between the sewer and any proposed or existing
water distribution facility, or the invert of the water main shall lie a
minimum of eighteen inches (18") above the top of the sewer pipe. Where neither
of the above conditions can be met, the water main shall be encased for the
duration of the horizontal conflict (ten foot (10') on each side of a
perpendicular conflict), or the sewer shall be constructed of water main
quality materials the duration of the conflict (ten foot (10') on each side of
a perpendicular conflict). Sewer Pipe, Minimum Size: Public sewer shall have a
minimum diameter of ten inches (10") for the first "run" of pipe, twelve inches
(12") minimum for all other.
         m.   Slope: Slope shall be adequate to provide a minimum flow velocity
of 3 fps and maximum acceptable velocity is 10 fps.
         n.   Structure Sizing: Manholes and catch basins shall have a minimum
inside diameter of four feet (4') for sewer pipe eighteen inches (18") or less
in diameter, five feet (5') for sewer pipe twenty one inches to forty eight
inches (21" to 48") in diameter. Pipes larger than forty eight inches (48") in
diameter will require a special design (refer to standard manhole and catch
basin details).
         o.   Structure Spacing: Manholes/catch basins shall be provided at
four hundred feet (400') minimum intervals; change in pipe diameter; change in
pipe material; change in vertical alignment; change in horizontal alignment.
         p.   Sump Lines: Domestic sump services shall be constructed of PVC
SDR 26 with a minimum diameter of four inches (4"). All domestic services shall
connect to the public sewer by removing a section of main and installing a new
"wye" fitting for pipes less than fifteen inches (15") in diameter, "KorN-Tee"
Boots for pipes fifteen inches (15") and larger, or at a structure (refer to
connection detail).
         q.   Trench Backfill: All utility and service trenches within three
feet (3') of paved surfaces, or at a distance specified by the Engineer, shall
be backfilled with CA-7 (Virgin Crushed Limestone). FA-6 (clean beach sand)
material shall be used in all other unpaved locations. All backfill material
shall be properly compacted unless otherwise directed by the appropriate
Engineering Division. Backfill under existing pavements, where an open cut of
the pavement has been approved, shall be Flowable Fill that meets the IDOT
standards of Controlled Low Strength Material (CLSM) Mixture #1. No fly ash
will be permitted in this mix (refer to Village pipe trench detail).
         r.   Underdrains: Underdrains will be required under curbs at the
bottom of all roadway sags. Underdrains shall extend fifty feet (50') on each
side of the inlet. Underdrains shall be perforated polyethylene pipe. The
underdrain shall be encased in gravel trench with no fines, and a geotextile
fabric shall be used to limit sedimentation in the pipe (refer to standard
"Pipe Underdrain" detail).
         s.   Sump Lines: Storm services shall be constructed for all buildable
lots. Services shall be constructed of PVC SDR 26 pipe, six inch (6") minimum
diameter, and shall be extended to the rights-of-way limits. All connections to
the public main shall be at a manhole or at a "wye" fitting approved by Public
Works Division. Once installed all services extending to the City right-of-way
limits shall be located utilizing a two inches by four inches (2" x 4") wooden
stake painted green.
         t.   Culverts: Culvert pipe designs shall be in accordance with the
Illinois Department of Transportation "Standard Specification for Road and
Bridge Construction" latest edition. Publicly owned culvert pipes shall be PVC
for pipes less than fifteen inches (15") in diameter or RCP for pipes equal to
fifteen inches (15") or larger in diameter.
      2.   Storm Sewer Materials:
         a.   Casing: Where water main protection is required, encasement shall
consist of PVC SDR 26, or steel casing with "Cascade type CCR-STD" spacers or
approved equal.
         b.   Frame And Grate: Curb Inlet/C.B.: High back: Neenah R-3281-A or
R-3278-1 Depressed: Neenah R-3506-A2 C.B., "behind the curb type": Neenah R-
3305 Neenah R 1713 (Refer to Lid Detail) C.B./M.H., Type "D": Grate: Neenah R
1713 (Refer to Lid Detail) Frame: Neenah R-1713 C.B., "beehive type": Neenah R-
4340-B.
         c.   Manhole: Manholes shall be reinforced concrete with steps
provided sixteen inches (16") on-center. All manholes shall have a minimum
inside diameter which conform to the following: eighteen inches (18") storm
sewer and smaller - four foot (4') inside diameter; twenty one inches to forty
eight inches (21" to 48") storm sewer - five foot (5') inside diameter; larger
than forty eight inches (48") storm sewer - special design required.
         d.   Sewer Pipe, Materials: Main line storm sewer shall be constructed
of one of the following: (i) Pre-cast reinforced concrete pipe, with "O-ring"
joints; (ii) PVC pipe, rigid, (Min. SDR 26, push-on gasket joints); (iii) All
joints shall conform to ANSI 21.11 for ductile iron pipe; (iv) Ductile iron
pipe, (Class 52), minimum; (v) HDPE pipe, (Rigid with corrugated exterior and
smooth interior meeting AASHTO M-294, Type S. Pipe sections shall be joined
with PVC double bell couplers installed on the pipe with O-ring gaskets. Ex-
filtration standards shall meet or exceed that of PVC SDR 26 with push-on-
joints.) FOR PRIVATE USE ONLY. NOT TO BE 14 USED WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY OR
FOR PUBLICLY OWNED AND MAINTAINED STORM SEWER (vi) The type of pipe material
will be dependent upon the depth of bury, soil conditions, and pipe criteria,
and as approved by the Village. (vii) For RCP/CSP pipe, lifting holes shall not
be allowed on pipes less than eighty four inches (84") in diameter. (viii) All
storm sewer smaller than fifteen inches (15") in diameter that will be publicly
owned and maintained shall be RCP or PVC pipe, rigid, (Min. SDR 26, push-on
gasket joints).
         e.   Flared End Section: Flared end sections and subsequent riprap
material shall be designed and specified per the Illinois Department of
Transportation "Standard Specification for Road and Bridge Construction" latest
edition. Flared end sections shall be constructed of a concrete material only
or approved by the Village Engineer.
   F.   Best Management Practices Requirements: Compliance with the need to
incorporate the U.S. EPA best management practices requires nothing beyond the
requirements cited in the U.S. Clean Water Act.
      1.   Impervious surfaces on the property should be minimized. Reducing
impervious surfaces is one method for controlling increases of stormwater
runoff, and, controlling future increases in stormwater damages. This method of
reducing stormwater increases also provides control at the most site-specific
or local level possible.
      2.   Natural flow paths and vegetated channels should be used and left
undisturbed to the maximum extent possible. By using natural drainage features
and keeping them undisturbed, site-specific and simple methods can be employed
as encouraged by the Plan.
      3.   On-site infiltration of stormwater should be encouraged where soils
and subsurface conditions are sufficiently permeable. As encouraged by the
Plan, onsite infiltration accomplishes site-specific or local control of future
increases in stormwater damages while preserving groundwater recharge.
      4.   To the extent practicable, drainage from impervious areas (i.e.,
roofs, driveways, sidewalks, parking lots, and streets) should drain across
pervious areas. Directing drainage from impervious areas across pervious areas
is one method to control increases of stormwater runoff, and thus control
future increases in stormwater damages. This method of reducing stormwater
increases will also provide control at the most site specific or local level
possible.
      5.   Directing sump pump flow away from storm sewer systems is one method
for controlling increases of peak stormwater runoff, and thus controlling
future increases in stormwater damages. Many homeowners view sump pump
discharges as a nuisance and it can cause continual "wet spots" in a yard
making mowing difficult. In residential developments, these concerns must also
be addressed. However, redirecting sump pumps to sanitary sewers is prohibited
by water quality regulations.
      6.   To the extent practicable, drainage should be directed to and
through onsite storage swales. The swales should be vegetated with water-
tolerant species to prevent erosion and promote infiltration and pollutant
capture. (Ord. O-20-13, 11-4-2020)
9-5-5: REQUIRED DEDICATIONS:
9-5-5-1: DEDICATION OF SCHOOL SITES:
School site dedications are required in compliance with Chapter 9-6 of the
Village Code. (Ord. O-20-13, 11-4-2020)
9-5-5-2: DEDICATION OF PARK SITES:
Park site dedications are required in compliance with Chapter 9-6 of the
Village Code. (Ord. O-20-13, 11-4-2020)
9-5-5-3: COMMON OPEN SPACE:
Residential subdivisions require that thirty five percent (35%) of the net
developable land area be set aside as common open space according to the
following standards.
   A.   The minimum open space required must be owned and managed as described
in this section. The uses within the open space must be accessible to all
residents of the development. These uses may also be available to the general
public. The required open space must be undivided and restricted in perpetuity
from future development.
   B.   The following active and passive open space uses are counted as common
open space:
      1.   Conservation area excluding natural water features and wetlands.
      2.   Water bodies, ponds, floodplain, or wetlands. However, no more than
fifteen percent (15%) of the total required common open space area may consist
of these areas.
      3.   Detention/retention areas accessible to occupants or the public via
nature trails, boardwalks, piers, or perimeter walkways. However, no more than
fifteen percent (15%) of the total required common open space area may consist
of these areas.
      4.   A trail system connecting open space areas. This includes hiking,
biking, and equestrian trails.
      5.   Recreational facilities such as swimming pools, tennis courts, and
skateparks. No more than thirty percent (30%) of the required total open space
area may consist of structures for recreational facilities.
      6.   Parks and playgrounds.
      7.   Greenways.
      8.   Botanical gardens, greenhouses, and community gardens.
      9.   Reuse of structures existing on the site prior to development for
community purposes (i.e. rehab of an existing barn or silo, etc.).
      10.   Agricultural uses, including vineyards with wineries and stables.
   C.   The following do not count toward common open space:
      1.   Yards on individual lots or yards that are reserved for the
exclusive use of an individual property owner.
      2.   Dedicated streets, alleys, or other public rights-of-way.
      3.   Vehicular drives, private streets, and parking, loading, and storage
areas.
      4.   Irrigation fields.
   D.   A management plan must be prepared and submitted for all common open
space, including any man-made drainage facilities that serve more than one
property, such as detention/retention ponds. The designated common open space
and common facilities must be owned and managed by one or a combination of the
following and the management plan must meet the standards for each type:
      1.   Homeowners Or Property Owners Association:
         a.   The developer must provide the Village with a description of the
association, proof of incorporation of the association, a copy of its bylaws,
and satisfactory proof of adoption thereof, a copy of the declaration of
covenants, easements, or restrictions or similar document(s) regulating the use
of the property and setting forth methods for maintaining the open space.
         b.   The association must be organized by the developer and operated
with financial subsidization from the developer before the sale of any lots
within the development.
         c.   Membership in the association is mandatory for all purchasers of
homes or lots therein and their successors. The conditions and timing of
transferring control of the association from developer to the homeowners must
be identified.
         d.   The association is responsible for maintenance and insurance on
open space owned by the association, enforceable by liens placed by the
homeowners' association. Maintenance obligations also may be enforced by the
Village, which may place liens to recover its costs. Any governmental body with
jurisdiction in the area where the development is located may place liens on
the owners of the open space to collect unpaid taxes.
         e.   The members of the association must share equitably the costs of
maintaining open space owned by the association. Shares must be defined within
the association bylaws or declaration. Association dues must be structured to
provide for both annual operating costs and to cover projected long-range costs
relating to the repair of any facilities and must be reserved for such
purposes.
         f.   The association must have or hire adequate staff to administer
common facilities and to properly and continually maintain the open space.
         g.   The homeowners' or property owner's association may lease open
space lands to any other qualified person or corporation for operation and
maintenance of such lands, but such a lease agreement must provide:
            (1)   That the residents of the development and owners of the
property will at all times have access to the open space lands contained
therein (except that access to land that is actively farmed).
            (2)   That the open space lands to be leased must be maintained.
            (3)   That the operation of open space facilities may be for the
benefit of the residents only or may be open to the public, at the election of
the developer and/or homeowners' or property owners' association, as the case
may be.
         h.   Homeowners' or property owners' association documentation
approved by the Village demonstrating compliance with these provisions must be
recorded with the final subdivision, and proof of recording thereof must be
provided to the Village prior to the issuance of any building permits for the
property. At the time of preliminary plan submission, the applicant must
provide draft homeowners' association documentation with sufficient detail to
demonstrate compliance with this section.
      2.   Condominium Association: To the degree applicable, condominium
documents must comply with the regulations above for homeowners' associations.
Condominium documents must be recorded with the final plat. At the time of
preliminary plan submission, the applicant must provide draft condominium
documents with sufficient detail to demonstrate compliance with this section.
      3.   Private Conservation Organization: With the permission of the
Village, an owner may transfer either fee-simple title of the open space or
easements on the open space to a private, conservation organization recognized
by the township, among whose purposes it is to conserve open space and/or
natural resources, provided that:
         a.   The organization is acceptable to Village, and is a bona fide
conservation organization with perpetual existence.
         b.   The conveyance contains appropriate provision for proper reverter
or retransfer in the event that the organization becomes unwilling or unable to
continue carrying out its functions.
         c.   The open space is permanently restricted from future development
through a conservation easement and the Village is given the ability to enforce
these restrictions.
         d.   A maintenance agreement acceptable to the Village is entered into
by the developer and the organization.
      4.   Private Ownership: An individual who will maintain the land for
common open space purposes, as provided by a conservation easement. This option
may be used only on a very limited basis for unique situations where no other
options are practical, as approved by the Village Board. (Ord. O-20-13, 11-4-
2020)
9-5-6: CONSERVATION DESIGN:
9-5-6-1: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Per Section 6.5 of the Zoning Ordinance, new development and
subdivisions located within the ESA Environmentally Sensitive Areas Overlay
District are required to undertake a conservation features inventory (CFI).
   B.   If the CFI indicates that twenty percent (20%) or more of the total
land area on-site contains significant natural resources, new residential
subdivisions must be designed as conservation design subdivisions per this
Section. (Ord. O-20-13, 11-4-2020)
9-5-6-2: INTENT:
Conservation design is intended to guide development so that it locates and
coordinates areas for development where the conservation of natural features is
prioritized, and provides common open space areas for passive and/or active
recreational use by residents of the development and, where appropriate, the
larger community. (Ord. O-20-13, 11-4-2020)
9-5-6-3: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Lots must be configured to minimize the loss of natural resources,
including wetlands, water bodies, woodlands, and historical resources. Lots may
be platted in a more irregular fashion than required by section
9-5-4-5 in order to achieve this purpose.
   B.   The development must preserve scenic natural views, including views
from roadways.
   C.   If agricultural uses are being maintained within the development, lots
must be configured in a manner that maximizes the usable area remaining for
such agricultural uses with appropriate buffers between agricultural uses and
residential structures. (Ord. O-20-13, 11-4-2020)
9-5-6-4: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Lots must be arranged in a manner that protects areas of conservation
value identified in the CFI.
   B.   Residential dwellings must be clustered according to the following
standards.
      1.   Each residential cluster is limited to no more than twenty five (25)
dwellings.
      2.   Residential clusters should be located a minimum of one hundred
fifty feet (150') apart lot line to lot line, separated by greenbelts or other
natural features. The greenbelts may include bike paths, hiking trails, or
equestrian trails, but no development is permitted within these separation
areas.
      3.   Residential clusters must be located to minimize negative impacts on
the natural, scenic, and cultural resources of the site.
      4.   Residential clusters must be sited to achieve the following goals:
         a.   Minimize disturbance to natural areas. Clear-cutting is
prohibited.
         b.   Prevent downstream impacts due to runoff through adequate on-site
stormwater management practices.
         c.   Protect scenic views of open land from adjacent roads to the
extent practical.
         d.    Whenever possible, fragmentation of woodland areas and other
natural ecosystems must be avoided. Contiguous swaths of undisturbed or
restored habitat should be preserved to create corridors for the movement of
wildlife and natural resources, and to promote biodiversity. (Ord. O-20-13, 11-
4-2020)
9-5-6-5: PERIMETER YARD:
There must be a perimeter buffer yard around the entire conservation design
development of no less than fifty feet (50'). No development is permitted in
this perimeter buffer yard, which must remain landscaped with no structures.
This perimeter buffer yard may be included in the required percentage of open
space if undivided and restricted in perpetuity from future development. Access
points to the development are permitted within this perimeter buffer yard.
(Ord. O-20-13, 11-4-2020)
9-5-6-6: COMMON OPEN SPACE:
   A.   Fifty percent (50%) of the total land area in a conservation design
must be maintained as active or passive common open space. This controls over
any amount required by section
9-5-5-3.
   B.   The following active and passive open space uses are counted as common
open space for a conservation design, which controls over permissions allowed
by section
9-5-5-3:
      1.   Conservation of areas identified in the CFI.
      2.   Water bodies, ponds, floodplain, or wetlands.
      3.   Greenways.
      4.   Detention/retention areas accessible to occupants or the public via
nature trails, boardwalks, piers, or perimeter walkways. However, no more than
ten percent (10%) of the total required common open space area may consist of
these areas.
      5.   Agricultural uses.
      6.   No more than ten percent (10%) of the required total required open
space area may consist of the following, individually or cumulatively:
         a.   A trail system connecting open space areas, including hiking,
biking, and equestrian trails.
         b.   Parks and playgrounds.
         c.   Botanical gardens, greenhouses, and community gardens.
      7.   Reuse of structures existing on the site prior to development for
community purposes (i.e. rehab of an existing barn or silo, etc.).
   C.   Management of the common open space must meet the standards of section
9-5-5-3. (Ord. O-20-13, 11-4-2020)
CHAPTER 6
DEDICATION OF LANDS FOR PUBLIC USE AND/OR CASH CONTRIBUTIONS
SECTION:
9-6-1: General Requirements
9-6-2: Criteria For Requiring School Site Dedications
9-6-3: Criteria For Requiring Park And Recreational Land Dedications
9-6-4: Criteria For Requiring Cash Contribution In Lieu Of Dedications, Or Both
9-6-5: Consumer Price Index
9-6-6: Density Formula
9-6-7: Reservation Of Additional Land
9-6-8: Combining With Adjoining Developments
9-6-9: Topography And Grading
9-6-10: Improved Sites
9-6-11: Environmental Risk Audit
9-6-12: Suitability Of Soils At Site
9-6-13: Title Insurance; Survey; Assessment Plats; Real Estate Tax Escrow
9-6-14: Objections
9-6-15: Annexation Of Land
9-6-16: Indemnification
9-6-17: Distribution
9-6-18: Needs Assessment; Land And Capital Facilities Acquisition Plan
9-6-19: Time Of Payment
9-6-20: Calculating Cash Contributions
9-6-21: Exhibits
9-6-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision or of a final plat of
a planned development of property within the village and within the contiguous
unincorporated area within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the village, each
subdivider or developer shall be required to dedicate land for school and park
purposes to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the
development, or shall be required to make a cash contribution in lieu of actual
land dedication, or a combination of both, at the option of the village with
the concurrence of the affected district or districts (as to school donations),
which concurrence shall be obtained in writing. However, the village shall have
the final decision making power in this regard. School land dedication sites
shall be conveyed to the applicable district, and park land dedication sites
shall be conveyed to the village. The dedications and cash contributions
required hereunder shall be made in accordance with the criteria and formulas
of this chapter. (2013 Code § 9-2-1)
9-6-2: CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING SCHOOL SITE DEDICATIONS:
   A.   Requirement And Population Ratio: The ultimate number of students to be
generated by a subdivision or planned development shall bear directly on the
amount of land required to be dedicated for school sites. The land dedication
requirement shall be determined by obtaining the ratio of: 1) estimated
children to be generated by the development in each school classification
(elementary, junior high, and high school) over the 2) maximum recommended
number of students per building to be served in each such school classification
as stated herein, and then applying such ratio to 3) the appropriate number of
acres for a school site of each such school classification as stated herein.
The product thereof shall be the acres of land deemed needed to have sufficient
land for school sites to serve the estimated increase in number of students for
each such school classification.
   B.   School Classifications And Size Of School Site:
   1.   These requirements for acreage are based upon a review of available
data, studies and literature on the subject including, but not limited to,
information provided by the state superintendent of education, the school
districts located within the village and the unique characteristics of the
village, including its general rural character and open space, and the desire
of the residents to maintain this character and open space in future school
sites. These requirements for acreage shall be presumed as the appropriate
acreage requirements and shall be used in calculating any cash in lieu of land
dedication herein, unless timely objected to as provided herein. Objections to
these acreage requirements for any particular development shall be made in
accordance with section
9-6-14 of this chapter to the Planning and Zoning Commission. Failure to timely
object to these acreage requirements in accordance with section
9-6-14 of this chapter shall thereafter waive any right to raise an objection
at a later time.
      2.   School classifications and size of school sites within the village
shall be determined in accordance with the following criteria:
   SCHOOL DISTRICTS 301, 302 AND 303
 
                           Maximum Number Of Students Appropriate Acres Of Land
                           For Each School            For Each School Site Of
                           Classification By Grades   Such Classification
Elementary schools, grades
kindergarten through fifth 600                        15
or sixth
Junior high schools,
grades sixth through       900                        35
seventh or eighth
High schools, grades ninth 1,500                      108
through twelfth
 
   C.   Location: The comprehensive school plan and/or the standards adopted by
the affected school district, if any, shall be used as a guideline in locating
sites. School sites shall be located in the village in accordance with plans
heretofore or hereafter adopted by the school district. If the school district
has not planned a school site within the village or the proposed subdivision or
planned development, or in the neighborhood in which such subdivision or
planned development is located, the school site shall be so located as to be
readily accessible to the greatest number of children projected for such
neighborhood.
(2013 Code § 9-2-2; amd. Ord. O-24-23, 12-3-2024)
9-6-3: CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING PARK AND RECREATIONAL LAND DEDICATIONS:
   A.   Suitability: The land for park and recreational dedications shall be
suitable for the purpose for which it is intended. Land set aside by developers
for parks, recreation and conservation purposes shall not be what has been
"left over" after residential, commercial and industrial development.
   B.   Requirement And Population Ratio:
      1.   The ultimate density of a proposed development shall bear directly
on the amount of land required for dedication for park and recreational
purposes. The total requirement shall be ten and one-half (10.5) acres of land
per one thousand (1,000) of ultimate population and may be allocated by the
village board at its discretion based upon the following criteria:
 
Type Of Recreation Area     Minimum Size      Park Acreage Per 1,000 Persons
Play lot                    8,000 square feet <1
Neighborhood park           3 acres           2
Villagewide park for active 10 acres          4
sports
Villagewide community park  15 acres          4
 
      2.   These requirements for acreage are based upon a review of available
data studies and literature on the subject including, but not limited to, the
National Recreation And Park Association’s “Recreation, Park And Open Space
Standards And Guidelines”. These requirements shall be presumed as the
appropriate acreage requirements and shall be used in calculating any cash in
lieu of land dedication herein unless timely objected to as provided herein.
Objections to these acreage requirements for any particular development shall
be made in accordance with section
9-6-14 of this chapter to the Planning and Zoning Commission. Failure to timely
object to these acreage requirements in accordance with section
9-6-14 of this chapter shall thereafter waive any right to raise an objection
at a later time.
   C.   Location: The park and recreation plans as adopted by the village
comprehensive plan shall be used as a guideline in locating sites. A central
location that will serve equally the entire development or a location that is
adjacent to an existing park and recreational land is most desirable. In large
developments, these sites can be located throughout the development according
to established standards for park area distances.
(2013 Code § 9-2-3; amd. Ord. O-24-23, 12-3-2024)
9-6-4: CRITERIA FOR REQUIRING CASH CONTRIBUTION IN LIEU OF DEDICATIONS, OR
BOTH:
   A.   When the development is small and the resulting site is too small to be
practical, or when the available land is inappropriate for school or park and
recreational sites, or is in conflict with the approved comprehensive school
plan or village comprehensive plan, the village, with the concurrence of the
affected district, if appropriate, shall require the subdivider or developer to
pay to the village, for the benefit of the applicable school districts or for
the benefit of the village, as appropriate, a cash contribution in lieu of the
land dedication.
   B.   The cash contribution in lieu of dedication of school sites shall be
held in trust by the applicable school district and shall be used solely for
the acquisition of land for school sites to serve the immediate or future needs
of the district or for the expansion of any existing school site or
construction of school buildings or additions thereto.
   C.   If any portion of a cash contribution in lieu of school sites is not
expended for the purposes set forth herein within thirteen (13) years from the
date of receipt, it shall be refunded by the school district holding the
contribution to the record owner of the subdivided land at the time of the
refund. If there is more than one record owner of the subdivided land or of the
land that comprises the planned development, as applicable, such record owners
shall share in the refund pro rata based on the cash contributions originally
paid by each property.
   D.   The cash contribution in lieu of park and recreation land dedication
shall be held in trust by the village and shall be used solely for equipment,
improvements and the acquisition of park and recreation land as classified
above, which will be available to serve the immediate or future needs of the
residents of that subdivision or development or for the expansion of other
existing local park and recreation lands that already serve such needs or for
any other lawful park purpose.
   E.   The cash contribution in lieu of land shall be based on the value of
the acres of land in the area that otherwise would have been dedicated as
school and/or park sites. The value, on a per acre basis, shall assume, unless
determined otherwise pursuant to this chapter, that the land is zoned in a one-
family dwelling residential zoning district, subdivided with appropriate
frontage on a dedicated street or road, has all appropriate utilities available
(including, where applicable, sanitary sewers provided by the spray field
system), is improved as set forth herein, and is otherwise property capable of
being used for residential development. Based upon a study of comparable real
estate transactions, it has been determined that the present value of such
improved land in and surrounding the village is, as of the effective date
hereof, as follows:
      One hundred ninety five thousand dollars ($195,000.00) per acre for
purposes of locating an elementary school, junior high school or high school
within the applicable school districts and for park and recreational purpose.
      The above figures shall be adjusted by the village board from time to
time with appropriate study and documentation. The value, as defined above,
shall be used in calculating any cash in lieu of land dedication herein unless
timely objected to as provided in section
9-6-14 of this chapter. Objections to the value as defined above shall be made
in accordance with section
9-6-14 of this chapter to the Planning and Zoning Commission. Failure to timely
object to the value, as defined above, in accordance with section
9-6-14 of this chapter shall thereafter waive any right to raise an objection
at a later time.
   F.   There will be situations in subdivisions or planned developments when a
combination of land dedication and a cash contribution in lieu of land are both
necessary. These occasions will arise when: 1) only a portion of the land to be
developed is proposed as the location for a school site (that portion of the
land within the subdivision falling within the school location shall be
dedicated as a site as stated above, and a cash contribution in lieu thereof
shall be required for any additional land that would have been required to be
dedicated); or 2) a major part of the school site has already been acquired by
the particular district, and only a small portion of land is needed from the
development to complete the site (the remaining portion shall be required by
dedication, and a cash contribution in lieu thereof for the rest of the
required land shall be required).
   G.   Each affected school district, or the village as to park and
recreational land, may, on a case by case basis, determine that the cash in
lieu of land to be dedicated would be of greater benefit to the district if
applied to the costs to educate the students generated by the development than
to the acquiring of land or to the capital repairs, improvements and expansion
of classroom and school facilities or the village for maintenance and/or other
operational expenses. In that event, the district or the village, as
applicable, may enter into a written agreement with said developer to accept
ninety five percent (95%) of the cash in lieu of the land requirement and
utilize those funds for operational expenses if the developer voluntarily
agrees to do so. Accordingly, the developer will receive a five percent (5%)
discount in exchange for granting the district the flexibility to utilize the
contribution for operational expenses.
(2013 Code § 9-2-4; amd. Ord. O-24-23, 12-3-2024)
9-6-5: CONSUMER PRICE INDEX:
The value identified in this chapter shall be subject to a "CPI adjustment"
which shall be calculated in January 2013 and in January of in each year
thereafter. Annually, the value per acre shall be adjusted to an amount equal
to the value per acre multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the
"all items" consumer price index for urban consumers (1982-84 = 100) for
Chicago, Illinois, published by the United States department of labor's bureau
of labor statistics ("CPI") for the month of December preceding the year of
adjustment, and the denominator of which is the CPI for the month of December
preceding the month of adjustment. If any index is calculated from a base
different from the base period 1982-84 = 100, such index shall be converted to
a base period of 1982-84 = 100 by use of a conversion factor supplied by said
bureau of labor statistics. If the CPI is discontinued or replaced, such other
governmental cost of living index or computation which replaces the CPI shall
be used in order to obtain substantially the same result as would be obtained
if the CPI had not been discontinued or replaced. (2013 Code § 9-2-5)
9-6-6: DENSITY FORMULA:
   A.   The table of estimated ultimate population per dwelling unit, prepared
by Illinois School Consulting Service/Ehlers, Inc., Naperville, Illinois, and
as updated from time to time by the consulting firm is contained in subsection
9-6-21C of this chapter. It constitutes projections of anticipated population
density and is generally indicative of current and short range projected trends
in family size for new construction and shall be used in calculating the amount
of required dedication of acres of land or the cash contributions in lieu
thereof, unless a written objection is filed thereto by the subdivider or
developer pursuant to section
9-6-14 of this chapter.
   B.   A "bedroom", as used in this section, shall mean any room, regardless
of its designation by the owner or permit applicant, which is suitable to be
used regularly as a room for sleeping including, but not limited to, dens,
studies, bonus rooms, libraries, television rooms, sewing rooms and similar
rooms (all of which are hereafter referred to as "extra rooms"), whether
finished or unfinished, located on the bedroom level of a multi-story
residence. Extra rooms located on the nonbedroom level of a multi-story
residence shall be considered bedrooms if there is a bath on that level
containing a shower or tub. Extra rooms in a single story residence shall
always be considered bedrooms.
   C.   The most recent version of the table of estimated ultimate population
per dwelling unit shall be used in calculating any cash in lieu of land
dedication herein unless objected to as provided in section
9-6-14 of this chapter. Objections to the table of estimated ultimate
population per dwelling unit shall be made in accordance with section
9-6-14 of this chapter to the Planning and Zoning Commission. Failure to object
to the table of estimated ultimate population per dwelling unit in accordance
with section
9-6-14 of this chapter shall thereafter waive any right to raise an objection
at a later time.
   D.   In the event a subdivider or developer files a written objection to the
table of estimated ultimate population per dwelling unit listed above, he shall
submit his own demographic study showing the estimated additional population to
be generated from the subdivision or planned development, and in that event,
final determination of the density formula shall be made in accordance with
section
9-6-14 of this chapter.
(2013 Code § 9-2-6; amd. Ord. O-24-23, 12-3-2024)
9-6-7: RESERVATION OF ADDITIONAL LAND:
When the comprehensive plan or the standards of the village call for larger
school sites in a particular subdivision or planned development than the
developer is required to dedicate pursuant to this chapter, the land needed
beyond the developer's dedication shall be set aside and reserved by the
developer for subsequent purchase by the school district (at a price determined
at the time of reservation); provided, that such acquisition is made within
five (5) years from the date of approval of the final plat. (2013 Code § 9-2-7)
9-6-8: COMBINING WITH ADJOINING DEVELOPMENTS:
Where appropriate, a school site or park and recreational land site that is to
be dedicated should, if possible, be combined with dedications from adjoining
developments in order to produce usable school sites or park and recreational
land sites without undue hardship on a particular developer. (2013 Code § 9-2-
8)
9-6-9: TOPOGRAPHY AND GRADING:
   A.   The slope, topography and geology of the dedicated site, as well as its
surroundings, must be suitable for its intended purpose. Wetlands, floodplains,
detention areas, retention areas and areas of steep slopes shall not be
accepted as school sites and shall not serve as a credit toward the required
school site cash contribution in lieu of land dedication.
   B.   In addition, the following site conditions and preparation standards
shall be met:
      1.   Slope:
         a.   Should not vary greatly in appearance from existing and adjacent
slopes;
         b.   Optimum slopes range from two percent (2%) minimum to five
percent (5%) maximum. No less than two percent (2%) slope is acceptable under
any circumstances;
         c.   Maximum allowable slope is ten percent (10%), except under
special conditions where greater slopes are desirable to enhance the use of the
site; and
         d.   On site drainage patterns shall be designated and constructed to:
            (1)   Ensure flow toward swales; and
            (2)   Ensure drainage away from active areas.
      2.   Grading:
         a.   Rough grading shall be completed at the time of rough grading of
adjacent contiguous area;
         b.   Grading shall comply with village approved plans;
         c.   Subgrade shall be graded and compacted so it will parallel the
finished grade;
         d.   Subgrade material shall be loosened and fine graded to a depth of
two inches (2") to four inches (4"). All stones over four inches (4") in size,
sticks, debris, rubbish and other foreign substances shall be removed; and
         e.   Finished grades shall be uniform in slope between points for
which elevations have been established.
      3.   Soils:
         a.   Soils shall not differ from those naturally occurring;
         b.   Soils shall not offer any restriction to the ultimate use of the
property;
         c.   Topsoil shall be spread evenly and lightly compacted to a minimum
depth of six inches (6") over the entire site;
         d.   Topsoil must be good, friable soils with good tillage and shall
be without any mixture of subsoil, clay, gravel, stones, debris, refuse, sand
or other subsurface elements;
         e.   Topsoil shall not be placed in a muddy or frozen condition;
         f.   Topsoil shall contain no toxic substances which may be harmful to
plant growth; and
         g.   Topsoil shall be spread no later than the placement of topsoil on
the first lot adjacent to the site.
      4.   Seeding:
         a.   All proposed school sites shall be seeded and an acceptable stand
of grass or vegetation established prior to the dedication of the area to the
applicable school districts;
         b.   Seeding shall be completed during the fall or spring planting
times, depending upon the recommended seed planting specifications;
         c.   Seeding shall be on moderately dry soil on a seedbed which will
easily accept and nurture germination of seeds;
         d.   Seeding shall be watered sufficiently so that the vegetation
becomes reasonably established; and
         e.   The developer shall be responsible for making necessary
reparations to the site caused by erosion or other damage. Reparations shall be
completed prior to acceptance of the site. (2013 Code § 9-2-9)
9-6-10: IMPROVED SITES:
All sites shall be dedicated in a condition ready for full service of
electricity, natural gas, telephone and cable television, and streets
(including enclosed drainage and curb and gutter, where applicable), as
applicable to the location of the site, and shall otherwise comply with the
requirements of the village ordinances and codes. Provided, that such
requirements may be waived in a specific case as to park and recreational land
sites, and the landscaping normally included within the definition of
"improved" sites under said ordinances and codes may be deleted due to the
delay time between dedication of any such school site and the construction of
school facilities thereon, except for ground cover as required in section
9-6-9 of this chapter. The site shall have direct access to a fully improved
street across at least twenty percent (20%) of the distance of its perimeter.
School sites should ideally be accessible by a bicycle/pedestrian trail, and
any such access route onto the property shall be at least twenty five feet
(25') wide. Such access routes should normally be dedications and not
easements, depending on which entity of government is to be responsible for
said routes. Any vehicular access route leading to or on the site shall be of
sufficient size and good geometry to properly accommodate vehicles that will
access and traverse the site including, but not limited to, good principles of
traffic circulation, accommodation of one-way and/or two-way drives for school
buses, separation of bus traffic from passenger automobile traffic, bus dropoff
areas separate from publicly dedicated streets, guest and employee parking
areas, and the like. Such off street access routes, drives, dropoffs and
parking areas will not be dedicated rights of way and shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the site to maintain. (2013 Code § 9-2-10)
9-6-11: ENVIRONMENTAL RISK AUDIT:
   A.   Prior to the conveyance of any land to the applicable school district
or the village, the intended grantee and the village shall be furnished with an
environmental risk audit prepared by an environmental professional meeting the
minimum requirements of 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/22.2(j)(6)(E)(iii),
certified to and acceptable to the grantee, assuring the grantee that there are
no "hazardous substance(s)" (as defined in subsection E of this section) on,
under, to or from the land. Said environmental audit shall be what is commonly
referred to as a phase I environmental audit, which shall meet the minimum
requirements for a preacquisition audit as set forth in 415 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/22.2(j)(6)(E)(v).
   B.   In the event the phase I environmental audit does not conclude there is
no presence or likely presence of a release or substantial threat of a release
of hazardous substance(s) or pesticide on, under, to or from the land, the
grantee shall furnish a phase II environmental audit as set forth in 415
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/22.2(j)(6)(E)(vi), including a soil toxicity
analysis and recommendation from said environmental professional, meeting the
minimum requirements of 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/22.2(j)(6)(E)(iii),
which concludes that there is no presence or likely presence of a release or
substantial threat of a release of hazardous substance(s) on, under, to or from
the land, and certifying that, in the judgment of said environmental
professional, there is no reasonable probability that the land contains any
hazardous substance(s) in violation of any federal or state environmental
standards.
   C.   In the event said phase II environmental audit and/or soil toxicity
analysis discloses the presence or likely presence of a release or a
substantial threat of a release of any hazardous substance(s) at, on, under, to
or from the land to the conveyed, the grantor shall first cause all such
hazardous substance(s) to be removed at its sole cost and expense in accordance
with all federal, state and local environmental laws, rules and regulations and
furnish the intended grantee with a "no further remediation letter" from the
governmental agencies having jurisdiction over the cleanup prior to the
conveyance of any of the land to the intended grantee.
   D.   Prior to the conveyance of the land, the subdivider or developer, as
the case may be, and the owner of the land to be conveyed shall execute and
deliver to the intended grantee an environmental indemnification agreement,
which form has been approved by the village attorney, agreeing to defend,
indemnify and hold the village, its corporate authorities, officers, officials,
employees, agents, successors and assigns, and the school district, as the case
may be, and its respective officers, officials, employees, agents, successors
and assigns, harmless from and against any and all liability, claims, damages,
causes of action and expenses arising out of the presence of any hazardous
substance(s) in, under or upon said land to be conveyed prior to the date of
conveyance. (2013 Code § 9-2-11)
   E.   The term "hazardous substance(s)" includes, without limitation:
      1.   Those substances included in the definitions of "hazardous
substances", "extremely hazardous substances", "hazardous materials", "toxic
substances", "toxic chemicals", "toxic wastes", "hazardous chemicals",
"hazardous wastes", "solid waste" and "pesticides" in CERLA, SARA, RCRA, HSWA,
TSCA, OSHA, FWPCE, Illinois pesticides act 1 ; the Illinois hazardous materials
transportation act 2 ; and 49 USC section 1801 et seq., as amended, and as they
may be amended in the future, and in the regulations promulgated pursuant to
said laws.
      2.   Those substances listed in the U.S. department of transportation
table (49 CFR 172.101, and amendments thereto) or by the environmental
protection agency (or any successor agency) as hazardous substances (40 CFR
part 302, and amendments thereto).
      3.   Such other substances, materials and wastes which are to become
regulated under applicable local, state or federal law, or which are classified
as hazardous or toxic under federal, state or local laws, ordinances or
regulations.
      4.   Any material waste or substance which is: a) asbestos; b)
polychlorinated biphenols; c) designated as a hazardous substance pursuant to
section 311 of the clean water act, 33 USC section 1251 et seq. (33 USC section
1321), or listed pursuant to section 307 of the clean water act (33 USC section
1317); d) explosives; or e) radioactive materials.
      5.   Petroleum or its byproducts as regulated under RCRA and any
applicable state law or regulation. (2013 Code § 9-2-11; amd. 2016 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 415 ILCS 60/1 et seq.
2 2. 430 ILCS 30/1 et seq.
9-6-12: SUITABILITY OF SOILS AT SITE:
The subdivider or developer, at its own cost or expense, shall provide to the
village or school district soil boring data, soil compaction test results and
such other engineering studies, data and information pertaining to the proposed
school, which the village or school district may request to enable the
suitability of the proposed land dedication for school sites or park and
recreation purposes to be determined. The village or school district shall have
the right to reject any site which the village or school district determines,
in accordance with sound engineering practices, is not suitable for school site
purposes. (2013 Code § 9-2-12)
9-6-13: TITLE INSURANCE; SURVEY; ASSESSMENT PLATS; REAL ESTATE TAX ESCROW:
   A.   Each deed or other instrument conveying land to the village or school
district shall be accompanied by:
      1.   A written commitment issued by a title insurer licensed to do
business in the state to insure the grantee's title to such real estate in an
amount equal to the value computed pursuant to section
9-6-2 of this chapter, with extended coverage over the general exceptions to
title and subject only to:
         a.   Real estate taxes not yet due and payable;
         b.   Covenants, conditions and restrictions which do not prohibit the
use of the subject property for school use;
         c.   Utility easements located within twenty feet (20') of the
boundary lines of the subject real estate (except where approved on the final
engineering plans approved by the village engineer);
         d.   Drainage ditches, feeders and laterals;
         e.   Underground pipe or other conduit; and
         f.   Acts done or suffered by or judgments against the grantees.
      2.   A current ALTA boundary line survey, certified to the grantee by a
licensed Illinois land surveyor to be in compliance with the "American Land
Survey Standards", showing no encroachments; and
      3.   Except in instances where the real estate to be conveyed is a lot in
a recorded subdivision, an assessment plat and tax division petition in a form
acceptable to the appropriate village authorities so the land to be conveyed
can be assigned its own permanent real estate index number (PIN) for exemption
purposes.
   B.   In addition, monuments must be established and the land staked
immediately prior to dedication of the property. The subdivider or developer
shall pay for the cost of the owner's title insurance in said amount, the ALTA
survey, the assessment plat and any and all costs in connection with the tax
division.
   C.   The developer shall pay the general real estate taxes on the land not
yet due and payable as of the date of transfer, and shall deposit a sum of
money in escrow with the intended grantee's attorney or a title company
licensed to do business in the state of Illinois, which is prorated as of the
date of transfer on the basis of one hundred ten percent (110%) of the tax
assessor's latest assessed valuation, the latest known equalization factors and
the latest known tax rate on the land. In the event the previous tax
information or the previous tax bill includes other property, then the amount
to be deposited in escrow shall be adjusted ratably based on the net acreage of
the land compared to the net acreage of the other parcels covered by said tax
bills. After the land has been divided for real estate tax purposes and has
been conveyed to the intended grantee, the grantee shall proceed with due
diligence to apply for a real estate tax exemption on the land. (2013 Code § 9-
2-13)
9-6-14: OBJECTIONS:
All objections relating to acreage requirements, school site requirements,
presumptions as to value, the table of estimated ultimate population per
dwelling unit or any other application of this chapter to a particular
subdivision or planned development shall first be referred to the Planning and
Zoning Commission for a hearing. An objection must be made, if at all, prior to
the approval of the final plat of subdivision by the village. A failure to
object by such time shall constitute a waiver of the right to object to the
provisions of this chapter. The procedure for a hearing before the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall be as follows:
   A.   Duties Of Plan Commission: The Planning and Zoning Commission shall
serve in an advisory capacity and shall have the following duties: (2013 Code §
9-2-14)
      1.   Advise and assist the village in resolving objections regarding the
table of estimated ultimate population per dwelling unit in subsection
9-6-21C of this chapter, the size of the school, the value of the land used to
calculate the cash contribution in this chapter or any other application of
this chapter to a particular subdivision or planned development. (2013 Code §
9-2-14; amd. 2016 Code)
      2.   The village shall adopt procedural rules to be used by the Planning
and Zoning Commission in carrying out the duties imposed by this subsection.
   B.   Information And Services To Be Used: The village shall make available
to the Planning and Zoning Commission all professional reports relating to the
table of estimated ultimate population per dwelling unit, the size of the
school sites and the value of land used in calculating these cash
contributions. The Planning and Zoning Commission may also retain the services
of professionals (attorneys, appraisers, statisticians, etc.) to assist in its
review of issues raised by any objection.
   C.   Procedure For Resolving An Objection:
      1.   Upon receipt of an objection, the village clerk shall place the same
on the next regular meeting agenda of the village board. Thereafter, the
village board shall refer the objection to the Planning and Zoning Commission
which shall establish a hearing date.
      2.   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall provide public notice of
the hearing date to consider the objection and shall notify the village board
and the affected school district by certified mail, return receipt requested,
or by electronic mail with proof of receipt, of the filing of the objection and
of any hearing regarding same.
      3.   The objector shall publish notice of the hearing date once each week
for three (3) consecutive weeks, at least thirty (30) days before, but no more
than sixty (60) days before, the scheduled date of the hearing. Notice shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation within the corporate limits of
the village. The notice of public hearing shall not appear in the part of the
paper where legal notices or classified ads appear. The notice shall not be
smaller than one-fourth (1/4) page of a standard size or tabloid size
newspaper. The objector shall send a copy of said notice to any person who has
requested said notice by certified mail (stamped at a U.S. postal service
facility showing the date of mailing) at least thirty (30) days prior to the
hearing date.
      4.   The notice shall contain all of the following information:
         a.   The heading shall read:
            NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING ON OBJECTION TO APPLICATION OF ORDINANCE
REQUIRING THE DEDICATION OF SCHOOL SITES AND PARK AND RECREATIONAL LAND OR
PAYMENT OF THE CASH CONTRIBUTIONS IN LIEU THEREOF.
         b.   The date, time and location of the public hearing.
         c.   A statement that the purpose of the hearing is to consider the
objection to a component of the application of this chapter requiring the
dedication of school sites or calculation of cash in lieu thereof.
         d.   A general description of the parcel(s), service area or areas
within the village that are the subject of the hearing.
         e.   A statement that the village shall make available to the public,
upon request, an easily understandable and detailed map of the parcel(s),
service area or areas to which this chapter applies, and any other available
information about the objection.
         f.   A statement that any member of the public affected by this
chapter or the parcel(s) or service area shall have the right to appear at the
public hearing and present testimony and/or evidence in support of or against
the objection.
      5.   A public hearing shall be held for the consideration of the
objection. In addition to the village, any affected school district shall be
allowed to participate in such hearing as a party thereto to present evidence,
cross examine witnesses and make arguments to the Planning and Zoning
Commission regarding the issues raised in the objection. The Planning and
Zoning Commission shall make a recommendation to adopt, reject in whole or in
part, or modify the objection presented at the hearing, by written report to
the village, within sixty (60) days after the hearing. The village shall then
have at least sixty (60) but not more than one hundred twenty (120) days to
approve, disapprove or modify, by ordinance or resolution, the findings in this
chapter as it pertains to the development in question.
   D.   Costs And Fees: The objector shall bear all costs of the hearing before
the Planning and Zoning Commission including, but not limited to, attendance
fees paid the Planning and Zoning Commission members, publication costs,
professional consultants and any other expenses of the village. Failure to
promptly pay costs which are billed shall be cause, at the option of the
village, to stay or defer any hearings, meetings or actions by the village.
(2013 Code § 9-2-14; amd. Ord. O-24-23, 12-3-2024)
9-6-15: ANNEXATION OF LAND:
   A.   The dedications of land or cash contributions in lieu thereof required
by this chapter shall also be required as a condition to the annexation of any
land to the village, and provisions therefor shall, at a minimum, be
incorporated in any annexation or preannexation agreement governing such land.
However, the village reserves the right to negotiate dedications of land or
cash contributions in lieu of land or a combination thereof greater than those
set forth herein.
   B.   The village recognizes the fact that developments may differ in their
impact upon a community. Consequently, the village reserves the right to
negotiate dedications that are different from those contained in this chapter
when annexing property to the village pursuant to an annexation agreement.
(2013 Code § 9-2-15)
9-6-16: INDEMNIFICATION:
As a condition to the village distributing land dedications and/or cash
contributions in lieu thereof, the appropriate district shall execute an
indemnification agreement in the form set forth in subsection
9-6-21A of this chapter. (2013 Code § 9-2-16)
9-6-17: DISTRIBUTION:
The cash contribution in lieu of land dedication imposed by this chapter shall
be collected and held by the benefiting district or the village, as applicable,
to be used for the purposes set forth in this chapter. As a condition of
distribution of these land dedications and/or cash contributions in lieu of
land dedications, the village shall require that the school district benefiting
from such land dedications and/or cash contributions provide a needs assessment
and a plan for acquisition of land and capital facilities. (2013 Code § 9-2-17)
9-6-18: NEEDS ASSESSMENT; LAND AND CAPITAL FACILITIES ACQUISITION PLAN:
   A.   A needs assessment shall contain the following information for each
benefiting district:
      1.   A description of the nature and location of existing school and
existing capital facilities within each district.
      2.   An identification of the capacity of each site within the particular
district and of the number of students then enrolled in each school building.
      3.   A projection of the character and location of new development that
is expected to occur within each district or village during the succeeding ten
(10) year period. The district or village may obtain the information necessary
to make this projection from sources such as, but not limited to:
municipalities, other units of government, agencies and consultants.
      4.   An identification of the amount of lands that will be necessary
within the school district and village in order to accommodate the demands of
such projected new development, and an estimate of the public grounds
acquisition costs that will be incurred or have been incurred by each district
in acquiring such lands.
      5.   A general description of each classification of capital facilities
(including construction, expansion or enhancement of any public facilities and
the land improvement, design, engineering and professional costs related
thereto) that will be necessary within each district in order to provide
adequate capacity for the projected new development, and an estimate of the
capital facilities costs that will be incurred by each district in constructing
such capital facilities.
   B.   Based upon the needs assessment, the school district shall provide the
village an acquisition plan for lands and capital facilities. This acquisition
plan shall:
      1.   Project for a planning period of at least five (5) years, the need
for lands and capital facilities within the district or village.
      2.   Set forth a schedule for the acquisition of such lands and
facilities to meet the projected need in general and specifically within the
village in the next five (5) years (which schedule may be conditioned upon the
availability of financing).
      3.   Indicate the size and general location of the needed lands and
facilities.
      4.   Identify the estimated or incurred costs of acquiring such needed
lands and facilities.
      5.   Set forth the anticipated funding sources for the acquisition of
such needed lands and facilities.
      6.   Determine the feasibility of acquiring the needed lands and
facilities based upon the district's current financial condition.
      7.   Determine the feasibility of acquiring the needed lands and
facilities based upon the district or village estimate of the revenues
(including, without limitation, cash in lieu of land dedication required by
this section) pursuant to the plan.
      8.   The impact on property taxes in the village assuming the plan is
implemented.
   C.   If the village deems it necessary, it may require an updated needs
assessment and plan for acquisition of land and capital facilities from the
district annually. The failure to require said assessment update shall not
invalidate the requirements of this section. (2013 Code § 9-2-18)
9-6-19: TIME OF PAYMENT:
   A.   All land dedications and cash contributions imposed by this chapter
shall be due and payable upon final plat approval. However, the village may
agree that the payment of the cash contributions may be made at the time of
building permit issuance in consideration of which the subdivider or developer
shall execute an agreement, as set out in subsection
9-6-21B of this chapter, agreeing that the cash contributions payable will be
adjusted in accordance with the requirements herein and further agreeing that
the cash contributions may be expended for the purposes described in subsection
9-6-21B of this chapter.
   B.   In calculating the land dedications and cash contributions at the time
of platting, the village will assume the maximum density permitted under the
zoning classification approved pursuant to the table set forth in subsection
9-6-21C of this chapter. However, if the subdivision in question is zoned
single-family, the village will assume, for purposes of calculating fees
payable pursuant to this chapter, that all houses will have four (4) bedrooms
(in recognition of the fact that experience and studies have demonstrated that
5 bedroom homes have a lesser financial impact on the school districts than 4
bedroom homes). The village will then hold sufficient funds pending issuance of
the building permit to enable it to refund any overpayments resulting from the
fact that houses with other than four (4) bedrooms are constructed. Refunds
shall be made at the time of issuance of the building permit.
In the event the village agrees to delay the payment of the fees required under
this section to the time of building permit issuance, the cash contributions
owed shall be based upon this chapter or as provided in such future ordinances
amending or replacing this chapter which are in effect at the time the building
permit is issued. (2013 Code § 9-2-19)
9-6-20: CALCULATING CASH CONTRIBUTIONS:
In calculating any cash contributions in lieu of land dedication payable at
time of issuance of building permit as provided in this chapter, the village
shall use the values as set forth in section
9-6-2 of this chapter, or any amendment thereto, and in effect at the time of
the contribution and building permit issuance. (2013 Code § 9-2-20)
9-6-21: EXHIBITS:
   A.   Exhibit A:
EXHIBIT A
AGREEMENT REGARDING THE RECEIPT OF DEVELOPER SUBDIVISION
CONTRIBUTIONS AND INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENT
WHEREAS, the Village of Campton Hills, Kane County, Illinois, on behalf of
itself, its officers, employees and independent contractors (the "Village"),
through its ordinances or through the provisions of its annexation agreements
has required that developers make contributions to the Village, that the
Village, in turn, may make these contributions available for itself and/or for
other governmental bodies that are affected by the subdivision improvements;
and
WHEREAS, such contributions may be in land or in money and, when transferred or
paid over to those government bodies, inure in part to the benefit of those
government bodies and not entirely to the direct benefit of the Village; and
WHEREAS, from time to time within the Village, and within other municipalities,
disputes have arisen regarding the validity and amount of such contributions;
and
WHEREAS, the Village is willing, at its discretion, to continue seeking the
contribution of land or money but wishes to procure a commitment from other
government bodies benefited by the receipt of such contributions that those
government bodies will (a) acknowledge that the requirement that such
subdivision contributions be made are totally within the discretion of the
Village as to their existence, manner and amount; (b) pay the cost of defending
any lawsuit that is filed challenging the appropriate amount of the
contributions, the time at which they are to be made or any other aspect of the
contributions; and (c) comply with the terms of a final and nonappealable
judicial determination by a court of competent jurisdiction rendered in
connection with the lawsuit; and
WHEREAS, the Village is willing, in its discretion, to pay over or require
contributions only to other government bodies that execute this agreement
("Agreement");
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration for the payment of money or the transfer of
the land to the Benefiting Government, which the Village from time to time may,
within its discretion, cause to be made by developers that are subdividing
property, it is agreed between the Village, on behalf of itself and its
officers, employees and independent contractors, and a government body within
the state of Illinois (the "Benefiting Government"), as follows:
   1.    The Benefiting Government acknowledges that, except as otherwise
provided in the Village's ordinances and/or annexation agreements, the Village
is not obligated to cause the payment of money or the transfer of land to the
Benefiting Government. The Benefiting Government recognizes that the Village
may, at its sole discretion, amend its ordinances or annexation agreements or
its practices to discontinue the payment of subdivision contributions to the
Benefiting Government.
   2.    Legal Representation
      A.    In the event a lawsuit is filed against the Village, the Benefiting
Government, and/or others by a developer that is subdividing property or any
other person, corporation or entity that challenges the appropriateness,
amount, timing or any other aspect of a subdivision contribution that, pursuant
to the terms of the Village's ordinances or annexation agreements, has been
paid or is due to the Benefiting Government, then the Benefiting Government
does agree to pay the costs and litigation expenses (including reasonable
attorneys' fees) incurred by the Village in defending such lawsuit. The costs
and expenses shall be paid by the Benefiting Government when and as incurred by
the Village but in no event more than once a month. As a condition precedent to
the payment of these costs and expenses, the Village shall submit to the
Benefiting Government copies of the original statements reflecting the costs
and expenses, together with the non-privileged supporting documentation that
may be reasonably requested by the Benefiting Government.
      B.    The Village covenants and agrees that it shall employ competent and
skilled legal counsel to represent the Benefiting Government and the Village,
and further covenants and agrees that it shall keep the Benefiting Government
fully advised as to the progress and status of the litigation. In particular,
the Village shall provide to the Benefiting Government copies of all pleadings
filed in the litigation and shall consult regularly (and shall cause its
attorneys to consult regularly) with the Benefiting Government or its
attorneys, as applicable, as to the strategy for defending the lawsuit. In no
event may such litigation be compromised or settled by the Village without at
least 30 days' prior written notice to the Benefiting Government.
      C.    In the event that the Benefiting Government decides that it would
prefer to be represented in the litigation by legal counsel of its own
choosing, then the Benefiting Government shall be free to retain its own legal
counsel for that purpose and to intervene in the litigation and to ask the
Village to terminate its representation of the Benefiting Government under this
Agreement. The Benefiting Government shall notify the Village, in writing, to
that effect. In that event, this Agreement shall remain in full force and
effect regarding all of the provisions of this Agreement, and the Benefiting
Government shall remain liable to the Village for all sums that have accrued
under this agreement up until the date that such written notice is received and
for all sums that remain due and owing from the Benefiting Government to the
Village relating to the defense of any lawsuit under the terms of this
Agreement.
   3.    The Benefiting Government shall further indemnify and hold harmless
the Village from any and all liability arising from the Subdivision Code of the
Village, including but not limited to, the general administration and handling
of funds required by the Village and the Benefiting Government.
   4.    In the event that a final and non-appealable judicial determination is
made by a court of competent jurisdiction that contributions of land or money
received by the Benefiting Government are, in whole or in part, excessive, the
Benefiting Government shall promptly repay those contributions to the person
who procures such a judgment, together with all other amounts judged by the
court to be owing from the Benefiting Government. In the event a judicial
determination should require the payment of damages or payment of the
attorneys' fees of the plaintiff's attorneys, the Benefiting Government shall
pay all additional amounts.
   5.    In further consideration of the continued payment by the Village to
the Benefiting Government of the subject contributions of land or money, the
Benefiting Government agrees that its obligations under this Agreement shall
extend to both past and future cash and land contributions.
   6.    On or before June 1st of each year, every Benefiting Government that
receives payments from the Village under this Agreement shall submit a report
to the Village describing the manner in which the payments have been used and
provide any additional information the Village may require. When that money
turned over to the Benefiting Government is to be used for a specific purpose
or within a specific time period, the report shall address those issues. If the
Benefiting Government should fail to file such a report with the Village, the
Village may delay the payment of any additional funds due the Benefiting
Government until such time as a full report containing adequate information is
transmitted to the Village. The Benefiting Government understands that it will
be asked to execute an indemnity agreement similar to this Agreement on an
annual basis and that the Village shall not pay any additional funds due to the
Benefiting Government until such time as the Village is in receipt of such
annually executed indemnity agreement.
   7.    This Agreement shall be terminable by either party for any reason or
no reason at all upon 30 days' prior written notice to the other party
evidencing the intention to so terminate this Agreement. But the termination of
this Agreement shall not affect the continuing obligation of the Benefiting
Government or the Village with regard to claims or damages allegedly arising
out of the Village's efforts prior to termination to impose, collect or
distribute contributions, or to the actual distribution of subdivision
contributions.
DATED this               day of May, 20                              
Village of Campton Hills   Benefiting Government
                                                                      
Village President       Title:
(SEAL)   (SEAL)
ATTEST:          ATTEST:
                                                          
Village Clerk          Secretary
(Title 9 ch. 2 ex. A)
   B.    Exhibit B:
EXHIBIT B
AGREEMENT WITH DEVELOPER TO DEFER CASH CONTRIBUTIONS
This agreement ("Agreement") is entered into between the Village of Campton
Hills ("Village") and ("Developer").
WHEREAS, the Village has approved a final plat of subdivision or a final plat
of a planned development at the request of Developer for the real estate
legally described in Exhibit B.1 attached hereto and made a part hereof (the
"Land"). Accordingly, pursuant to the Village Code, certain cash contributions
for school lands are immediately due the Village from the Developer; and
WHEREAS, Developer has, however, requested that the payment of the aforesaid
cash contributions be delayed and that the same become due and payable on a per
dwelling unit basis at the time the Village issues a building permit for the
particular dwelling unit.
NOW THEREFORE, in consideration for the Village agreeing to delay its receipt
of the cash contributions, Developer hereby agrees as follows:
   1.    The amount of cash contributions owed shall be calculated based upon
the present provisions of the Village Code or as provided for in such other
future provisions amending or replacing the Code provisions which are in effect
at the time of the issuance of a building permit.
   2.    Notwithstanding any present or future law, regulation and/or legal
precedent to the contrary, the unit of local government that is the ultimate
recipient of the subject cash contributions may expend such contributions for
any of the following purposes intended to serve immediate or future needs of
the residents and children of the Developer's subdivision or planned
development: (a) for the acquisition of land; (b) for site improvements such
as, by way of example, streets, curbs, gutters, stormwater control, and utility
extensions; (c) for construction of capital facilities, including, by way of
example, new buildings and structures, and the expansion or enhancement of
existing buildings and structures; and (d) for so-called soft costs directly
related to the foregoing items (b) or (c) such as architectural and engineering
costs.
   3.    Developer has reviewed sections of the Village Code regarding the
dedication of school sites or cash contributions in lieu thereof, as well as
all of the methodology, formulae, calculations, projections, assumptions,
numbers and other factors used to arrive at the land dedication requirements or
cash contributions in lieu thereof that are the subject of this Agreement
(hereinafter referred to as the "Code and Attendant Calculations") and hereby
acknowledges and agrees that:
      (a)    Pursuant to the terms of the Code, Developer has been offered the
opportunity to raise in a hearing before the Village, any objections relating
to acreage requirements, presumptions as to value, the Table of Estimated
Ultimate Population Per Dwelling Unit, or any other application of the Code;
Developer has not raised such objections; Developer has thereby waived the
right to assert those objections.
      (b)    Developer hereby waives any future right to object to or to
institute any legal action regarding Code and Attendant Calculations.
      (c)    Developer hereby acknowledges that Code and Attendant Calculations
have been properly passed, calculated and imposed.
   4.    This Agreement constitutes a covenant that is appurtenant to and runs
with the Land. Either this Agreement or a memorandum thereof may be recorded
against legal title to the Land by either party hereto; provided, however, it
shall be a condition of the Village's issuance of the first building permit for
a dwelling unit on the Land that Developer shall provide satisfactory evidence
to the Village that this Agreement or a memorandum thereof has been recorded
against legal title to the Land.
   5.    Developer represents and warrants to the Village that it is the sole
holder of record fee title to the Land.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Village and the developer have caused this agreement to
be duly authorized, executed and entered into as of the day of
                                                   
Village President         Developer
ATTEST:
                       
Village Clerk
(Title 9 ch. 2 ex. B)
   C.    Exhibit C:
   EXHIBIT C
   TABLE OF ESTIMATED
   ULTIMATE SCHOOL POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT
Children Per Unit
                  Elementary        Middle  Total    High
                                                     School
                                    Grades  Total    Grades   Adults   Total
Type Of Preschool Grades K-5 5–10 6-8 11- Grades   9-12 14- 18 Years Per
Unit    0-4 Years Years             13      K-8 5-13 17 Years +        Dwelling
                                    Years   Years                      Unit
Detached single-family:
Children Per Unit
                     Elementary        Middle  Total  High
                                                      School
                                       Grades  Total  Grades          Total
Type Of    Preschool Grades K-5 5–10 6-8 11- Grades 9-12   Adults   Per
Unit       0-4 Years Years             13      K-8 5- 14-17  18 Years Dwelling
                                       Years   13     Years  +        Unit
                                               Years
Detached single-family:
2 bedroom  0.113     0.136             0.048   0.184  0.020  1.700    2.017
3 bedroom  0.292     0.369             0.173   0.542  0.184  1.881    2.899
4 bedroom  0.418     0.530             0.298   0.828  0.360  2.158    3.764
5 bedroom  0.283     0.345             0.248   0.583  0.300  2.594    3.770
Attached single-family:
1 bedroom  0.000     0.000             0.000   0.000  0.000  1.193    1.193
2 bedroom  0.064     0.088             0.048   0.136  0.038  1.752    1.990
3 bedroom  0.212     0.234             0.058   0.292  0.059  1.829    2.392
4 bedroom  0.323     0.322             0.154   0.476  0.173  2.173    3.145
Apartments:
Efficiency 0.000     0.000             0.000   0.000  0.000  1.294    1.294
1 bedroom  0.000     0.002             0.001   0.003  0.001  1.754    1.758
2 bedroom  0.047     0.086             0.042   0.128  0.046  1.693    1.914
3 bedroom  0.052     0.234             0.123   0.357  0.118  2.526    3.053
 
(Title 9 ch. 2 ex. C)
CHAPTER 7
OUTDOOR LIGHTING FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION
SECTION:
9-7-1: Definitions
9-7-2: Application Of Provisions
9-7-3: Prohibited Lighting For New Construction
9-7-4: Illumination Standards
9-7-5: Luminaire Standards
9-7-6: Procedural Requirements
9-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
AMBIENT LIGHTING: The general overall level of lighting in an area.
ARCHITECTURAL LIGHTING: Outdoor lighting directed at buildings, facades,
structures, monuments, and other architectural features.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: As defined in the village of Campton Hills zoning
ordinance.
CANOPY: A roofed structure with at least one side open for pedestrian and/or
vehicle access that typically provides protection from the sun or weather and
is associated with providing goods or services.
COMMERCIAL: Any lot, however zoned, in any zoning district that does not have
as its primary use a single-family residential dwelling, a two-family
residential dwelling, or land used for "agriculture", as defined in the village
of Campton Hills zoning ordinance.
CORRELATED COLOR TEMPERATURE (CCT): Measured in degrees Kelvin (K), the
absolute temperature of a blackbody whose chromaticity most nearly resembles
that of the light source. For the purpose of this chapter, "CCT" is used as a
simplified way to characterize the spectral properties of a light source and
estimate the overall appearance of the light to the human eye.
FLOODLIGHT: A light designed for lighting a scene or object to a luminance
greater than its surroundings.
FOOT-CANDLE: A unit of measure of illuminance equal to one lumen of light
spread over an area of one square foot.
FULL CUTOFF LUMINAIRE: A luminaire having zero intensity at or above horizontal
(90°) and limited to a value not exceeding ten percent (10%) of lamp lumens at
or above eighty degrees (80°). Such luminaire is determined by a photometric
test and certified by the manufacturer. See diagram below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/09fc73b1baa9c9185d886b27aa527b40ba0b85e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-708.gif]
GLARE: Lighting entering the eye directly from luminaires or indirectly from
reflective surfaces that causes visual discomfort or reduced visibility.
IES: Illuminating Engineering Society Of North America.
ILLUMINANCE: The total luminous flux incident on a surface, per unit area.
ILLUMINANCE GRID PLOT: A photometric report indicating the average horizontal
illumination delivered to each of the squares of a gridded area illuminated by
one or more luminaires.
INITIAL LUMEN: The measurement of a lamp's lumen output at the time the lamp is
burned for the first time. As a light ages, the amount of light produced is
reduced.
INSTALLED HEIGHT: The height above grade of the lowest light emitting point of
an installed luminaire.
ISO-FOOT-CANDLE PLOTS: A plot that graphically represents a particular
luminaire's lighting pattern, in illuminance, as the light strikes a horizontal
surface. It includes foot- candle calculations shown with the luminaire at
various mounting heights. Contour lines are drawn through illuminance values.
KELVIN: A unit increment of temperature used as a color temperature scale of a
light bulb (see definition of "correlated color temperature (CCT)" in this
section).
LED (LIGHT EMITTING DIODE): An electronic semiconductor device that emits light
when an electrical current is passed through it.
LAMP: The source of light being emitted from a luminaire, such as a bulb, LED,
and/or a refractive pane.
LIGHT: Electromagnetic radiation within a range of wavelengths sufficient for
visual perception by the normal unaided human eye.
LIGHT LEVEL: See definition of Illuminance.
LIGHT OUTPUT: Luminous flux (see definition of "luminous flux" in this
section). The amount of light which is emitted by a lamp or luminaire.
LIGHT POLE: Pole on which a luminaire is mounted.
LIGHT TRESPASS: Light that falls on property other than that of the owner of
the light source.
LIGHTING INSTALLATION: An arrangement of one or more luminaires including any
mounting hardware, brackets, and supporting structures.
LIGHTING PLAN: An overall plan that describes the outdoor lighting.
LUMEN: A unit of measure of luminous flux.
LUMINAIRE, LIGHT LUMINAIRE: The complete lighting assembly (including the lamp
(s), housing, ballasts, photocells, globes, reflectors or refractors, lenses,
sensors and shield(s) and excluding the support assembly or pole, mounting
bracket and base) consisting of one or more lamps, together with the attachment
parts designed to distribute light, position and connect the lamp to the power
supply.
LUMINOUS FLUX: The power emitted from a source of electromagnetic radiation,
such as a light bulb, in the form of visible light. Luminous flux is measured
in lumens and is typically specified by the manufacturer for a given lamp or
luminaire.
NADIR: The direction pointing directly downward from the light source of the
luminaire that originates from a horizontal plane at the lowest point on the
luminaire. See diagram below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/09fc73b1baa9c9185d886b27aa527b40ba0b85e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-710.gif]
NEON LIGHT: Colored fluorescent or gas discharge tubular which can be bent into
various forms for use decoratively or as signs.
NEW CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Subject to the exemption described in subsection B of this definition,
means:
      1.   Site preparation for, and construction of, entirely new structures
(including new poles) and subsequent replacement of such new structures or any
part thereof.
      2.   Enlargement of any existing structure by the more restrictive of
fifty percent (50%) of the area of the footprint of the building or fifty
percent (50%) of the gross square footage of such existing structure
(regardless of the number of other structures on the same site).
      3.   Adding new lighting fixture(s), pole(s) or other amenity(ies) to
existing structure(s) or pole(s) to which such fixture(s) were or are to be
attached.
   B.   New construction does not apply to the replacement of lighting
fixtures, poles, or other amenities that existed prior to July 1, 2014.
OPEN SPACE AND OPEN SPACE LOT: A parcel of land in a predominately undeveloped
condition that is protected from development.
ORGANIZED SPORTING EVENT: A prearranged sports or recreational event involving
at least one group or team with a roster and schedule.
OUTDOOR LIGHTING: Light generated from an indoor or outdoor source that
provides illumination to any exterior surface, building, sign, structure,
device, or other outdoor feature (including land) which is visible to an
observer located outdoors. For the purposes of this chapter, the light source
inside an internally illuminated sign is not considered outdoor lighting.
PHOTOMETRIC PLAN: A technical plan that will indicate light distribution and
the performance of lighting fixtures. It will explain the distribution of the
proposed lighting and its effects on the area surrounding the site.
PLAYING FIELD: An open outdoor field or court used for, but not limited to,
playing sports such as baseball, soccer, football, tennis, volleyball, and
basketball.
RESIDENTIAL: Any zoning lot in a residential or agricultural zoning district
that has as its primary use a residential dwelling, as defined in the village
of Campton Hills zoning ordinance.
STREET LIGHTING: One or more luminaires or light installations designed to
illuminate a public roadway or intersection.
UPLIGHTING: Lighting applications which direct light above a horizontal plane.
VARIANCE: As defined in the village of Campton Hills zoning ordinance.
ZONING LOT: As defined in the village of Campton Hills zoning ordinance. (Ord.
O-14-12, 6-17-2014)
9-7-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
This chapter shall be applicable to the following lighting applications for new
construction only and the subsequent maintenance of all new construction:
   A.   Residential: Street, pedestrian, sign, flood, and parking lot
luminaires only.
   B.   Commercial: Any outdoor lighting luminaire. (Ord. O-14-12, 6-17-2014)
9-7-3: PROHIBITED LIGHTING FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION:
The following lighting shall not be permitted for new construction in any
zoning district as of the effective date hereof:
   A.   Strobe lights and laser lights, including laser light shows and aerial
laser lights.
   B.   Neon style colored light tubes.
   C.   Flashing lights unless temporarily triggered by a security system and
extinguished within thirty (30) minutes or at a time of security response.
   D.   Lighting which is used to outline a building, including neon, fiber
optic, light emitting diode (LED), or fluorescent tube lighting which is used
for this purpose (unless considered holiday lighting).
   E.   Any lighting luminaire that is construed as or confused with a traffic
signal or traffic control device.
   F.   As determined by the police chief, lighting that contributes to or
causes disabling or distracting glare onto a public roadway.
   G.   The use of uplighting, except when lighting the American flag or other
government flag or government endorsed flag. (Ord. O-14-12, 6-17-2014)
9-7-4: ILLUMINATION STANDARDS:
   A.   Gross Emission Of Light: The total light output from all luminaires
used for outdoor lighting on any zoning lot, except for street lighting,
outdoor display lots, automobile service station and outdoor lighting of
playing fields on public property, shall not exceed fifty thousand (50,000)
initial lumens per acre of illuminated area. Automobile service stations shall
not exceed eighty thousand (80,000) initial lumens per acre of illuminated
area. Lighting installations located under skirted canopies shall not
contribute more than fifty percent (50%) of this limit.
   B.   Light Intensity And Uniformity: The maximum illuminated surface light
level for automobile service stations and drive- in/drive-through canopies is
ten (10) foot-candles, measured horizontally at ground level.
   C.   Light Direction And Control: Lighting applications shall meet the
following requirements:
 
Lighting Application   Maximum Inclination Above Nadir Maximum Light Output
Architectural lighting 90 degrees                      1,100 initial lumens
Floodlighting          90 degrees                      2,200 initial lumens
Sidewalk lighting      45 degrees                      800 initial lumens
 
   D.   Correlated Color Temperature (CCT): All lighting sources, except for
public playing fields, must have a correlated color temperature (CCT) at or
below three thousand two hundred degrees Kelvin (3200°K).
   E.   Permitted Hours Of Outdoor Lighting:
      1.   Commercial: No more than fifty percent (50%) of exterior lighting
shall be permitted to be illuminated, except for one hour before start of
business, during regular business hours as determined by said business, and one
hour following close of business unless exempt for safety or security concerns,
as determined by the police chief. All outdoor lighting shall be turned off
during daylight hours.
      2.   Property Used For Governmental And Public Purposes: Any zoning lot
in any zoning district used for governmental or public purposes, except for
street lighting, shall comply with the permitted hours and security lighting
limitations for commercial lighting zones. Outdoor lighting of the playing
field of an organized sporting event on public property may remain illuminated
until thirty (30) minutes after the conclusion of an event.
   F.   Light Trespass: Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as
provided by section
5-1-6 of this code. (Ord. O-14-12, 6-17-2014)
9-7-5: LUMINAIRE STANDARDS:
   A.   Full Cutoff Requirement:
      1.   All lighting regulated by this chapter shall be full cutoff.
      2.   Where applicable and appropriate, for areas outside of the village
jurisdiction including, but not limited to, forest preserve and open space
areas, the village shall recommend to the appropriate jurisdiction that
lighting be full cutoff.
   B.   Streetlight Restrictions: Streetlights are permitted only at
intersections unless exempt through a variance or PUD ordinance.
   C.   Photocell/Timer Requirement For Street And Parking Lot Lights: Both
street lighting and parking lot lighting shall include photocells or timers as
needed to regulate the hours of operation as required by this chapter and to
prevent operation during daylight hours.
   D.   Installed Height: The installed height of any full cutoff luminaire
used for the outdoor lighting of any roadway shall not exceed the following
limits:
 
Roadway                                              Maximum Installed Height
Residential lighting                                 20 feet
Commercial lighting, municipal lighting, open space/ 25 feet
forest preserve lighting
Public playing field lighting                        50 feet
 
   E.   Light Pole Color Restriction: Street and parking lot luminaire poles
shall have a dark, matte finish, excluding spun aluminum and concrete poles.
   F.   Canopy Requirement: All canopies must be skirted with a skirt depth of
eight inches (8") or greater. (Ord. O-14-12, 6-17-2014)
9-7-6: PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Plan Submission: For land development, redevelopment and new zoning
applications where outdoor lighting is proposed, lighting plans shall be
submitted to the village building and zoning officer for review by a village
appointed engineer at the expense of the applicant and approval prior to final
plat and shall include:
      1.   A site plan complete with all structures, parking spaces, building
entrances, traffic areas (both vehicular and pedestrian), vegetation that might
interfere with lighting, and all adjacent uses. The site plan shall show and
identify the location of each existing and proposed luminaire and shall specify
its installed height, detailed pole foundations, and method of mounting.
      2.   Iso-foot-candle plots for individual lighting installations, or ten
feet by ten feet (10' x 10') illuminance grid plots for multiluminaire lighting
installations which shall demonstrate compliance with all applicable
requirements set forth in this chapter. The plots shall indicate the location
of each existing and proposed luminaire, the installed height of said
luminaires, and the overall light levels in foot-candles and initial lumens on
the entire zoning lot and at the property lines.
      3.   A summary table identifying the maximum and minimum light levels in
foot-candles and initial lumens for all, but not limited to, parking areas,
street or building entryways, signs, street lighting, canopies, architectural
lighting and walkways.
      4.   A description of each luminaire identified in the site plan
including, but not limited to:
         a.   Manufacturer with website.
         b.   Lamp type.
         c.   Bulb type including CCT (Kelvin).
         d.   Model number.
         e.   Photograph or catalog cut.
         f.   Photometric plan.
         g.   Pole color.
         h.   Light output in initial lumens.
         i.   Shielding or glare reduction devices.
         j.   Energy reduction and on/off control devices.
   B.   Postapproval Alterations: Postapproval alterations to lighting plans or
intended substitutions for approved lighting equipment shall be submitted to
the village building and zoning officer for review by a village appointed
engineer at the expense of the applicant and approval prior to final plat, with
all plan submission requirements set forth in this chapter, prior to
installation.
   C.   Inspections: The village shall have the right to conduct a
postinstallation inspection to verify compliance with the requirements of this
chapter and, if appropriate, to require remedial action within thirty (30) days
at the expense of the applicant.
   D.   Variances: Variances shall be processed as defined in the village
zoning ordinance, except a public notice sign and publication in a local
newspaper shall not be required. (Ord. O-14-12, 6-17-2014)
TITLE 10
ZONING
CHAPTER 1
TITLE, PURPOSE, AND APPLICABILITY
SECTION:
10-1-1:    Title
10-1-2:    Purpose
10-1-3:    Applicability
10-1-4:    Transition Rules
10-1-5:    Severability
10-1-1:   TITLE:
This title shall be known, cited, and referred to as the “Campton Hills Zoning
Ordinance of 2024,” or “Zoning Ordinance,” or “Ordinance.” (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-
2024)
10-1-2:   PURPOSE:
The intent of this title is to establish land use regulations to serve the
Village of Campton Hills (hereinafter “the Village”). The purpose of this title
is to:
   A.   Promote the public health, safety, and welfare.
   B.   Provide for preservation, protection, and conservation of natural
resources.
   C.   Preserve and enhance the value of structures, communities, and
neighborhoods that constitute the distinct places within the Village.
   D.   Divide the Village into zoning districts, according to use of land and
structures, bulk of structures, intensity of the use of the lot, or other
classification, as deemed best suited to carry out the purposes of this title.
   E.   Encourage and support open space preservation efforts by the Village as
well as other entities such as Campton Township and the Forest Preserve
District of Kane County.
   F.   Control the development of the Village in an orderly manner in
accordance with the Comprehensive Plan and adopted land use policies.
   G.   Promote the principles of sustainability, as described, and defined in
the Comprehensive Plan.
   H.   Promote economic development that balances the needs of the current and
future economy with a high quality of life standard.
   I.   Reduce traffic congestion and utilize existing infrastructure and
resources.
   J.   Maintain, develop, and plan for public facilities and utilities in an
economical and environmentally sound manner.
   K.   Provide for the protection of public investment in transportation,
water, stormwater management systems, sewage treatment and disposal, solid
waste treatment and disposal, schools, recreation, public facilities, open
space, and other public requirements.
   L.   Provide for the gradual elimination of nonconformities. (Ord. O-24-22,
12-3-2024)
10-1-3:   APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Territorial application. This title applies to all land, uses, and
structures within the corporate limits of the Village.
   B.   General application. In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this title are held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion and protection of the public health, safety, and welfare.
   C.   Required conformance. Any portion or whole of a structure must be
erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or enlarged in conformance with the
requirements of this title. Any structure or land must be used and occupied in
conformance with the requirements of this title.
   D.   Relation to private agreements. This title does not nullify any
annexation agreement, private agreement, homeowner’s association rules or
covenants, or any other recorded covenants or restrictions on the land. Those
private agreements, rules, and covenants may be more restrictive than this
title, but not less restrictive, otherwise this title controls. Those charged
with administration and enforcement of this title do not enforce any private
agreement, annexation agreement, homeowner’s association rules or covenants, or
any other recorded covenants or restrictions on the land.
   E.   Relation to other laws and regulations. Unless otherwise specifically
provided, this title controls over less restrictive statutes, ordinances, or
regulations, and more restrictive statutes, ordinances, or regulations control
over the provisions of this title.
   F.   Rules regarding illustrations and graphics. Any illustrations,
graphics, and/or photos contained in this title are to assist the reader in
understanding and applying the Ordinance. If there is any inconsistency between
the text of the Ordinance and any such illustration, graphic, and/or photo, the
text controls unless specifically stated otherwise. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-1-4:   TRANSITION RULES:
   A.   Existing uses.
      1.   Any structure or land used in a manner that was classified a
permitted use prior to the effective date of this title or any subsequent
amendment to this title, and that use is classified as a permitted use as of
the effective date of this title or any subsequent amendment to this title,
that use remains a permitted use.
      2.   Any structure or land used in a manner that was classified a special
use prior to the effective date of this title or any subsequent amendment to
this title, and that use is classified as a special use as of the effective
date of this title or any subsequent amendment to this title, that use remains
a special use and remains subject to the special use ordinance under which it
was originally approved.
      3.   Any structure or land used in a manner that was classified as a
permitted use prior to the effective date of this title or any subsequent
amendment to this title, and now that use is classified as a special use as of
the effective date of this title or any subsequent amendment to this title, may
continue as a nonconforming use, subject to the provisions of this title
regarding nonconforming uses. The owner of the subject property for the
nonconforming use may seek, at his or her own discretion, special use approval
in order to remove the nonconforming status.
      4.   Any structure or land used in a manner that was classified as a
special use prior to the effective date of this title or any subsequent
amendment to this title, and that use is now classified as a permitted use as
of the effective date of this title or any subsequent amendment to this title,
that use is classified as a permitted use. The use is no longer subject to any
conditions placed upon its approval; however, the continued operation and/or
any subsequent addition, enlargement, or expansion of that use must conform to
all Ordinance requirements for such use.
      5.   Any structure or land used in a manner that was classified as either
a permitted use or special use prior to the effective date of this title or any
subsequent amendment to this title, but this title no longer allows that use as
either a permitted or special use in the zoning district in which it is
located, that use is classified a nonconforming use.
   B.   Structures rendered nonconforming. If a structure existing on the
effective date of this title was a conforming structure before the effective
date of this title or any subsequent amendment to this title, but such
structure does not meet all standards set forth in this title in the zoning
district in which it is located, that structure is deemed a nonconforming
structure.
   C.   Lots rendered nonconforming. If a lot existing on the effective date of
this title was a conforming lot of record before the effective date of this
title or any subsequent amendment to this title, but such lot does not meet all
standards set forth in this title in the zoning district in which it is
located, that lot is deemed a nonconforming lot.
   D.   Site elements rendered nonconforming. If a site element existing on the
effective date of this title was conforming before the effective date of this
title or any subsequent amendment to this title, but such site element does not
meet all standards set forth in this title in the zoning district in which it
is located, that site element is deemed a nonconforming site element.
   E.   Previously issued building permits. If a building permit for a
structure was lawfully issued prior to the effective date of this title, or any
subsequent amendment to this title, and if construction has begun within ninety
(90) days of the issuance of that permit, the structure may be completed in
accordance with the plans on the basis of which the building permit was issued
and may, upon completion, be occupied for the use originally intended.
   F.   Previously granted variances. All variance approvals granted prior to
the effective date of this title, or any subsequent amendment to this title,
remain in full force and effect. The recipient of the variance may proceed to
develop the property in accordance with the approved plans and all applicable
conditions.
   G.   Existing planned unit developments. Previously approved planned unit
developments (PUD) remain in effect and continue to control the development of
land that is subject to the PUD. Any amendments to existing PUDs are subject to
the amendment procedures of this title.
   H.   Pending applications. A building permit application or a zoning
application that has been received and deemed complete by the Zoning Officer is
subject to the rules in effect on the date the application was deemed complete.
   I.   Existing unlawful uses. Any use that was unlawful at the time of the
adoption of this title that is in conflict with the requirements of this title
remains unlawful. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-1-5:   SEVERABILITY:
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, sentence, or provision of this
title is adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, that
judgment does not affect, impair, invalidate, or nullify the remainder of this
title. The effect of the judgment is confined to the section, paragraph,
subdivision, clause, sentence, or provision immediately involved in the
controversy in which judgment or decree was rendered. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
CHAPTER 2
ZONING ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
10-2-1:    Designees
10-2-2:    Village Board
10-2-3:    Planning And Zoning Commission
10-2-4:    Zoning Officer
10-2-1: DESIGNEES:
Certain Village officials within this chapter are cited as having powers that
may also be administered by a designee, indicated by the language “or his/her
designee.” The ability to direct powers to a designee applies to the actions of
such officials throughout this title. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-2-2: VILLAGE BOARD:
The Village Board has the following powers, pursuant to this title:
   A.   To make final decisions on zoning text and map amendment applications.
   B.   To make final decisions on special use applications.
   C.   To make final decisions on planned unit development applications.
   D.   To make final decisions on variation applications. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-
2024)
10-2-3: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION:
The Planning and Zoning Commission has the following powers, pursuant to this
title:
   A.   To make recommendations to the Village Board on zoning text and map
amendment applications.
   B.   To make recommendations to the Village Board on special use
applications.
   C.   To make recommendations to the Village Board on planned unit
development applications.
   D.   To hear and report to the Village Board on such other matters as may be
referred to the commission by the Village Board.
   E.   To hear and decide any appeal from any order, decision or
interpretation of the enforcing officer, or any matter referred to it or upon
which it is required to pass under the provisions of this code, the ordinances
of the village, or state statutes; provided, that a concurring vote of four
members shall be necessary to reverse any decision of the enforcing officer or
to recommend a variation.
   F.   To hear all requests for zoning variation and make recommendations to
the corporate authorities, as provided in the zoning ordinance.
   G.   To keep records of its examinations and other official actions. Every
rule, regulation, amendment or repeal thereof, and every order, requirement,
decision, determination or recommendation of the Planning and Zoning
Commission, shall be filed promptly in the office of the village clerk and
shall be a public record.
   H.   Other powers and duties as specified in Title 2, Chapter 1 of the
Village Code of the Village of Campton Hills.
(Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024; amd. Ord. O-24-23, 12-3-2024)
10-2-4: ZONING OFFICER:
The Zoning Officer shall be appointed by the Village Board. The Zoning Officer
may delegate to Village staff any authorized duty unless specifically
prohibited by this title, and in such instances of delegation decisions made by
the staff shall be construed to have been decisions of the Zoning Officer. The
Zoning Officer, or his/her designee, has the following powers, pursuant to this
title:
   A.   To determine conformance of applications for building permits, site
plans, or other applications related to land use with the provisions of this
title.
   B.   To make decisions on zoning interpretation applications.
   C.   To make decisions on sign permit applications.
   D.   To make decisions on temporary use permit applications.
   E.   To receive and forward zoning applications as required by this title to
the Planning and Zoning Commission, Village Board, or Village official, as
appropriate.
   F.   Maintain records of the administration and enforcement of this title.
   G.   To maintain and make available the Village’s Official Zoning Ordinance
and Zoning Map, and all permanent and current records required by this title.
   H.   To conduct inspections of structures or the use of land to determine
whether there is compliance with this title, and, in case of any violation,
order corrective action.
   I.   Provide information, forms, and other documents for the filing of
applications to interested parties;
   J.   Review, from time to time, a study of the provisions of this title and
make reports of recommendations to the Village Board or commissions.
   K.   Approve minor changes to approved planned unit developments when such
changes do not affect the intent, bulk, or use of the planned unit development.
(Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024; amd. Ord. O-24-23, 12-3-2024)
CHAPTER 3
ZONING APPROVAL PROCESSES
SECTION:
10-3-1:    Applications
10-3-2:    Public Notice
10-3-3:    Zoning Text And Map Amendments
10-3-4:    Special Uses
10-3-5:    Variations
10-3-6:    Planned Unit Developments
10-3-7:    Site Plan Review
10-3-8:    Zoning Interpretation
10-3-9:    Temporary Use Permits
10-3-10: Zoning Appeals Of Zoning Officer Decision
10-3-1:   APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Filing, pre-application conference, and referrals.
      1.   All zoning applications shall be filed with the Zoning Officer. The
application shall be on forms provided by the Village and filed in such
quantity as required by the instructions.
      2.   Prior to formal submittal of an application, the applicant may
request a pre-application conference with the Zoning Officer. The purpose of a
pre-application conference, which requires neither application nor fees, is to
provide informal advice and assistance to the applicant. Any opinions or advice
provided are not binding with respect to any official action that may be taken
on the formal application.
      3.   Prior to final decisions on the applications of this chapter, during
the review and recommendation process, the application may be referred to the
applicable fire district, applicable school district, Kane County Department of
Transportation, Illinois Department of Transportation, and/or other
governmental authorities or their consultants for review and comment.
   B.   Completeness.
      1.   An application must include all information, plans, and data as
specified in the application requirements. Any required plans must be at a
scale sufficient to permit a clear and precise understanding of the proposal,
unless specifically required to be at a set scale.
      2.   The Zoning Officer will examine all applications within thirty (30)
days of filing to determine their completeness, which time may be reasonably
extended by the Zoning Officer upon notice to the applicant. If the application
does not include all the submittal requirements for the application, the Zoning
Officer will reject the application and provide the applicant with the reasons
for the rejection. The Zoning Officer will take no further steps to process the
application until all deficiencies are remedied.
      3.   After an application is determined to be complete, any substantive
change made by the applicant to the application requires resubmittal of the
entire application and a new completeness review. However, such revisions do
not require an additional payment of fees.
      4.   Once the application is under consideration by the appropriate body,
additional information, or revisions are not subject to this provision.
   C.   Fees and Escrow. Each application must be accompanied by the required
filing fee and/or escrow money as established and modified, from time to time,
in the Village Code. The failure to pay such fee when due is grounds for
refusing to process the application and renders the application incomplete.
   D.   Withdrawal of applications. An applicant has the right to withdraw an
application at any time prior to the final decision on the application by a
board or official, including the ability to withdraw the application if it has
been tabled by a board or official. The applicant must submit a request for
withdrawal in writing. There will be no refund of fees. Any unused escrow money
shall be refunded by the Village.
   E.   Consideration of successive applications.
      1.   If an application is denied, a subsequent application for the same
zoning approval will not be reviewed or heard within one (1) year of the date
of denial unless the applicant can show there is substantial new evidence
available or that changed circumstances exist.
      2.   If the application is resubmitted earlier than one year from the
date of denial, the subsequent application must include a detailed statement of
the grounds justifying its consideration. The Zoning Officer will make a
determination as to whether the subsequent application is appropriate for
consideration prior to the expiration of the one (1)-year period. If the Zoning
Officer finds that there are no new grounds for consideration of the subsequent
application, he/she shall deny the request. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2022)
10-3-2:   PUBLIC NOTICE:
   A.   Required notice. The types of public notices required for zoning
applications are indicated with an “x” in Table 3-1 below.
   B.   Publication in newspaper. When publication in a newspaper is required,
the Zoning Officer will cause to be published a notice in a newspaper of
general circulation within the Village. The notice must include the date, time,
venue and purpose of such hearing, and the address and Parcel Identification
Number (PIN) of the subject property. Notice must be published no less than
fifteen (15) days and no more than thirty (30) days in advance of the scheduled
hearing date.
Table 3-1. Required Notice for Public Hearings, by Zoning Application
PUBLICATION IN NEWSPAPER MAILING SIGN ON PROPERTY
Table 3-1. Required Notice for Public Hearings, by Zoning Application
PUBLICATION IN NEWSPAPER MAILING SIGN ON PROPERTY
Text amendment X
Map amendment  X X X
Special use    X X X
Variation      X X X
Zoning appeal  X
   X denotes the notice is required.
 
   C.   Mailing. The following mailing notice requirements apply to all
applications cited in Table 3-1, Required Notice for Public Hearings, by Zoning
Application.
   D.   Written notice. Written notice shall be mailed by the applicant no less
than fifteen (15) and no more than thirty (30) days in advance of the scheduled
hearing date to all property owners within two hundred and fifty feet (250') of
all property lines of the subject property. When measuring from a property line
abutting a right-of-way, measurement is taken from the right-of-way line on the
farthest side of the right-of-way from the property. The Zoning Officer shall
provide the applicant with the text of the notice to be mailed and a list of
property owners and their addresses to whom the notice shall be mailed.
      1.   The notice must include the date, time, venue, and purpose of such
hearing, the address and PIN of the subject property. When a zoning map
amendment is proposed by the Village, notification shall also be mailed to the
owner of the subject property.
      2.   Nothing in this section is intended to prevent the applicant or the
Village from giving additional notice as he/she may deem appropriate.
      3.   The applicant is responsible for providing mailing material and
postage costs. Following completion of the mailing, the applicant shall return
to the Zoning Officer a signed affidavit, as provided by the Village,
indicating compliance with the mailing requirements.
   E.   Sign notice. When sign notice is required, the sign shall be located on
the subject property in accordance with the following provisions:
      1.   The required posting period must be no less than fifteen (15) days
and no more than thirty (30) days in advance of the scheduled hearing date. The
sign must be posted at a prominent location on the property, near the sidewalk
or public or private right-of-way, so that it is visible to pedestrians and
motorists. Properties with more than one street frontage are required to post
one sign visible on each street frontage. Posted signs may be removed the day
following the scheduled hearing date.
      2.   Posted signs shall contain the following information: date, time and
venue of hearing. Additionally, the sign shall state:
         “A public hearing regarding a zoning application is scheduled on this
property before the Planning and Zoning Commission/Planning and Zoning
Commission on [insert date] at [insert time] at [insert venue]. For more
information call the Village of Campton Hills at [insert number].”
      The sign shall be a minimum of three by four feet (3' x 4') in size, and
shall have a white background with black block letters at least one and a half
inches (1.5") in height. The phrase “NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING” shall be in
three-inch (3") high red capital block letters.
      3.   The Zoning Officer shall draft the text for sign, and forward to the
applicant the text and the sign guidelines as specified in sub-paragraphs 1 and
2 above. It shall be the applicant’s responsibility to ensure the creation and
proper installation of the public notice sign. The applicant shall bear cost of
sign production. The Zoning Officer or other Village staff shall verify timely
placement of the sign and that the sign was installed in a proper location.
(Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2022)
10-3-3:   ZONING TEXT AND MAP AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Purpose. The regulations imposed and the districts created by this
title may be amended from time to time in accordance with this chapter. This
process for amending the Zoning Ordinance text or the Zoning Map is intended to
allow modifications in response to omissions or errors, changed conditions, or
changes in Village policy. Amendments are not intended to relieve particular
hardships or confer special privileges or rights upon any person or party.
   B.   Initiation. The Village Board, the Planning and Zoning Commission, or a
property owner in the Village, or his/her designee, may propose a zoning text
amendment. The Village Board or the Planning and Zoning Commission may propose
zoning map amendments. Additionally, the owner of a property may propose a
zoning map amendment for his/her property.
   C.   Authority. The Village Board, after receiving a recommendation from the
Planning and Zoning Commission, will take formal action on requests for zoning
text or map amendments.
   D.   Procedure. All applications must be filed with the Zoning Officer. Once
it is determined that the application is complete, the Zoning Officer will
schedule the application for consideration by the Planning and Zoning
Commission. Amendments initiated by the Village Board or the Planning and
Zoning Commission also require an application, but are exempt from fees.
      1.   Action by Planning and Zoning Commission.
         a.   Within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete application,
unless an extension of time is agreed to by the applicant and the Zoning
Officer, the Planning and Zoning Commission will consider the proposed zoning
amendment at a public hearing.
         b.   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall evaluate the application
based upon the evidence presented at the public hearing, pursuant to the
approval standards of this section. For zoning text amendments, the Planning
and Zoning Commission shall recommend approval, approval with modifications, or
denial of the application. For zoning map amendments, the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall recommend approval or denial of the application.
         c.   Within sixty (60) days of the close of the public hearing, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward its recommendation to the Village
Board, unless an extension is agreed to by the applicant and the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
      2.   Action by Village Board. The Village Board will review the
application within sixty (60) days of receipt of the Planning and Zoning
Commission recommendation, unless an extension of time is agreed to by the
applicant and the Village Board. The Village Board must take action in the form
of approval, approval with modifications, or denial on applications for zoning
text amendments, and approval or denial on applications for zoning map
amendments.
   E.   Approval Standards. The Planning and Zoning Commission recommendation
and the Village Board decision on any zoning text or map amendment is a matter
of legislative discretion that is not controlled by any particular standard.
However, in making their recommendation and decision, the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the Village Board shall consider the following standards. The
approval of amendments is based on a balancing of these standards; adherence or
conformance to all standards is not necessary.
      1.   Approval Standards for Map Amendments:
         a.   The compatibility with the existing use and zoning of nearby
property.
         b.   The extent to which the proposed amendment promotes the public
health, safety, and welfare of the Village.
         c.   The relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship
imposed upon the applicant.
         d.   The suitability of the property for the purposes for which it is
presently zoned, i.e., the feasibility of developing the property in question
for one or more of the uses permitted under the existing zoning classification.
         e.   The length of time that the property in question has been vacant,
as presently zoned, considered in the context of development in the area where
the property is located.
         f.   The consistency of the proposed amendment with the Comprehensive
Plan and any adopted land use policies.
         g.   That the proposed amendment will benefit the residents of the
Village as a whole, and not serve solely the interest of the applicant.
         h.   The extent to which the proposed amendment creates or eliminates
nonconformities.
         i.   The trend of development, if any, in the general area of the
property in question.
         j.   Whether adequate public facilities are available including, but
not limited to, schools, parks, police and fire protection, roads, sanitary
sewers, storm sewers, and water lines, or are reasonably capable of being
provided prior to the development of the uses, which would be permitted on the
subject property if the amendment were adopted.
      2.   Approval Standards for Text Amendments:
         a.   The extent to which the proposed amendment promotes the public
health, safety, and welfare of the Village.
         b.   The relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship
imposed upon the applicant.
         c.   The consistency of the proposed amendment with the Comprehensive
Plan and whether the proposed amendment provides a more workable way to achieve
the intent and purposes of this title and the Comprehensive Plan.
         d.   The consistency of the proposed amendment with the intent and
general regulations of this title.
         e.   Whether the proposed amendment corrects an error or omission,
adds clarification to existing requirements, or reflects a change in policy.
         f.   The extent to which the proposed amendment creates
nonconformities.
         g.   The extent to which the proposed amendment is consistent with the
overall structure and organization of this title.
   F.   Written Protest of Amendment. Written protest of an amendment may be
filed and will be processed and considered in accordance with Illinois State
Statute. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2022)
10-3-4:   SPECIAL USES:
   A.   Purpose. This title is based upon the division of the Village into
zoning districts. Within each zoning district the uses of land and structures
are substantially uniform. It is recognized, however, that there are certain
uses which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot be properly
classified in a particular district or districts without consideration of the
impact of those uses upon neighboring land and of the public need for the
particular use at the particular location.
   B.   Initiation. A property owner in the Village, or his/her designee, may
file an application to use his/her land for one or more of the special uses
authorized within the zoning district. A property owner, or his/her designee,
may only propose a special use for property under his/her control.
   C.   Authority. The Village Board, after receiving a recommendation from the
Planning and Zoning Commission, will take formal action on special use
applications.
   D.   Procedure. An application for a special use must be filed with the
Zoning Officer. Once it is determined that the application is complete, the
Zoning Officer will schedule the application for consideration by the Planning
and Zoning Commission.
      1.   Action by the Planning and Zoning Commission:
         a.   Within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete application,
unless an extension of time is agreed to by the applicant and the Zoning
Officer, the Commission will consider the special use at a public hearing.
         b.   The Planning and Zoning Commission must evaluate the application
based upon the evidence presented at the public hearing, pursuant to the
approval standards of this section. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall
recommend either approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the special
use.
         c.   Within sixty (60) days of the close of the public hearing, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward its recommendation to the Village
Board, unless an extension is agreed to by the applicant. The recommendation
shall be accompanied by findings.
      2.   Action by Village Board. The Village Board shall act on the special
use within sixty (60) days of receipt of the Planning and Zoning Commission
recommendation. The Village Board shall approve, approve with conditions, or
deny the special use. Any approval shall be accompanied by findings.
      3.   Conditions on Special Uses. The Planning and Zoning Commission may
recommend, and the Village Board may impose, such conditions and restrictions
upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance, and operation of
the special use as may be deemed necessary for the protection of the public
health, safety, and welfare. The Village Board may require such guarantees, as
it may deem necessary, to assure compliance with any stipulated conditions.
      4.   Approval Runs with Property. Special use approval shall be granted
for the property rather than the applicant, unless the Village Board, in
approving the special use ordinance, grants the special use approval to the
applicant. In such instances, the applicant shall not transfer the special use
to a new property without a new application and public hearing.
   E.   Approval standards. The listing of a use as a special use within a
zoning district does not constitute an assurance or presumption that such
special use will be approved. Rather, each special use application must be
evaluated on an individual basis, in relation to all applicable standards of
this title. Such an evaluation will determine whether approval of the special
use is appropriate at the particular location and in the particular manner
proposed. The recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission will be
accompanied by findings to support each of the following conclusions, which the
Village Board will consider in its decision:
      1.   The proposed special use will not endanger the public health,
safety, or welfare.
      2.   The proposed special use is compatible with the general land use of
adjacent properties and other property within the immediate vicinity.
      3.   The special use in the specific location proposed is consistent with
the spirit and intent of this title and adopted Village land use policies.
   F.   Modifications to approved special uses. Any amendment to an approved
special use permit must follow the application, hearing, and approval process
required for a new special use permit.
   G.   Expiration. A special use approval expires if any one of the following
conditions occurs and no request for an extension of the special use approval
is pending.
      1.   When an approved special use is changed to another use.
      2.   For special uses approved in conjunction with new construction or
additions or enlargements to an existing structure, the special use approval
expires within one (1) year of the date of approval if a building permit has
not been issued.
      3.   For special uses approved in conjunction with an existing structure
or on lot where no structure is planned, the special use approval expires
within one (1) year of the date of approval if the licenses or permits required
for the operation or maintenance of the use have not been obtained.
      4.   For special uses approved in conjunction with a preliminary plan for
a planned unit development, the special use approval expires in conjunction
with the preliminary plan expiration.
      5.   When the special use has been abandoned or has ceased operation for
one (1) year or more. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2022)
10-3-5:   VARIATIONS:
   A.   Purpose. The purpose of the variation process is to provide a narrowly
circumscribed means by which relief from the strict adherence to this title may
be granted from unforeseen applications of this title that create practical
difficulties or particular hardships.
   B.   Initiation. Any owner of property, or the designee of the property
owner, may file an application for a variation for the specific property owned.
   C.   Authority. The Village Board, after receiving a recommendation from the
Planning and Zoning Commission, will take formal action on variations.
   D.   Procedure. All applications must be filed with the Zoning Officer. Once
it is determined that the application is complete, the Zoning Officer will
schedule the application for consideration by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
      1.   Within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete application, unless
an extension of time is agreed to by the applicant and the Zoning Officer, the
Planning and Zoning Commission will consider the variation at a public hearing.
      2.   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall evaluate the application
based upon the evidence presented at the public hearing, pursuant to the
approval standards of this section. The Commission must recommend either
approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the variation.
      3.   Within sixty (60) days of the close of the public hearing, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward its recommendation to the Village
Board, unless an extension is agreed to by the applicant. The recommendation
shall be accompanied by findings.
      4.   The Village Board shall act on the variation within sixty (60) days
of receipt of the Planning and Zoning Commission recommendation. The Village
Board shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the variation request.
Any approval shall be accompanied by findings.
   E.   Conditions.
      1.   The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend and the Village
Board may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the variation as may be
deemed necessary for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare.
      2.   The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend and the Village
Board may grant a variation that is less than that requested when it has been
decided that the applicant is entitled to some relief of the hardship, but not
to the entire relief requested in the variation application.
   F.   Approval standards. The recommendation of the Planning and Zoning
Commission must make findings to support the following conclusions, which the
Village Board will consider in its decision:
      1.   The strict application of the terms of this title will result in
undue hardship unless the specific relief requested is granted.
      2.   The particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical
conditions of the specific property impose a particular hardship upon the
owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the
regulations were to be carried out.
      3.   The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances inherent to
the subject property and not from the personal situation of the owner and has
not been created by any person presently having a proprietary interest in the
property in question.
   G.   Expiration of variation. An approved variation will expire one year
from the date of approval unless a building permit is obtained or applied for
within such period. The Village Board may grant an extension to the one (1)-
year expiration period, so long as the applicant applies in writing for an
extension of time at any time prior to the date of expiration. No public
hearing is required for approval of such an extension of time. (Ord. O-24-22,
12-3-2022)
10-3-6:   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS:
   A.   Purpose. Planned unit developments (PUD) are allowed as a distinct
category of special use. In particular the planned unit development technique
is intended to encourage and allow more creative and flexible development of
land than is possible under district zoning regulations and should only be
applied to further those applications that provide compensating amenities to
the Village. The underlying zoning district’s standards apply to a PUD unless
specifically modified through the approval process. Through the flexibility of
the planned unit development technique, the planned unit development is
intended to:
      1.   Encourage flexibility in the development of land and in the design
of structures.
      2.   Encourage a creative approach to the use of land that results in
better development and design than might otherwise be accomplished under the
strict application of other sections of this title.
      3.   Allow for the design of developments that are architecturally and
environmentally innovative, and that achieve better utilization of land than is
possible through strict application of standard zoning controls.
      4.   Combine and coordinate architectural styles, building forms, and
structural/visual relationships within an environment that allows mixing of
different uses in an innovative and functionally efficient manner.
      5.   Provide for the efficient use of land to facilitate a more effective
arrangement of land uses, structures, circulation patterns, and utilities.
      6.   Encourage land development that, to the greatest extent possible,
preserves natural vegetation, respects natural topographic and geologic
conditions, and refrains from adversely affective flooding, soil, drainage, and
other natural ecologic conditions.
      7.   Facilitate the implementation of adopted Village land use policies,
particularly with respect to areas planned for potential redevelopment. For
example, the Village’s Green Infrastructure Plan should be consulted and
adhered to.
   B.   Initiation. The entire property proposed for the planned unit
development must be in single ownership or under unified control. All owners of
the property must be included as joint applicants on all applications and all
approvals will bind all owners.
   C.   Authorization. A planned unit development is authorized in all zoning
districts. A planned unit development shall be granted in accordance with the
procedures and standards of this section.
   D.   Deviations from district regulations.
      1.   The planned unit development is subject to the underlying zoning
district’s standards unless deviations are specifically granted. The Planning
and Zoning Commission may recommend, and the Village Board may grant,
deviations to the applicable zoning district’s standards. Such deviations may
be granted for planned unit developments if they:
         a.   Enhance the overall merit of the planned unit development.
         b.   Promote the objectives of both the Village and the development.
         c.   Enhance the quality of the design of the structures and the site
plan.
         d.   Will not cause such an adverse impact on neighboring properties
so as to outweigh the benefits of the development.
         e.   Are compatible with adopted Village land use policies.
         f.   Provide a public benefit to the Village, as described below.
      2.   Deviations from district regulations may be granted where it is
determined that such modifications do not negatively affect the value and
enjoyment of surrounding property, the provision of municipal services, or
traffic circulation on-site and off-site. To be granted such deviations, the
applicant must demonstrate superior design and enhanced amenities. In no case
may a deviation from district regulations be granted unless the applicant
demonstrates a substantial benefit to the Village. Design characteristics and
amenities to be considered in this determination include, but are not limited
to, the following:
         a.   Community amenities including plazas, malls, formal gardens,
places to congregate, outdoor seating, public art, and pedestrian and public
transit facilities.
         b.   Preservation of existing environmental features.
         c.   Preservation of historic features.
         d.   Open space and recreational amenities such as:
            (1)   Swimming pools.
            (2)   Tennis courts and pickle ball courts.
            (3)   Recreational open space accessory buildings.
            (4)   Jogging trails and fitness courses.
            (5)   Playgrounds, dog parks, skate parks, and similar recreational
features.
            (6)   Natural water features and conservation areas.
            (7)   Multi-use trails, nature trails, boardwalks, overlooks,
landscaped areas with native plantings, which may incorporate water features,
such as a detention pond.
         e.   The use of green building and sustainable development techniques,
including LEED or LEED-equivalent certification of structures.
         f.   Incorporation of stormwater management techniques that exceed the
minimum applicable state, county, or Village stormwater ordinance development
standards.
         g.   Adaptive reuse of existing buildings.
         h.   Provisions of car- or bike-share facilities, and various non-
motorized modes of transportation such as walking, biking, small-wheeled
transport, wheelchair travel, equestrian or horse-drawn vehicles.
         i.   A senior housing set-aside, either rental or for-sale.
   E.   Procedure. The following procedures, requirements, restrictions, and
conditions are required. In addition to the special use procedures, approval of
a planned unit development includes a pre-application consultation, required
concept plan review, preliminary plan approval, and final plan approval. A
preliminary plan and a final plan may not be submitted and reviewed
simultaneously but must follow the procedures as laid out sequentially in this
section.
      1.   Pre-Application Consultation.
         a.   Prior to formal submittal of an application, a pre-application
conference with the Zoning Officer is required. Additional Village staff,
consultants, or officials may attend the meeting as deemed necessary and
appropriate.
         b.   At a pre-application consultation, the applicant must provide
information as to the location of the proposed planned unit development, the
proposed uses, proposed improvements including the public benefits and
amenities, anticipated exceptions to this title, and any other information
necessary to explain the planned unit development.
         c.   The purpose of such pre-application consultation is to make
advice and assistance available to the applicant before preparation of a
concept plan, so that the applicant may determine whether the proposed planned
unit development is in compliance with the provisions of this title and other
applicable regulations, and whether the proposed planned unit development
aligns with the adopted land use policies of the Village.
         d.   The pre-application conference does not require formal
application, fee, or filing of a planned unit development application. Any
opinions or advice provided by the Zoning Officer, other Village staff,
consultants or officials are in no way binding with respect to any official
action that may be taken on the subsequent formal application.
      2.   Concept Plan. Before submitting a formal application for a planned
unit development, the applicant must present a concept plan before the Planning
and Zoning Commission for the purpose of obtaining information and guidance
prior to formal application. The concept plan will be presented at a public
meeting and no notice is required. At minimum, the concept plan must consist of
the following:
         a.   A map or maps in general form containing the proposed land uses,
the natural features of the development site, the character and approximate
location of all roadways and access drives proposed within the planned unit
development, the location of all adjacent public streets, public utilities, and
schematic drawings showing the size, character, and disposition of buildings on
the site.
         b.   A written statement containing a general explanation of the
planned unit development, including a statement of the present ownership of all
the land within said development and the expected schedule of construction.
         c.   The Planning and Zoning Commission will review the concept plan
and provide such information and guidance it deems appropriate. Any opinions or
advice provided by the Planning and Zoning Commission is in no way binding with
respect to any official action the Planning and Zoning Commission or Village
Board may take on the subsequent formal application. While this review of the
concept plan occurs at a public meeting where the proceedings are subject to
the Illinois Open Meetings Act, this review is not a public hearing.
      3.   Preliminary Plan.
         a.   Action by Zoning Officer. An application for a preliminary plan
for a planned unit development must be filed with the Zoning Officer. Once it
is determined that the application is complete, the Zoning Officer will
schedule the application for consideration by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
         b.   Action by Planning and Zoning Commission.
            (1)   Within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete application,
unless an extension of time is agreed to by the applicant and the Zoning
Officer, the Planning and Zoning Commission will consider the preliminary plan
at a public hearing.
            (2)   The Planning and Zoning Commission will review the
application based upon the evidence presented at the public hearing, pursuant
to the approval standards of this section and the approval standards for a
special use. The Planning and Zoning Commission must recommend either approval,
approval with conditions, or denial of the preliminary plan.
            (3)   Following the closing of the public hearing, the Planning and
Zoning Commission will forward its recommendation to the Village Board.
         c.   Action by Village Board. The Village Board will review the
preliminary plan within sixty (60) days of receipt of the Planning and Zoning
Commission recommendation, unless an extension of time is agreed to by the
applicant and the Village Board. The Village Board must approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the preliminary plan.
         d.   Conditions. The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend, and
the Village Board may impose, such conditions and restrictions upon the
establishment, location, construction, maintenance, and operation of the
planned unit development as may be deemed necessary for the protection of the
public health, safety, and welfare. Such conditions and restrictions must be
incorporated into the final plan.
         e.   Approval Standards. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make
a finding that the following standards for a planned unit development have
generally been met, which the Village Board will consider in its decision.
            (1)   The proposed planned unit development meets the purpose of a
planned unit development.
            (2)   The proposed planned unit development will not be injurious
to the use and enjoyment of other property in the vicinity.
            (3)   The proposed planned unit development will not impede the
normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding property.
            (4)   There is provision for adequate utilities, drainage, off-
street parking and loading, pedestrian access, and all other necessary
facilities.
            (5)   There is provision for adequate vehicular ingress and egress
designed to minimize traffic congestion upon public streets.
            (6)   The location and arrangement of structures, parking areas,
walks, landscape, lighting, and other site design elements are compatible with
the surrounding neighborhood and adjacent land uses.
         f.   Expiration. The preliminary plan approval expires if a complete
application for approval of a final plan has not been filed within two (2)
years after the date the Village Board grants preliminary plan approval. As
part of the Village Board approval of the preliminary plan, the Village Board
may approve a longer period of validity. An extension of this period of two (2)
years may also be granted by the Village Board if the applicant requests an
extension in writing prior to the expiration date of the approval. A public
hearing for an extension of time of a preliminary plan is not required.
      4.   Final Plan. Following the approval of the preliminary plan, an
application for a final plan for a planned unit development must be filed with
the Zoning Officer.
         a.   Action by Village Engineer. The Village Engineer will review the
final plan take the following action:
            (1)   If the final plan is in substantial compliance with the
approved preliminary plan, the Village Engineer will recommend approval of the
final plan to the Village Board. The Village Engineer will certify to the
Village Board that the final plan is in substantial conformance with the
previously filed preliminary plan.
            (2)   If the final plan is not in substantial conformance with the
approved preliminary plan, the Village Engineer must inform the applicant as to
specific areas found not to be in compliance, and the applicant must resubmit
the final plan to the Village Engineer with changes to those areas found not to
be in substantial compliance and the validity of the preliminary plan remains
in effect. If the revised final plan remains noncompliant with the preliminary
plan, the applicant may request that the Village Engineer render a decision to
be forwarded to the Village Board. In such case, the Village Engineer will
recommend to the Village Board that the final plan be denied. If denied, the
applicant may reapply by submitting a new preliminary plan.
         b.   Action by Village Board. After receipt of the Village Engineer
recommendation, the Village Board must review the final plan. The Village Board
must approve or deny the final plan. If denied, the applicant may reapply by
submitting a new final plan and the validity of the preliminary plan remains in
effect. If subdivision is part of the development of the planned unit
development, the final plan will be reviewed simultaneously with the final plat
following the Planning and Zoning Commission review of the final plat.
         c.   Effect of Approval. After final plan approval, the final plan
will supplements the development regulations applicable to the subject
property. The planned unit development must be developed in accordance with the
final plan and the applicable zoning district regulations. Violation of the
final plan approval or any condition of approval is a violation of this title
and constitutes grounds for revocation of all approvals granted for the planned
unit development.
         d.   Expiration. The final plan approval expires if a building permit
has not been issued within two (2) years after the date the Village Board
grants final plan approval. As part of the Village Board approval of the final
plan, the Village Board may approve a longer period of validity. An extension
of this two (2)-year validity period may be granted by the Village Board if the
applicant requests an extension in writing prior to the expiration date of the
original approval.
   F.   Modifications to approved final plans. No adjustments may be made to
the approved final plan, except upon application to the Village in accordance
with the following:
      1.   Administrative Modifications. The Zoning Officer may approve the
following administrative modifications to an approved final plan when it is
determined by the Zoning Officer that such changes are in substantial
conformance with the approved final plan. Any changes considered a minor or
major modification, as defined in this section, cannot be approved as an
administrative modification. No notice is required for an administrative
modification.
         a.   Changes in building location of no more than five feet (5') that
continue to meet the requirements of this title and any conditions of the final
plan approval.
         b.   Changes in the location of walkways, vehicle circulation ways,
and parking areas of up to ten feet (10') that continue to meet the
requirements of this title and any conditions of the final plan approval.
         c.   Interior modifications that do not increase the area of the
building footprint.
         d.   Changes in building design, including building materials, that
continue to meet the requirements of this title and any conditions of the final
plan approval.
         e.   Modification of existing accessory structures or the addition of
new accessory structures when in conformance with the requirements of this
title.
         f.   Modifications to the approved landscape plan that do not result
in a reduction of the total amount of plant material required and conform with
all landscape requirements of this title.
         g.   Modification of existing signs or the addition of new signs when
in conformance with sign regulations.
      2.   Minor Modifications. The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve
the following minor modifications to an approved final plan when it is
determined by the Commission that such changes are in general conformance with
the approved final plan. Any changes considered a major modification, as
defined in this section, cannot be approved as a minor modification. The
Planning and Zoning Commission, at its sole discretion, may choose to classify
a modification that meets the criteria of this section as a major modification
to be approved by the Village Board. A public hearing is not required for
consideration and approval of a minor modification. When calculating
percentages, all fractions are rounded up to the nearest whole number.
         a.   Changes required during construction when related to final
engineering issues such as topography, drainage, underground utilities,
structural safety, or vehicular circulation.
         b.   An increase or decrease in the number of dwelling units of up to
five percent (5%).
         c.   An increase or decrease in building height of up to five percent
(5%).
         d.   An increase or decrease in building coverage of up to five
percent (5%).
         e.   An increase or decrease in open space of up to five percent (5%).
         f.   A change in the location of walkways, vehicle circulation ways,
and parking areas between up to ten feet (10').
         g.   A change in the location and arrangement of general land use
categories within the development, or an increase or decrease of up to five
percent (5%) in the overall final approved land use mix in any phase.
         h.   An increase or decrease in the number of parking spaces of up to
ten (10) parking spaces.
         i.   A change to the landscape plan that results in a reduction of
plant material but does not violate the landscape requirements of this title.
         j.   Altering any final grade by no more than ten percent (10%) of the
originally planned grade.
      3.   Major Modifications.
         a.   The Village Board may approve any other changes to an approved
final plan that do not qualify as an administrative or minor modification. In
addition, any of the following are considered major modifications:
            (1)   Any request for an extension of time of the final plan
approval.
            (2)   Changes to any conditions imposed as part of final plan
approval.
            (3)   Reductions or alterations in the approved public benefit and
amenities to be provided.
            (4)   Any development action that does not comply with zoning
district regulations.
         b.   All major modifications to the final plan must be approved by the
Village Board. Approval of major modifications will follow the special use
process including conducting a properly noticed public hearing before the
Planning and Zoning Commission. The Village Board may only approve changes to
the final plan if they find such changes are in general conformance with the
approved final plan, necessary for the continued successful functioning of the
planned unit development, respond to changes in conditions that have occurred
since the final plan was approved, and/or respond to changes in adopted Village
land use policies. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2022)
10-3-7:   SITE PLAN REVIEW:
   A.   Purpose. The site plan review process is intended to promote orderly
development and redevelopment in the Village, and to assure that such
development or redevelopment occurs in a manner that is harmonious with
surrounding properties, is consistent with Village’s adopted land use policies,
and promotes the public health, safety, and welfare of the Village. This
section provides standards by which to determine and control the physical
layout and design to achieve compatibility of land uses and structures,
efficient use of land, minimization of traffic and safety hazards, and
incorporation of stormwater management and sustainable design techniques.
   B.   Authority. The Zoning Officer will conduct site plan review as required
by this Section. The Zoning Officer may convene a technical review committee,
comprised of Village staff as the Zoning Officer deems appropriate.
   C.   Required site plan review. No zoning approval or building permit may be
issued until site plan approval has been granted. In addition, all other
requirements of all other applicable Village codes and ordinances must be met.
Site plan review and approval is required for the following developments:
      1.   New non-residential and mixed-use construction.
      2.   As of the effective date of this title, additions to existing non-
residential and mixed-use developments that increase the total floor area by
thirty percent (30%) or more.
      3.   Parking lots of twenty (20) or more spaces.
      4.   Drive-through facilities.
   D.   Procedure. Applications for site plan review must be submitted to the
Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer will begin the review of the site plan
within thirty (30) days of the date the application is deemed complete. The
Zoning Officer will review and evaluate the application, pursuant to the
standards of this section and the Ordinance, and approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the site plan. If the Zoning Officer approves the site plan
subject to certain conditions, all plans and drawings to be submitted as part
of the application for a building permit or zoning approval must include those
conditions. If the Zoning Officer denies site plan approval or approves with
conditions, the applicant may appeal the decision to the Planning and Zoning
Commission per the procedures of Section 10-3-10 of this chapter.
   E.   Approval standards. The following will be evaluated in the review of
site plans:
      1.   Conformity with the regulations of this title and any other
applicable regulations of the Village Code, and the Village’s Comprehensive
Plan and adopted land use policies.
      2.   The location, arrangement, size, design, and general site
compatibility of all structures, lighting, and signs to ensure:
         a.   Efficient use of land that responds to the existing off-site
utilities and service conditions in order to minimize the demand for additional
municipal services, utilities, and infrastructure.
         b.   Compatibility with and mitigation of any potential impact upon
adjacent property.
         c.   Lighting designed and installed to minimize adverse impact on
adjacent properties.
         d.   Signs in conformance with the Ordinance.
      3.   Landscape and the arrangement of open space or natural features on
the site should:
         a.   Create active and/or passive open space for all site users.
         b.   Preserve unique natural resources, including measures to preserve
and protect existing healthy plantings.
         c.   Design drainage facilities to promote the use and preservation of
natural watercourses and patterns of drainage.
         d.   Utilize plant materials suitable to withstand the climatic
conditions of the Village and microclimate of the site. The use of species
native or naturalized to northeastern Illinois is encouraged.
         e.   Use of screening to minimize the impact of the development on
adjacent uses and mitigate impacts between incompatible uses, creating a
logical transition to adjoining lots and developments.
      4.   Circulation systems and off-street parking designed to:
         a.   Provide adequate and safe access to the site for motor vehicles
as well as other modes of transportation, including pedestrians, bicyclists,
and public transit users.
         b.   Minimize potentially dangerous traffic movements.
         c.   Minimize curb cuts, including the use of cross-access easements
and shared parking.
         d.   Clearly define a network of pedestrian connections in and between
parking lots, street sidewalks, open spaces, and structures that are safe,
visible, and identifiable.
   F.   Modifications to approved site plans.
      1.   An application for an amendment to an approved site plan must be
submitted to the Zoning Officer. Amendment applications must include a written
description of the proposed change, including the reason for such change, and a
notation of the location on the approved site plan.
      2.   The Zoning Officer may approve the following minor modifications to
approved site plans:
         a.   Minor changes required during construction, as related to final
engineering issues such as topography, drainage, underground utilities,
structural safety, or vehicular circulation.
         b.   Exterior renovations to a building facade.
         c.   The modification of existing accessory structures or the addition
of new accessory structures when in conformance with the requirements of this
title.
         d.   The construction of additional bicycle or parking spaces.
         e.   The addition of any open space.
         f.   A reduction in the number of bicycle or parking spaces so long as
the remaining number of spaces is in conformance with the requirements of this
title.
         g.   Modifications to the approved landscape plan that does not result
in a reduction of the total amount of plant material required and remains in
conformance with all landscape requirements.
         h.   The modification of existing signs or the addition of new signs
when in conformance with the requirements of the Ordinance.
      3.   The Zoning Officer must approve or deny the proposed site plan
modifications within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete application. The
Zoning Officer may decide that the proposed change or changes to the approved
site plan is such a significant change that it constitutes a new application
and is subject to the complete site plan review provisions of this Section.
(Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2022)
10-3-8:   ZONING INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Purpose. The interpretation authority is intended to recognize that the
provisions of this title, though detailed and extensive, cannot, as a practical
matter, address every specific zoning issue. However, this zoning
interpretation authority is not intended to add or change the essential content
of the Ordinance.
   B.   Initiation. The Village Board, the Planning and Zoning Commission, or a
property owner in the Village, or person expressly authorized in writing by the
property owner, may initiate a zoning interpretation application. All
interpretation requests must be for the purpose of furthering some actual
development.
   C.   Authority. The Zoning Officer will review and make decisions on written
requests for zoning interpretations.
   D.   Procedure.
      1.   All applications for interpretations must be filed with the Zoning
Officer.
      2.   The Zoning Officer must review a written request for an
interpretation and render the interpretation in writing within thirty (30) days
of receipt of a complete application.
      3.   The Zoning Officer may request additional information prior to
rendering an interpretation. Until such additional material is received, the
thirty (30)-day period described in item 2 above is suspended. (Ord. O-24-22,
12-3-2022)
10-3-9:   TEMPORARY USE PERMITS:
   A.   Purpose. A temporary use permit allows for the short-term use and/or
placement of structures on a lot. The temporary use permit regulates temporary
uses that occur entirely on and within a lot. Temporary uses located within the
public right-of-way are regulated separately by the Village Code.
   B.   Initiation. A property owner in the Village, or person expressly
authorized in writing by the property owner, may initiate a temporary use
permit application.
   C.   Authority. The Zoning Officer will review and make final decisions on
temporary use permit applications.
   D.   Procedure. All applications for temporary use permits must be filed
with the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer must render a decision on the
temporary use permit within thirty days of the date of receipt of a complete
application. The Zoning Officer must review and evaluate the application,
pursuant to the standards of this section, and approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the application.
   E.   Approval standards. All temporary uses must comply with the
requirements of this title, including the temporary use standards of Chapter 7,
and the following standards:
      1.   Unless expressly allowed by this title, the temporary use or
structure complies with the dimensional requirements of the district in which
it is located.
      2.   The temporary use does not adversely impact the public health,
safety, and welfare.
      3.   The temporary use is operated in accordance with any restrictions
and conditions as the police and the appropriate fire district, or other
Village officials, may require.
      4.   The temporary use does not conflict with another previously
authorized temporary use.
      5.   The temporary use provides adequate parking if needed. If located on
a lot with an operational principal use, does not impact the parking and site
circulation of the principal use.
   F.   Expiration. The temporary use permit is valid for the time period
granted as part of the approval. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2022)
10-3-10:   ZONING APPEALS OF ZONING OFFICER DECISIONS:
   A.   Purpose. The zoning appeals process is intended to provide appropriate
checks and balances on the administrative authority of the Zoning Officer
   B.   Initiation. A property owner in the Village that is directly affected
by a determination of the Zoning Officer may file an appeal of the Zoning
Officer’s decision on a site plan review, zoning interpretation, temporary use
permit, or other administrative decision related to this title.
   C.   Authority. The Planning and Zoning Commission will take formal action
on zoning appeal applications.
   D.   Procedure. All applications must be filed with the Zoning Officer. Once
it is determined that the application is complete, the Zoning Officer will
schedule the application for consideration by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
      1.   Within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete application, unless
an extension of time is agreed to by the applicant and Zoning Officer, the
Planning and Zoning Commission will consider the appeal at a public hearing.
      2.   The Planning and Zoning Commission must evaluate the application
based upon the evidence presented at the public hearing.
      3.   Within thirty (30) days of the close of the public hearing, unless
an extension is agreed to by the applicant, the Planning and Zoning Commission
must either confirm or overturn the Zoning Officer’s decision. Decisions of the
Planning and Zoning Commission are final. They are not appealable to the
Village Board.
   E.   Limitations on zoning appeals. A decision of the Zoning Officer may
only be appealed if an application is filed within forty-five (45) days of the
date of the decision. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2022)
CHAPTER 4
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-4-1:    Enforcement Official
10-4-2:    Application Of Penalties
10-4-3:    Fines
10-4-1:   ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL:
This title is enforced by the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer may secure the
assistance of the Village Attorney to seek an injunction, abatement, or other
appropriate actions to enjoin, abate, or stop any violation of this title. At
times, the aid of the Police Department may be sought to enforce this title.
(Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-4-2:   APPLICATION OF PENALTIES:
Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or
refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions
of this title, upon conviction, will be fined for each offence. Each day that a
violation continues constitutes a separate offense for the purposes of the
penalties and remedies available to the Village. The accumulation of penalties
for violations, but not the obligation for payment for violations already
committed, ceases upon correction of the violation. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-4-3:   FINES:
Each violation, and each day that such violation continues, is subject to a
fine as established in the Village Code. Upon proof of compliance, the Zoning
Officer may reduce accumulated fines at his/her discretion. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-
3-2024)
CHAPTER 5
ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSES ZONING DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-5-1:    Zoning Districts And Purposes
10-5-2:    Zoning Map
10-5-3:    Annexed Land
10-5-4:    Exemptions For Right-Of-Way And Public Utilities
10-5-1:   ZONING DISTRICTS AND PURPOSES:
In order to carry out the purpose and intent of this title, the Village of
Campton Hills is divided into the following zoning districts:
   A.   Residential districts. The residential districts (“R districts”) are
primarily for residential land uses and for other selected uses that are deemed
compatible with residential environments.
      1.   RE-1 Residential Estate District. The RE-1 district is intended to
provide for a low-density, semi-rural environment of detached single-family
dwellings on relatively large lots of four (4) acres or more.
      2.   RE-2 Residential Estate District. The RE-2 district is intended to
provide for a low-density, semi-rural environment of detached single-family
dwellings on relatively large lots of two (2) acres or more.
      3.   RE-3 Residential Estate District. The RE-3 district is intended to
provide for a low-density, semi-rural environment of detached single-family
dwellings on relatively large lots of one and a quarter (1.25) acres or more.
      4.   R-1 Residential District. The R-1 district is intended to provide
for a moderate density environment of detached single-family dwellings on lots
of thirty thousand (30,000) square feet or more.
      5.   R-2 Residential District. The R-2 district is intended to provide
for a moderate density environment of detached single-family dwellings on lots
of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet or more.
      6.   R-3 Residential District. The R-3 district is intended to provide
for a moderate density environment of detached single-family dwellings on lots
of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more.
      7.   R-4 Residential District. The R-4 district is intended to provide
for a moderate density environment of detached single-family dwellings on lots
of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more. The R-4 district is intended only
for areas where adequate public utilities and other infrastructure exist, and
where such development will not negatively impact adjacent lower density
residential neighborhoods.
   B.   Commercial districts. The commercial districts (“C districts”) are
primarily for commercial land uses such as those related to retail, service,
office, research and development or light industrial uses.
      1.   C-1 Local Commercial District. The C-1 district is intended for
smaller-scale commercial uses that serve the local community. The C-1 district
applies to areas of commercial uses that are targeted at serving Village
residents and are compatible in scale and intensity with nearby residential
areas.
      2.   C-2 General Commercial District. The C-2 district is intended for
areas with a variety of higher intensity commercial uses generally serving a
wider geographic area. The C-2 district accommodates a range of commercial uses
and business types, including, but not limited to, freestanding retail and
office buildings and multi-tenant retail centers. The C-2 district standards
are intended to enhance the appearance of these areas and provide adequate
buffering between residential areas located adjacent to the district.
      3.   RD Research and Development District. The purpose of the RD district
is to accommodate research and development facilities and larger office
structures that may include lighter industrial uses.
   C.   Agricultural and natural area districts. The agricultural and natural
area districts (“A districts”) are primarily for agricultural, agri-business,
or open space uses. This category of A districts includes an overlay district
for environmentally sensitive areas.
      1.   F Farming District. The F district is intended to promote and
protect agricultural land. The standards of the F district are to protect and
promote the continuation of farming, and to protect agricultural land uses from
encroachment of incompatible developments.
      2.   FB Farm-Business Overlay District. The FB overlay district is
intended to promote business actively and directly used by those engaged in the
pursuit of agricultural activities, including commercial and industrial sues,
located within rural and agricultural areas. The FB overlay district can be
applied to rural districts such as the F and RE-1 districts.
      3.   FP Farmland Preservation District. The purpose of the FP District is
to provide a zoning district for properties where at least seventy-five percent
(75%) is the subject of a deed of an agricultural conservation easement as a
perpetual restriction of uses of such property, whether the easement is
conveyed to Kane County or Campton Hills or a Township to the extent permitted
by statute or other applicable law, with the primary purpose of protecting the
agricultural soils, agricultural viability, and agricultural productivity of
properties subject to the easement.
      4.   OSP Open Space Preservation District. The OSP district is intended
to provide and protect private and public open space and public recreational
facilities, both outdoor and indoor. Larger regional open spaces/parks may
include both active and passive recreation areas and certain ancillary
commercial activities, such as cultural facilities, performance venues, and
restaurants. Designation of a parcel as part of the Open Space Preservation
District on the official Zoning Map does not indicate whether the parcel is
privately or publicly owned. Additionally, designation of a parcel as part of
the Open Space Preservation District does not confer public access to the
parcel. For public and private ownership of parcels in the Open Space
Preservation District, please see
Appendix 1  of this title, Open Space Ownership Map.
      5.   ESA Environmentally Sensitive Area Overlay District. The purpose of
the ESA overlay district is to preserve environmentally sensitive areas while
allowing for residential development. The intent is to work with natural land
features and cluster residential development within the larger development
space to leave the remainder of the site as natural areas or open space. This
type of conservation design helps to achieve numerous environmental and
ecological benefits, including wildlife management and habitat preservation,
water quality protection, and greater aquifer recharge. The ESA Overlay
District should be linked to the Village’s Green Infrastructure Plan. (Ord. O-
24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-5-2:   ZONING MAP:
   A.   Location of districts.
      1.   The location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by
this title are set forth in the Village of Campton Hills Zoning Map (“the
Zoning Map”), as periodically amended. The Zoning Map is incorporated into, and
made an integral part of, this title.
      2.   It is the intent of this title that the entire area of the Village,
including all land and water areas, are included in the zoning districts
established by this title. Any land lying within the Village, but not shown on
the Official Zoning Map as being included within a district, is classified as
the F Farming District.
   B.   Interpretation of Boundary Lines. Where uncertainty exists with respect
to boundaries of the various zoning districts as depicted on the Zoning Map,
the following rules shall apply:
      1.   Right-of-Way Lines. Where zoning district boundary lines are
indicated as following public or private streets, highways, expressways,
easements, railroads, or waterways (streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other
bodies of water), the boundary line is construed to be the centerline of the
right-of-way.
      2.   Property Lines. Where zoning district boundary lines coincide with a
recorded property line, the property line is construed to be the boundary line
of the zoning district.
      3.   Vacated Areas. Streets, alleys, or other public rights-of-way that
have been vacated will be construed to fall in the same zoning district as the
lots abutting both sides of the street, alley or right-of way involved. If the
lots abutting each side of the street, alley or right-of-way were classified in
different zoning districts before the vacation, the center line of the street,
alley, or right-of-way shall be construed as the boundary between the zoning
districts.
      4.   Clarification of Boundary Lines. The Zoning Officer will decide any
interpretations of zoning district boundary lines, where the application of
items 1 through 3 of this section above leaves doubt as to the boundary between
two (2) zoning districts. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-5-3:   ANNEXED LAND:
Any territory annexed into the Village is, upon annexation, zoned as the RE-
1 Residential Estate District, unless otherwise provided for in the annexation
agreement or the territory is rezoned. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-5-4:   EXEMPTIONS FOR RIGHT-OF-WAY AND PUBLIC UTILITIES:
   A.   The following utility-related equipment and devices are exempt from the
provisions of this title and are permitted in any district: wires, cables,
conduits, vaults, laterals, pipes, mains, hydrants, valves and water supply
wells.
   B.   This exemption does not include wireless telecommunications, amateur
HAM radio towers, solar energy systems, or wind energy systems. All such
structures must comply with this title and any other applicable Village
ordinances. This exemption also does not apply to buildings established by or
used by utility companies or agencies. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
CHAPTER 6
DIMENSIONAL AND DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
10-6-1:    General Standards
10-6-2:    Dimensional Standards
10-6-3:    Design Standards
10-6-1:   GENERAL STANDARDS:
   A.   Site development standards. For additional on-site development
standards and requirements, such as accessory structures and uses, fences and
walls, see Chapter 8 of this title.
   B.   Landscape. See Chapter 10 of this title for landscape, buffering, and
screening standards and requirements.
   C.   Off-street parking and loading. See Chapter 11 of this title for off-
street parking and loading standards and requirements.
   D.   Signs. See Chapter 12 of this title for sign standards and
requirements.
   E.   Illumination. See Title 9 (Building and Development), Chapter 7
(Outdoor Lighting for New Construction) for illumination and luminaire
standards.
   F.   Building height. The following structures or parts thereof are exempt
from maximum height limitations, unless otherwise limited by any height
restriction imposed by any airport authority, or other similar federal, state,
or local authority.
      1.   Public utility poles, towers, and wires. This does not include
wireless telecommunication towers and wind turbines that are regulated
separately by this title.
      2.   Water tanks and standpipes.
      3.   Building appurtenances such as chimneys, parapet walls, skylights,
steeples, flag poles, smokestacks, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire
towers, monuments, water towers, stacks, stage towers, or scenery lofts, tanks,
ornamental towers and spires, rooftop accessory structures, recreational
facilities, necessary mechanical appurtenances, or penthouses to house
mechanical appurtenances. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-6-2:   DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS:
Dimensional standards for all lots in all zoning districts are established in
Tables 6-1, 6-2 and 6-3, below.
   Table 6-1. Dimensional Standards for R Districts
Standards Zoning District
          RE-1 RE-2 RE-3 R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4
   Table 6-1. Dimensional Standards for R Districts
Standards     Zoning District
              RE-1    RE-2    RE-3       R-1       R-2       R-3       R-4
Lot Standards
Minimum lot   4 acres 2 acres 1.25 acres 30,000 sf 15,000 sf 10,000 sf 5,000 sf
area
Minimum lot   250     150     125        125       100       80        50
width (in ft)
Maximum
building      20%     25%     25%        30%       30%       35%       45%
coverage (as
pct of lot)
Maximum
impervious
surface       35%     35%     40%        40%       50%       60%       60%
coverage (as
pct of lot)
Setback and Height Standards (in ft)
Minimum front 35      35      35         35        30        25        25
yard setback
Minimum side  15      15      15         15        10        10        10
yard setback
Minimum
corner side   30      30      30         25        20        20        20
yard
Minimum rear  30      30      30         25        20        20        20
yard
Maximum
building      40      40      40         30        30        30        25
height
 
Table 6-2. Dimensional Standards for C Districts
Standards Zoning District
          C-1 C-2 C-3
Table 6-2. Dimensional Standards for C Districts
Standards                                           Zoning District
                                                    C-1    C-2    C-3
Lot Standards
Minimum lot area                                    N/A    N/A    10,000 sf
Minimum lot width (in ft)                           N/A    N/A    100
Maximum building coverage (as pct of lot)           N/A    N/A    N/A
Maximum impervious surface coverage (as pct of lot) N/A    N/A    N/A
Setback and Height Standards (in ft)
Minimum front yard setback                          15     20     25
Minimum side yard setback                           Note 1 Note 1 10
Minimum corner side yard                            15     20     25
Minimum rear yard                                   20     25     25
Maximum building height                             40     40     40
Note:
1.   None, unless abutting a residential district, then 10 ft.
 
   Table 6-3. Dimensional Standards for F and OSP Districts
Standards Zoning District
          F OSP
   Table 6-3. Dimensional Standards for F and OSP Districts
Standards                                      Zoning District
                                               F                       OSP
Lot Standards
Minimum lot area                               Agriculture use: 5 aces 1 acre
                                               All other uses: 2 acres
Minimum lot width (in ft)                      Agriculture use: none   100
                                               All other uses: 250
Maximum building coverage (as pct of lot)      N/A                     N/A
Maximum impervious surface coverage (as pct of Agricultural use: none.
lot)                                           All other uses: 20%     N/A
Standards                                      Zoning District
                                               F                       OSP
Setback and Height Standards (in ft)
Minimum front yard setback                     35                      15
Minimum side yard setback                      10                      15
Minimum corner side yard                       35                      15
Minimum rear yard                              10                      15
Maximum building height                        40                      40
 
10-6-3:   DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Applicability of design standards. The design standards of this chapter
apply to new construction, substantial repair or rehabilitation meant to remedy
damage or deterioration of the exterior façade of an existing structure, and
additions to an existing structure. The aforementioned design standards apply
only to commercial zoning districts, including the RD District. These standards
do not apply to interior remodeling.
   B.   Commercial district design standards. Table 6-4. General Building
Design Standards, indicates the applicability of general building design
standards to the commercial districts. An “X” indicates that the standard is
applicable in the district indicated. A blank cell indicates that the standard
is not applicable. (See
Table 6-4  at the end of this chapter.)
   C.   Building materials. The materials listed in this paragraph shall be
limited to thirty percent of non-window areas in any building elevation:
      1.   CMU or split face block;
      2.   Corrugated metal;
      3.   Galvanized steel;
      4.   Exposed aggregate concrete wall panels;
      5.   Exterior insulating finish systems (EIFS);
      6.   T-111 composite plywood siding; and
      7.   Plastic. For the purposes of this paragraph “plastic” is defined as
a synthetic, thermoplastic, or solid polymer based on hydrocarbons.
      8.   Vinyl. For the purposes of this paragraph “vinyl” is defined as a
form of plastic, the equivalent hydrocarbon radical (CH2=CH), derived from
ethylene.
   D.   Roof-mounted mechanical equipment.
      1.   For the purposes of this chapter, roof-mounted mechanical equipment
shall include heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) equipment,
electrical generators, and similar equipment. Mechanical equipment in this
chapter does not include solar panels or wind turbines.
      2.   Roof-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from view from a
public street by a parapet wall on all four sides. Alternatively, the equipment
may be housed a rooftop enclosure that is architecturally integrated with the
building. If used, such a rooftop enclosure shall be the minimum size and
height necessary to conceal the mechanical equipment. Neither roof-mounted
mechanical equipment nor their enclosures shall count toward the maximum
allowable height of the building.
Table 6-4. General Building Design Standards
Design Standards    Applicable Zoning District
Building Elevations C-1 C-2 RD
Table 6-4. General Building Design Standards
                                                                     Applicable
Design Standards                                                     Zoning
                                                                     District
Building Elevations                                                  C-1 C-2 RD
When visible from the public right-of-way, building elevations
should include architectural features to avoid the appearance of
blank walls facing the street. These include, but are not limited    X   X   X
to: window, changes in the wall plan of at least two feet, changes
in wall texture or masonry pat terns, colonnade, columns or
pilasters.
Facades in excess of 100 ft must include a repeating pattern with no
less than two of the following elements: color change, texture
change, material module change, or a wall articulation change of no  X
less than two feet in depth, such as a reveal, pilaster or
projecting rib. All elements must occur at intervals of no more than
40 ft.
Building facades in excess of 100 feet along public rights-of-way
must include a repeating pattern with no less than two of the
following elements: color change, texture change, material module        X   X
change, or a wall articulation change of no less than two feet in
depth, such as a reveal, pilaster, or projecting rib. All elements
must occur at intervals of no more than 75 feet.
Public entrances and primary building elevations must be oriented
toward public streets. Main entrances to buildings must be defined   X   X   X
and visually distinctive from the remaining portions of the façade.
   Fenestration Design
The ground floor must maintain a transparency of 50%, measured       X
between two and ten feet in height from grade.
The ground floor must maintain a transparency of 35%, measured           X   X
between two and ten feet in height from grade.
Upper floors must maintain a transparency of 25% of the wall area of X
the story.
   Roof Design
Parapet walls must feature three-dimensional cornice treatments or   X   X   X
other shadow-creating details along their tops.
Green roof, blue roof, and white roof designs are encouraged.        X   X   X
Reflective roof surfaces that produce glare are prohibited, except
for solar panels or white roofs intended to radiate absorbed or non- X   X   X
reflected solar energy and reduce heat transfer to the building.
   Site Design
Retail centers must be designed to accommodate safe pedestrian
access to the center from the public right-of-way and safe               X
pedestrian circulation within the development itself.
 
(Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
CHAPTER 7
PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES
SECTION:
10-7-1:    General Use Regulations
10-7-2:    Principal Use Standards
10-7-1:   GENERAL USE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Table 7-1, Permitted and Special Uses in All Zoning Districts. This
table identifies permitted, special, conditional, and temporary uses allowed
within each zoning district.
      1.   “P” indicates that the use is permitted by-right in the district.
      2.   A “C” indicates the use is permitted with conditions. The referenced
section of the ordinance should be consulted to determine these conditions.
      3.   “S” indicates that the use is a special use in the district and
requires special use permit approval.
      4.   A dash (“—”) indicates that the use is not permitted in the
district.
   B.   Terminology in Table 7-1. Uses found within Table 7-1 are defined in
Chapter 14 of this title.
      1.   Certain uses are defined to be inclusive of many uses.
      2.   When a use meets a specific definition, it is regulated as such and
is not regulated as part of a more broadly defined use category.
      3.   A use that does not fall within a use definition or is interpreted
as not part of a use definition, is prohibited.
   Table 7-1. Permitted and Special Uses in All Zoning Districts
A "P" indicates the use is permitted in the applicable zoning district. A "C"
indicates the use is permitted with conditions; see the Notes, References
column for the Ordinance section that contains the conditions. An "S" in the
column indicates the use is allowed only with special use approval. An "'-" in
the column indicates the use is not allowed. Nonconforming status, per Chapter
10, and uses approved per PUD ordinances, shall govern as well.
Uses    Zoning District
     RE- 1 RE-2 RE- 3 R1 R2 R3 R4 C1 C2 R D F F-B OS P
                                                                        Zoning District
Uses                                                                 RE- RE- RE- R1 R2 R3 R4 C1 C2 R F F- OS
                                                                     1   2   3                     D   B  P
RESIDENTIAL AND ACCOMMODATION USES
Private household
   Dwelling unit, single-family (for dwellings in F district, see P   P   P   P  P  P  P  -  -  - C -  -
Sec. 7.2 F.
   Manufactured home                                              -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  -  - - -  -
   Mixed use                                                      -   -   -   -  -  -  -  P  P  - - -  -
   Short-term rental                                              -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  -  - - -  -
Housing services for the infirm                                      -   -   -   -  -  -  S  S  S  - - -  -
Other Accommodation Services
   Bed and breakfast                                              S   S   S   S  S  S  -  -  -  - S -  -
   Boarding house                                                 -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  -  - - -  -
   Community residence, large                                     P   P   P   P  P  P  P  -  -  - - -  -
   Community residence, small                                     S   S   S   S  S  S  S  -  -  - - -  -
   Hotels, motels                                                 -   -   -   -  -  -  -  S  S  S - -  -
COMMERCIAL USES
Retail sales or service                                              -   -   -   -  -  -  -  P  P  P - -  -
   Auto body and auto repair                                      -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  S  - - -  -
   Auto parts and auto accessory sales                            -   -   -   -  -  -  -  P  P  - - -  -
   Beer, wine and liquor store                                    -   -   -   -  -  -  -  P  P  - - -  -
   Cannabis business establishment (non-dispensing)               -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  -  - - -  -
   Cannabis business establishment (dispensing)                   -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  -  - - -  -
   Car wash                                                       -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  S  - - -  -
   Department store, membership club or superstore                -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  -  - - -  -
   Drive-thru facility                                            -   -   -   -  -  -  -  S  S  S - -  -
   Gas station                                                    -   -   -   -  -  -  -  S  S  - - -  -
   Grocery store, supermarket, bakery                             -   -   -   -  -  -  -  P  P  P - -  -
   Heavy equipment sales or service                               -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  S  - - P  -
   Home centers                                                   -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  S  - - -  -
   Investment banking, securities, and brokerages                 -   -   -   -  -  -  -  P  P  - - -  -
   Office                                                         -   -   -   -  -  -  -  P  P  P - -  -
   Pawn shop                                                      -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  -  - - -  -
   Pharmacy, drug store (If drive-thru, then S)                   -   -   -   -  -  -  -  P  P  - - -  -
   Smoking, hookah or vaping lounge                               -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  -  - - -  -
   Tobacconist                                                    -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  -  - - -  -
   Vehicle dealership                                             -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  -  - - -  -
Business, professional, scientific, and technical services
   Professional services                                          -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  P  P - -  -
Food services
   Banquet hall/caterer                                           -   -   -   -  -  -  -  S  P  P - -  -
   Bar/brew pub                                                   -   -   -   -  -  -  -  S  S  - - -  -
   Convenience store                                              -   -   -   -  -  -  -  P  P  - - -  -
   Mobile food services (base of operations)                      -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  -  P - -  -
   Restaurant, full service                                       -   -   -   -  -  -  -  P  P  - - -  -
   Restaurant, limited service (cafeteria)                        -   -   -   -  -  -  -  P  P  - - -  -
   Studio, physical activity and hobbies                          -   -   -   -  -  -  -  P  P  - - -  -
Personal Services
   Body art establishment                                         -   -   -   -  -  -  -  S  S  - - -  -
   Funeral home                                                   -   -   -   -  -  -  -  P  P  - - -  -
   Massage therapy establishment                                  -   -   -   -  -  -  -  S  S  - - -  -
   Personal services establishment                                -   -   -   -  -  -  -  P  P  - - -  -
   Physical therapy establishment                                 -   -   -   -  -  -  -  S  S  - - -  -
Pet and Animal Services
   Animal hospital or veterinarian                                -   -   -   -  -  -  -  P  P  P - P  -
   Animal kennel, commercial                                      -   -   -   -  -  -  -  S  S  S - P  -
   Animal shelter                                                 -   -   -   -  -  -  -  S  S  S - P  -
MANUFACTURING
   Industrial, light                                              -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  -  P - -  -
   Industrial design                                              -   -   -   -  -  -  -  P  P  P - -  -
   Self-storage facility                                          -   -   -   -  -  -  -  P  P  P - -  -
TRANSPORTATION /LOGISTICS / CONSTRUCTION
   Airport                                                        -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  -  - S S  -
   Contractor office with equipment                               -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  -  - - -  -
   Contractor/storage yard                                        -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  -  - - -  -
   Parking lot (principal)                                        -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  -  - - -  -
   Truck and transportation facility                              -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  -  S - S  -
   Warehouse                                                      -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  -  S - -  -
COMMUNICATIONS
   Broadcasting facility (TV/radio)                               -   -   -   -  -  -  -  S  S  S S S  S
   Wireless communications facilities                             -   -   -   -  -  -  -  S  S  S S S  S
UTILITIES
   Energy systems--principal use                                  -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  -  S S S  -
   Utilities                                                      S   S   S   S  S  S  S  S  S  S S S  S
ARTS, ENTERTAINMENT, RECREATION AND OPEN SPACE
   Amusement arcade                                               -   -   -   -  -  -  -  P  P  - - -  -
   Amusement facility, outdoor                                    -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  -  S - -  -
   Campground                                                     -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  -  - - -  S
   Cemetery                                                       -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  -  - - -  S
   Community garden                                               P   P   P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P - -  P
   Fitness, recreational sports, gym, or athletic club, 10,000 SF -   -   -   -  -  -  -  P  P  - - -  -
GFA or less
   Fitness, recreational sports, gym, or athletic club, more than -   -   -   -  -  -  -  S  S  S - -  -
10,000 SF GFA
   Gaming (gambling) parlor                                       -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  -  - - -  -
   Golf course/driving range                                      -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  -  - - S  S
   Museum, cultural facility                                      -   -   -   -  -  -  -  P  P  P P P  P
   Nature preserve                                                P   P   P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P P P  P
   Park                                                           P   P   P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P P P  P
   Performing arts establishment                                  -   -   -   -  -  -  -  P  P  - - -  -
   Private club or lodge                                          -   -   -   -  -  -  -  S  S  S - S  S
   Sports team or club facilities                                 -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  -  S - -  S
EDUCATION, PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, HEALTH CARE, AND OTHER INSTITUTIONAL USES
   Adult education services                                       -   -   -   -  -  -  -  S  S  S - -  -
   Community center                                               -   -   -   -  -  -  -  P  P  - - -  S
   Day care center                                                -   -   -   -  -  -  -  P  P  - - -  -
   Day care home                                                  P   P   P   P  P  P  P  -  -  - - -  -
   Health care facility                                           -   -   -   -  -  -  -  P  P  P - -  -
   Hospital                                                       -   -   -   -  -  -  -  S  S  S - -
   Medical clinic/dental clinic                                   -   -   -   -  -  -  -  P  P  P - -  -
   Pre-school                                                     -   -   -   -  -  -  -  P  P  - - -  -
   Public administration                                          P   P   P   P  P  P  P  P  P  P P P  P
   Public safety facility                                         S   S   S   S  S  S  S  P  P  P P P  P
   Public works facility                                          S   S   S   S  S  S  S  P  P  P P P  P
   Religious institutions                                         S   S   S   S  S  S  S  S  S  S - -  -
   Research and development                                       -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  -  P - -  -
   School, alternate education services                           S   S   S   S  S  S  S  S  S  S - -  -
   School, college or university                                  S   S   S   S  S  S  S  S  S  S - -  -
   School, elementary or secondary                                S   S   S   S  S  S  S  S  S  S - -  -
   School, trade or vocational                                    S   S   S   S  S  S  S  S  S  S - -  -
   Urgent care center                                             -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  S  S - -  -
AGRICULTURE
   Agricultural support services                                  -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  -  P - P  -
   Crop or animal production                                      -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  -  - P P  -
   Equine boarding facility                                       -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  -  - P P  -
   Farm stand                                                     P   P   P   -  -  -  -  -  -  - P P  S
   Green house/nursery                                            -   -   -   -  -  -  -  -  P  - P P  -
 
(Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-7-2:   PRINCIPAL USE STANDARDS:
   A.   Animal Care Facilities, Animal Kennels (Commercial), and Animal
Shelters.
      1.   Exterior exercise areas must be located to the interior side or rear
of the principal building on the lot. Exterior exercise areas must provide
covered areas over a minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the exterior area
to provide shelter against weather.
      2.   All animal quarters and exterior exercise areas must be kept in a
clean, dry, and sanitary condition.
      3.   All animal overnight boarding facilities must be located indoors.
   B.   Auto Body and Auto Repair Shops.
      1.   All repair operations must be performed within a fully enclosed
building. All equipment and parts must be stored indoors. Any vehicles awaiting
repair must be stored so that no fluids will drain and cause contamination.
      2.   Auto body and auto repair establishments that abut a residential
district must be screened along interior side and rear lot lines with a wall or
privacy fence, a minimum of six feet and a maximum of seven feet in height.
      3.   No partially dismantled, wrecked, junked, or discarded vehicles, or
vehicles that sit on one or more flat tires or are inoperable in any manner may
be stored outdoors on the premises. This standard does not apply to vehicles
under repair.
   C.   Bed and Breakfast Establishments.
      1.   The owner of a bed and breakfast must reside in and continue to
reside in the dwelling as a principal residence and must be occupying the
dwelling unit for the duration of time other visitors are accommodated.
      2.   Bed and breakfasts are allowed only within single-family dwellings.
      3.   Bed and breakfasts must not generate a significant increase in
pedestrian or vehicular traffic within the residential district in which it is
located.
      4.   Bed and breakfasts must not change the character of the single-
family dwelling unit or adversely affect the character of the neighborhood or
the enjoyment of adjacent properties.
      5.   No more than one (1) person who is not a principal resident of the
dwelling may be an employee at the dwelling site at any one time. The term
employee does not apply to contractors providing short-term temporary services,
such as repairs or landscaping.
   D.   Community Gardens.
      1.   Community gardens are limited to the cultivation of herbs, fruits,
flowers, or vegetables, including the cultivation and tillage of soil and the
production, cultivation, growing, and harvesting of any agricultural,
floricultural, or horticultural commodity. It may also include community-
gathering spaces for active or passive recreation but playground equipment is
prohibited.
      2.   Greenhouses, including high tunnels/hoop-houses, cold-frames, and
similar structures, are permitted to extend the growing season. Accessory
structures such as sheds, gazebos, and pergolas are also permitted.
   E.   Community Residences. Community residences must meet all federal,
state, and local requirements including, but not limited to, licensing, health,
safety, and building code requirements. The facility must retain a residential
character, which is compatible with the surrounding residential neighborhood.
   F.   Day Care Centers and Day Care Homes.
      1.   Each day care must comply with all applicable state and federal
regulations. The operator of a day care must be licensed by the state.
      2.   A day care home must maintain its original appearance as a
residential dwelling.
      3.   A day care center must provide a pickup/drop off area. When a day
care center is part of a multi-tenant retail center, the pickup/drop off area
must not interfere with vehicle circulation in the parking lot, including
blocking of the drive aisle.
   G.   Drive-Through Facilities.
      1.   All drive-through facilities must provide a minimum of three
stacking spaces per lane or bay, unless additional stacking spaces are
specifically required by this title. Stacking spaces provided for drive-through
uses must be:
         a.   A minimum of nine feet (9') in width, as measured from the
outermost point of any service window or bay entrance, to the edge of the
driveway, and eighteen feet (18') in length. In the case of a recessed service
window, the measurement must be taken from the building wall.
         b.   Stacking spaces must begin behind the vehicle parked at a final
point of service exiting the drive-through aisle, such as a service window or
car wash bay (this does not include a menu board). Spaces must be placed in a
single line behind each lane or bay.
         c.   All drive-through lanes must be located and designed to ensure
that they do not adversely affect traffic circulation on adjoining streets.
Drive-through lanes on corner lots must not route exiting traffic into adjacent
residential neighborhoods.
         d.   Drive-through facilities must be screened along the interior side
and rear lot lines with a wall or privacy fence, a minimum of six feet (6') and
a maximum of seven feet (7') in height. One shrub a minimum of three feet (3')
in height at time of planting must be planted linearly every three feet (3')
on-center along such fence or wall. This standard does not apply to drive-
through facilities within multi-tenant retail centers.
         e.   A drive through lane must have bail out capability for all
vehicles that enter the drive through lane. The bail out lane must be a minimum
width of ten feet (10') in width and run parallel to the drive through lane. If
a bail out lane is also an interior access drive providing access to parking
spaces, the bail out lane is limited to a one-way traffic pattern following the
direction of the drive through lane.
   H.   Dwelling Units in Farming District. Single-family dwellings are allowed
in the Farming District provided at least one of the following conditions is
met:
      1.   The single-family dwelling was an existing residential structure on
December 11, 1979. In no case will the area of the lot be reduced after
December 11, 1979, unless done in compliance with this title.
      2.   The land on which the single-family dwelling is proposed is a parcel
of land recorded with this County Recorder of Deeds prior to December 11, 1979,
whether the recording is by a deed or deeds, or by a contract to purchase or
memorandum of purchase on which there is a detailed legal description, provided
the parcel contains a minimum of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet and at
least seventy-five feet (75') in width, and that all other zoning, waste water
disposal and building ordinance requirements are complied with.
      3.   The single-family dwelling is located on a parcel of no less than
fifteen (15) acres in area and the parcel has been recorded with the Kane
County Recorder between December 11, 1979 and 12:00 o'clock noon (CDT),
September 8, 1992.
   I.   Energy Systems (Principal Use).
      1.   Solar Energy Systems. The following provisions apply to solar energy
systems:
         a.   Systems, equipment, and structures are limited to the maximum
height of the district.
         b.   All solar farm structures must meet the district setbacks.
         c.   No grid-tied photovoltaic system must be installed until evidence
has been provided that it has been approved by the utility company to install
the system.
         d.   The facility owner and operator must, at their sole expense,
complete decommissioning of the solar farm within one year after the end of the
useful life of the solar farm. The solar farm is deemed to be at the end of its
useful life if it is abandoned for a period for one hundred eighty (180) days
or more.
      2.   Wind Turbines. The following provisions apply to wind turbines:
         a.   Wind turbines must comply with the following design standards:
            (1)   Wind turbines must be a non-obtrusive and non-reflective
color. The facility owner or operator must maintain the paint on wind turbines
at all times in good repair.
            (2)   Wind turbines must not display advertising, except for
reasonable identification of the turbine manufacturer, or the facility owner
and operator.
            (3)   Wind turbines must not be artificially lit, except to the
extent required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other applicable
regulatory authorities.
            (4)   On-site transmission and power lines between wind turbines
must, to the maximum extent practicable, be placed underground, reach the
property line, and be located and constructed in such a way as to minimize
disruption to the property's primary purpose as well as to facilitate the
interconnection of other commercial wind power generating facilities.
            (5)   Non-essential appurtenances are prohibited to be affixed to
any wind turbine, including, but not limited to, cellular or radio antennae.
            (6)   A clearly visible warning sign advising people of the
presence of high voltage levels must be placed at the base of all pad-mounted
transformers and substations.
         b.   The applicant must commission and submit at the time of permit
application a wildlife assessment (impact study), conducted by a qualified
wildlife expert having no less than ten years of experience conducting wildlife
assessments, indicating possible risks to local wildlife, habitat, and
migratory birds. Additionally, the applicant's wildlife expert must also
develop a mitigation plan, if applicable, that addresses/mitigates any risk to
wildlife, migratory birds, and affiliated habitat. All wind turbines at time of
application must be located outside of bird and bat migration pathways/
corridors where wind turbine construction would pose a substantial risk.
         c.   Wind turbines must not be climbable up to a height of at least
fifteen feet (15') above ground surface. All access doors to wind turbines and
electrical equipment must be locked or fenced, as appropriate, to prevent entry
by non-authorized persons.
         d.   Wind turbines must be set back from all surrounding buildings at
the date of installation a distance of no less than the turbine height. The
setback distance is measured from the nearest point on the outside edge of a
tower to the nearest point on the foundation of the building. Turbine height is
measured from the base of the tower to tip of a prop at maximum vertical
rotation.
         e.   All wind turbines must be set back from the nearest public right-
of-way a distance of one hundred ten percent (110%) of the turbine height, as
measured from the right-of-way line to the nearest point on the outside edge of
a tower. Turbine height is measured from the base of the tower to tip of a prop
at maximum vertical rotation.
         f.   The facility owner or operator must comply with all applicable
codes and codes regulating sound generation. In the event that any sound levels
from a wind turbine are found to be in excess of permissible levels, the
facility owner or operator must take necessary measures to bring sound levels
down to a level acceptable.
         g.   A wind turbine’s shadow flicker must not fall on any window of an
existing structure or within the buildable area of an adjacent lot, as defined
by current setback requirements at the time of installation.
         h.   The facility owner and operator must, at their sole expense,
complete decommissioning of the wind energy system, or individual wind
turbines, within one year after the end of the useful life of the wind energy
system or individual wind turbines. The wind turbine must be deemed to be at
the end of its useful life if it is abandoned for a period of time in excess of
one hundred eighty (180) days. Decommissioning includes removal of wind
turbines, structures, roads and foundations to a depth of four feet (4'), and
any other element constructed by facility owner or operator for the purpose of
maintaining or operating the wind energy system.
   J.   Farmstands. Farmstands are permitted and are limited to sales of items
grown at the site. Farmstands must be removed from the premises or stored
inside a structure on the premises during that time of the year when the use is
not open to the public. Only one farmstand is permitted per lot.
   K.   Gas Stations. The following provisions apply to gas stations:
      1.   All gas station driveways must be located and designed to ensure
that they will not adversely affect the safety and efficiency of traffic
circulation on adjoining streets.
      2.   All structures and pump islands must be set back a minimum of twenty
(20) feet from the interior side and rear lot lines. Structures are exempt from
any build-to lines required by the district.
      3.   The volume on any audio component must be maintained at a level so
as not to be audible in adjoining properties. The volume on any audio component
must comply with all local noise regulations. Audio components are permitted
only on the gas station pump. Audio components are prohibited as part of any
other structure, including canopies and buildings.
   L.   Private Club or Lodges. The following provisions apply to private clubs
or lodges:
      1.   No more than thirty percent of the gross floor area may be used as
office space.
      2.   Sleeping facilities are prohibited.
      3.   Private clubs and lodges leased or used as reception/banquet halls
must comply with the requirements for reception/banquet halls.
   M.   Reception/Banquet Facilities. A reception/banquet facility may include
outdoor areas for the use of guests.
   N.   Short-Term Rentals. Short-term rentals, either as a primary or
accessory use, are prohibited in all zoning districts.
   O.   Wireless Telecommunications Facilities.
      1.   Applications. All applications to erect, construct, or modify any
part of a wireless telecommunications system require site plan review must
include the following items:
         a.   A site plan showing:
            (1)   The location, size, screening, and design of all structures,
including fences.
            (2)   The location and size of all outdoor equipment.
            (3)   Elevations showing antenna height.
            (4)   If the site plan is for a new wireless telecommunications
facility, a landscape plan showing all screening.
            (5)   If the site plan is for a new wireless telecommunications
tower, indication of the fall zone as a shaded circle.
         b.   A maintenance plan and any applicable maintenance agreement
designed to ensure long-term, continuous maintenance, such as maintenance of
landscape, keeping the area free from debris and litter, and immediate removal
of any graffiti.
         c.   A disclosure of what is proposed, demonstrating the need for the
wireless telecommunications system in the proposed location.
         d.   The reason or purpose for the placement, construction, or
modification in the proposed location with specific reference to the provider’s
coverage, capacity, and/or quality needs, goals, and objectives. This is not
required if the proposal does not involve the erection of a new tower.
         e.   The service area of the proposed wireless telecommunications
system.
         f.   If the proposal is for a new telecommunications tower, then a map
showing collocation opportunities within the Village and within areas
surrounding the borders of the Village must be provided and justification for
why co-location is not feasible in order to demonstrate the need for a new
tower.
         g.   If the proposal is for a new telecommunications tower,
certification by a licensed and registered professional engineer regarding the
manner in which the proposed structure will fail. The certification may be
utilized, along with other criteria such as applicable regulations for the
district in question, in determining if additional setback should be required
for the structure and other facilities.
      2.   Height. The maximum height of a wireless telecommunications tower is
the minimum needed to function satisfactorily. The application for approval of
a wireless telecommunications tower must demonstrate the minimum height needed
for the tower to function, which will be reviewed and approved as part of site
plan review. The Village has the ability to hire an independent consultant to
assist in reviewing the proposed height, whose fee will be charged to the
applicant.
      3.   Lighting and Marking. Wireless telecommunications systems must not
be lit or marked unless required by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
or the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
      4.   Specific Standards for Wireless Telecommunications Antennae. All
applications for wireless telecommunications antennas must include all
information required by this section.
      5.   Specific Standards for Wireless Telecommunications Towers.
         a.   The use of guyed towers is prohibited. Towers must be monopoles,
meaning self-supporting with no wires, cables, or beams.
         b.   Unless otherwise required by the Federal Communications
Commission, the Federal Aviation Administration or the Village, towers must
have a galvanized silver or gray finish.
      6.   Specific Standards for Distributed Antenna Systems (DAS).
         a.   If a distributed antenna system (DAS) is installed and entirely
enclosed within a principal building, the requirements of this title do not
apply.
         b.   All equipment related to a distributed antenna system must be
mounted/co-located on existing poles or other existing structures unless it can
be shown that an alternate location will be less obtrusive and/or more
beneficial to the public. The design of any new pole requested requires special
use approval.
         c.   An applicant seeking installation of a distributed antenna system
must demonstrate that it has made efforts to blend or camouflage the system
with existing facilities and surroundings or has otherwise screened or
concealed the system from view. Approved blending methods include, but are not
limited to, location of equipment other than antennas within a tree canopy or
other inconspicuous location, use of green, brown or other colored equipment
(if commercially available to the applicant) designed to mimic the colors and/
or materials of the tree canopy, co-location structure or other nearby
structures, as well as use of textures and shapes as appropriate, all with the
intent of minimizing the visual impact of the system. Unnatural colors and
exposed cables are prohibited.
         d.   All pole-mounted distributed antenna systems must be installed at
a minimum height of nine feet (9') above the ground. Equipment may be housed in
a cabinet at ground level only with the approval of the Village as to location
and with appropriate screening.
         e.   Distributed antenna systems may not extend more than seven feet
(7') above the height of the existing pole or other structure on which it is
installed.
         f.   Where distributed antenna systems are placed in residential
districts, every effort must be made to avoid placement at right of way
locations directly in front of a residence. If placement directly in front of a
residence is necessary for technological reasons, the Village has the right to
require screening or impose other design mitigation requirements.
         g.   The Village may request that a particular node or nodes be placed
in an alternative location to that proposed by the applicant. Where a request
for an alternative location is unable to be accommodated by an applicant, the
applicant must supply an explanation in writing as to why the suggested
alternative location will materially compromise the functioning of the system
or is otherwise impractical.
      7.   Abandonment. Any wireless telecommunications system that is not
operated for a period of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days is
considered abandoned. The owner must immediately remove the tower or facility,
and all aboveground equipment and related debris. The Village may ensure and
enforce removal by means of its existing regulatory authority. (Ord. O-24-22,
12-3-2024)
CHAPTER 8
ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
SECTION:
10-8-1:    General Requirements
10-8-2:    Accessory Structures And Uses
10-8-3:    Accessory Dwelling Units
10-8-4:    Barns And Silos
10-8-5:    Fences And Walls
10-8-6:    Home-Based Businesses
10-8-7:    Outdoor Activities
10-8-8:    Renewable Energy Structures And Uses
10-8-9:    Communication Equipment
10-8-10: Other Accessory Structures And Uses
10-8-1:   GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Number of structures on a lot. On lots used for single-family dwellings
there shall be only one (1) principal building per lot. This does not include
permitted accessory structures, or agricultural structures. In all other
instances, more than one principal building is permitted on a lot, provided
that the lot complies with all dimensional standards of the district.
   B.   Applicability of required setbacks. No lot may be reduced in area so
that the yards are less than required by this title or a PUD ordinance. The
required setbacks for a lot cannot be considered a setback for any other lot.
No principal building or accessory structure shall be located in a required
setback unless specifically permitted by this title or unless a variance is
approved.
   C.   Applicability of bulk requirements. All structures must meet the
dimensional requirements of the zoning district in which the structure is
located. No existing structure may be enlarged, altered, reconstructed, or
relocated in such a manner that conflicts with the requirements of the district
in which the structure it is located unless a variance is approved.
   D.   Sight triangle. All structures, including signs, mailboxes, a privacy
fence or wall, and all plantings are limited to a maximum height of thirty
inches within the sight triangle, which is a triangular area of twenty-five
feet (25') from the point of intersection of the two (2) street curb lines
forming such corner lot. A non-privacy fence that complies with all fence
requirements that does not impair the sight triangle is permitted. US Postal
Service guidelines and regulations for the placement and height of mailboxes
shall take precedence over the provisions of this Article. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-
2024)
10-8-2:   ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES:
   A.   Location, height and other standards for accessory structures. Location
of accessory structures and uses in yards is governed by Table 8-1 of this
Article. Table 8-1 also provides setback and height restrictions for accessory
structures, as well as additional restrictions or guidance for certain
structures. Unless otherwise noted in Table 8-1 or elsewhere in this title, the
following restrictions apply to all accessory structures:
      1.   Accessory buildings, structures, and uses shall be compatible with
the principal use and shall not be established or erected prior to the
establishment or construction of the principal structure or use.
      2.   The maximum height of any detached accessory structure is twenty
feet (20') or the height of the principal structure, whichever is less, unless
otherwise permitted or restricted by this title.
      3.   The aggregate square footage of all accessory structures with roofs
shall be limited as follows:
         a.   Two percent (2%) of the lot square footage on lots four (4) acres
or greater in area;
         b.   Two-and-a-half percent (2.5%) of the lot square footage on lots
less than four (4) acres but equal to or greater than two (2) acres.
         c.   Three percent (3%) of the lot square footage on lots less than
two (2) acres.
      4.   Accessory structures must be at least ten feet (10') from any lot
line, unless otherwise permitted or restricted by this title, with the
exception of the R-4 District, where accessory structures must be at least five
feet (5') from any lot line, unless otherwise permitted or restricted by this
title.
      5.   No accessory structures, with the exception of fences, shall be
located on any utility, drainage, or access easement. If an accessory structure
is located on a utility easement and repair or replacement of the utility is
needed, the cost of removing the accessory building is the responsibility of
the owner of the structure. Neither the Village, other local government entity,
or the utility company is responsible for the repair or replacement of such
structure.
      6.   Additionally, all principal and accessory structures on a lot are
still subject to maximum building coverage and maximum impervious surface
regulations. See Chapter 6,
Tables 6-1  and
6-2 .
Table 8-1. Permitted Accessory Structures and Obstructions in Yards
Structure and Additional Rules Yard
                               Front Rear Side Corner Side
Table 8-1. Permitted Accessory Structures and Obstructions in Yards
Structure and Additional Rules                      Yard
                                                    Front Rear Side Corner Side
Arbor
Accessibility ramps                                 P     P    P    P
Air conditioner units and equipment, other than
window installed, provided they are at least four   P     P    P    P
feet from any lot line.
Antenna, dish, pole, or tower, provided they are at
least five feet from any property line, and if      -     P    P    P
mounted on a structure are on the roof or rear of
the structure.
Awning and canopies, provided they are at least
seven feet above grade. In R districts they shall   P     P    P    P
be at least five feet from any lot line.
Barns, pole barns, silos and other farm buildings,
subject to regulations in Section                   -     P    P    P
10-8-4 of this Article.
Bay window. The location of bay windows must meet   P     P    P    P
minimum yard requirements. See "Oriel" below.
Canopy                                              P     P    P    P
Chicken coop and run, provided they are a minimum   -     P    -    -
of 15 feet from any lot line.
Chimney, attached, provided project not more than
two feet into a yard and are at least three feet    P     P    P    P
from any lot line.
Compost bins                                              P    P    P
Decks, provided they are a minimum of fifteen feet  -     P    -    -
from all lot lines
Fences, see Section
10-8-5 of this Article.
Garages, detached                                   -     P    P    P
Gazebos                                             -     P    -    P
Greenhouses                                         -     P    -    -
Oriels, provided they protrude a maximum of four    P     P    P    P
feet into a yard.
Patios                                              -     P    P    P
Pergola                                             -     P    P    -
Personal recreation game court                      -     P    -    -
Playground equipment, including tree houses         P     P    P    P
Porch, unenclosed                                   P     -    -    P
Porte Cochere                                       -     P    P    P
Shed                                                -     P    -    -
Sidewalk                                            P     P    P    P
Stables, paddock and other animal enclosures not
otherwise regulated, and subject to restrictions    -     P    -    -
found in Chapter 10, Keeping of Animals
Steps or stoop                                      P     P    P    P
Trellis                                             -     P    P    P
 
(Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-8-3:   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS:
An Accessory Dwelling Unit (“ADU”) DUs may be established in conjunction with a
single-family residence in any R or F zoning district, subject to the
provisions of this Section
10-8-3 .
   A.   Limit. Only one (1) ADU per zoning lot shall be permitted.
   B.   Attached ADUs. ADUs attached to the principal dwelling unit are
permitted only under the following circumstances and situations:
      1.   The ADU may be internal to the existing principal dwelling unit and
created from existing floor area with no enlargement of the primary dwelling
unit’s building footprint, such as in an attic, basement, storage space, garage
space.
      2.   The ADU may be an addition to the primary dwelling unit, provided
that:
         a.   The exterior material on the addition matches the exterior of the
existing primary dwelling unit; and
         b.   The ADU and existing primary dwelling unit share a wall at least
twenty feet (20') in length.
      3.   The height any addition or build-out for an attached ADU shall be
subject to unit to the height and floor area ratio limits of the subject zoning
district.
      4.   ADUs shall have direct access to the outside, that is, access to the
unit cannot be solely from or through the primary residence.
   C.   Restrictions on residency. ADUs are limited to the use of family
members of the principal structure. Once established, the accessory unit cannot
be used, rented, or sold as a separate dwelling unit. This restriction must be
recorded against the property with the Kane County Recorder of Deeds. A copy of
such recording must be provided to the Village.
   D.   Utility metering. Separate utility reading meters for the accessory
unit are not permitted. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-8-4:   BARNS AND SILOS:
   A.   Importance. Barns and silos are important features in the landscape of
Campton Hills and the surrounding area. Some are still in active agricultural
use, but others are vacant or serve other purposes. Regardless of current use,
these structures contribute to the unique sense of place and hark back to the
Village’s rural roots and cultural and historical heritage.
   B.   Nonconforming status. Because of their importance as described in
Paragraph A. above, barns and silos established prior to the effective date of
this title, as defined by this title, regardless of zoning district or
placement on a lot, are considered conforming structures. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-
2024)
10-8-5:   FENCES AND WALLS:
   A.   General rules. The following provisions are applicable to fences and
walls in all zoning districts:
      1.   Height shall be measured from the adjacent ground to the highest
point, except that decorative posts of a fence or wall may exceed the maximum
height by six inches (6").
      2.   When additional fence and wall requirements are found in the use
standards of Chapter 7 or the landscape standards of Chapter 10, such
requirements control.
      3.   There is no setback requirement for fences.
      4.   All fences shall be erected or installed so that the finished side
faces outward, the posts or other supporting materials face the interior of the
lot on which the fence is installed.
      5.   All fences shall be of rigid materials.
      6.   Private fences are prohibited within the public right-of-way.
      7.   Fences or walls shall not interfere with drainage easements or
impede the natural flow of water on a lot or across lots, unless expressly
approved by the Village Engineer.
      8.   Fences and walls shall comply with sight triangle restrictions found
in Section
10-8-1  of this Article.
      9.   The following materials are prohibited in the construction of fences
and walls:
         a.   Scrap metal.
         b.   Corrugated metal.
         c.   Sheet metal.
         d.   Spiked posts, which means sharpened ends of fence posts that can
cause physical damage to persons and animals.
         e.   Electrical fences, with the exception of enclosures used for
animal husbandry.
         f.   Razor wire.
         g.   Barbed wire, unless otherwise allowed by the provisions of this
Section.
         h.   Chicken wire, except:
            (1)   As used in F and FB zoning districts; and
            (2)   As used for enclosures for poultry or small animals; and as
used for protection and/or enclosure of gardens or small trees and shrubs from
animals.
         i.   Chain link unless otherwise allowed by the provision of this
Section. Slats in chain link fencing are prohibited in all zoning districts and
uses.
   B.   Exempt fences. The following fences are exempt from the provisions of
this Article, except for the provisions regarding drainage and the flow of
water in Paragraph
10-8-4  A.7 above:
      1.   Temporary fences for the purposes of crowd control and security at
special events; and
      2.   Fences for recreational purposes on county, township, park district
or school district property; and
      3.   Fences for safety established in or near public rights of way by
state, county or local governmental agencies.
      4.   Notwithstanding the provisions on prohibited materials, temporary
fences used during construction activities, such as silt fences and security
fences; and
      5.   Fences for security at a public safety, telecommunications or public
utility site.
   C.   Fences and walls in residential zoning districts. The following
provisions apply to fences and walls in all residential zoning districts.
      1.   Non-privacy fences are permitted in front and corner side yards up
to a maximum height of fifty-two inches (52").
      2.   Fences of any non-prohibited material are permitted in rear and side
yards up to a maximum height of six feet (6').
   D.   Fences and walls in F and FB zoning districts. The following provisions
apply to fences and walls in F and FB zoning districts:
      1.   In front and corner side yards a non-privacy fence is permitted up
to a maximum height of five feet (5'). In all other yards in the F and FB
zoning districts fence or wall of any type is permitted up to a maximum height
of eight feet (8').
      2.   Chain-link fences are permitted, except in front yards.
      3.   Barbed wire fences for the enclosure of livestock are permitted.
   E.   Fences and walls in other zoning districts. The following provisions
apply to fences and walls in all zoning districts other than residential and F
and FB districts.
      1.   Chain link fencing is permitted, but only in yard areas located
beyond front façade building line.
      2.   In the front and corner side yards, a non-privacy fence is permitted
up to a maximum height of fifty-two inches (52"). In all other yards, a fence
or wall of any permitted type is allowed up to a maximum height of eight feet
(8').
10-8-6:   HOME-BASED BUSINESSES:
   A.   Purpose and applicability. The standards and limitations for home
businesses are intended to ensure compatibility with other permitted uses in
the zoning district where they are found, maintain the residential character of
surrounding areas, and limit adverse impacts on surrounding residents. The
provisions of this Section apply to all residential zoning districts and
residential land uses.
   B.   Limitations on home-based businesses.
      1.   Home-based businesses shall be conducted only by residents of the
subject property. The resident may employee up to one (1) non-family members to
assist in business operations.
      2.   The location of home occupations shall be limited to any dwelling
unit or any building or structure that is accessory to the dwelling unit in any
zoning district in which dwelling units are permitted. Outside storage,
display, or use of land is prohibited. The building in which the home
occupation is located shall be subject to the regulations of the zoning
district in which it is located.
      3.   No toxic, explosive, flammable, combustible, corrosive, etiologic,
radioactive, or other restricted materials, beyond types and quantities typical
of for residential use, shall be used or stored on the site.
      4.   The home-based business shall not create greater vehicular or
pedestrian traffic than normal for a residential area. The delivery and sending
of any packages shall be done by parcel or letter carrier mail services using
vehicles typically employed in residential areas. The home-based business and
any related activity must not create any traffic hazards or nuisances in public
rights-of-way.
      5.   Alterations to the residence that would impact the residential
character of the dwelling are prohibited.
      6.   The home occupation shall not generate noise, vibration, glare,
fumes, odors, electrical interference, or garbage beyond which normally occurs
in the zoning district or planned unit development in which the home occupation
is located business is located in excess of that normally associated with
residential use.
      7.   Use or storage of tractor trailers, semi-trucks, box trucks or heavy
equipment, such as construction equipment used in a commercial business, is
prohibited.
   C.   Prohibited activities. The following activities, by their very nature,
are deemed to be incompatible with residential areas and are expressly
prohibited for home business:
      1.   Animal hospitals, animal shelters and kennels (animal grooming
services are permitted);
      2.   Medical and dental clinics;
      3.   Eating and drinking establishments;
      4.   Repair, maintenance, or painting of motor vehicles, to include
motorcycles, snow mobiles, trucks, and heavy equipment.
   D.   Permitted home businesses. This title does not attempt to define or
list all permitted home businesses. However, the following activities and uses
are expressly permitted, provided that the other provisions of this chapter are
met:
      1.   Barber/beauty shop;
      2.   Animal grooming service;
      3.   Baby-sitting services and day care activities that do not met state
law thresholds for licensing and regulations;
      4.   State-licensed day care homes;
      5.   Instruction in music, dance, home crafts and arts, provided that the
total class size does not exceed four students at any time;
      6.   Offices of architects, brokers, engineers, insurance agents,
lawyers, real estate agents, urban planners, landscape architects, accountants,
mental health practitioners, and secretarial services;
      7.   Offices of ministers, priests, rabbis, or other leaders of religious
congregations;
      8.   Workrooms of dressmakers, seamstresses, and tailors; and
      9.   Workroom for home crafts, such as model making, rug weaving, or
cabinet making providing noise levels and other nuisances are not above what
normally occurs in the zoning district. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-8-7:   OUTDOOR ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Applicability. The provisions of this Section apply to commercial
zoning districts and commercial land uses.
   B.   Outdoor operations.
      1.   Outdoor operations. All commercial activities must be conducted
within completely enclosed buildings unless otherwise expressly allowed by this
title. This requirement does not apply to agriculture, automated teller
machines, off-street parking or loading, or drive through operations as
otherwise permitted by this title. This provision also does not apply to
activities in conjunction with special events or promotions as allowed by the
Village.
      2.   Outdoor dining and drinking. Outdoor dining and drinking areas on
public property, a public right of way, or private property may be allowed as
an accessory use, upon compliance with the any Village licensing requirements
for outdoor dining/sidewalk cafes that the Village may establish.
   C.   Outdoor sales and display. Outdoor sales display and/or storage is
prohibited except as follows:
      1.   Seasonal outdoor storage as defined by this title, provided that the
storage includes a temporary structure, the provisions of 17.06.150 are met;
      2.   Temporary sidewalk displays that are licensed by the Village and are
removed from the sidewalk at the end of each business day;
      3.   Items displayed under a permanent overhead structure such as an
arcade or canopy. For this provision, awnings and extended eaves do not
constitute a “permanent overhead structure;”
      4.   On-site display and/or storage of products at establishments
      5.   With a primary use of:
         a.   Auto/light truck sales and service;
         b.   Boat/RV sales and service;
         c.   Heavy equipment sales and service;
         d.   Motorcycle sales and service;
         e.   Flea market or farmer’s market;
         f.   Garden center;
         g.   Landscaping/nursery provided mulch, either piled or in bags, is
screened;
         h.   Lumberyard;
         i.   Freight transportation terminal; or
         j.   Hardware store/home improvement center when limited to seasonal
items and lumber. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-8-8:   RENEWABLE ENERGY STRUCTURES AND USES:
   A.   Electric vehicle (EV) charging.
      1.   EV chargers are permitted as an accessory use within any parking
lot, parking structure, or gas station in all zoning districts.
      2.   Electric charging station equipment shall not block the public
right-of-way.
      3.   Each public charging station space must be posted with a sign
indicating the space is only for electric vehicle charging purposes.
Information identifying voltage and amperage levels, or safety information must
be posted.
      4.   Charging station equipment must be maintained in good condition and
all equipment must be functional. Charging stations no longer in use must be
immediately removed.
   B.   Solar panels.
      1.   General Requirements.
         a.   A solar panel may be building-mounted or freestanding.
         b   Solar panels must be placed so that concentrated solar radiation
or glare is not directed onto nearby properties or roadways.
      2.   Building-Mounted Solar Systems.
         a.   A building-mounted system may be mounted on the roof or wall of a
principal building or accessory structure.
         b.   On pitched roof buildings, the maximum height a roof-mounted
solar panel may rise is eighteen inches (18").
         c.   On flat roofed buildings, the roof-mounted solar panel system is
limited to a maximum height of six feet (6') above the surface of the roof.
Roof-mounted solar energy systems are excluded from the calculation of building
height.
         d.   Building-mounted solar panels may project up to three feet from a
building façade and must be integrated into the structure as an architectural
feature.
      3.   Freestanding Systems.
         a.   A freestanding system is permitted only in the interior side and
rear yard.
         b.   The maximum height of a freestanding system is eight feet (8').
Freestanding systems are prohibited in the front yard.
      4.   Co-Location. Solar panels may be co-located on structures such as
light poles.
   FIGURE 8-1. SOLAR PANELS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/09fc73b1baa9c9185d886b27aa527b40ba0b85e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1514.png]
 
   C.   Wind turbines.
      1.   Wind turbines may be designed as either vertical or horizontal axis
turbines with or without exposed blades, including designs that combine
elements of the different types of turbines.
      2.   Wind turbines are subject to the following height restrictions:
         a.   The maximum height of any ground-mounted wind turbine is the
maximum height allowed in the district. A taller height may be allowed by
special use.
         b.   The maximum height of any wind turbine mounted upon a structure
is fifteen feet (15') above the height of such structure.
         c.   Maximum height is the total height of the turbine system,
including the tower and the maximum vertical height of the turbine blades.
Maximum height therefore is calculated measuring the length of a prop at
maximum vertical rotation to the base of the tower. The maximum height of any
ground-mounted wind turbine is measured from grade to the length of a prop at
maximum vertical rotation.
         d.   No portion of exposed turbine blades (vertical access wind
turbine) may be within twenty feet (20') of the ground. Unexposed turbine
blades (horizontal access wind turbine) may be within ten feet (10') of the
ground.
      3.   Ground-mounted wind turbines are permitted only in the rear yard. No
part of the wind system structure, including guy wire anchors, may be located
closer than ten feet (10') to any lot line. The tower must be set back from all
lot lines equal to the height of the system. No principal buildings may be
located within this area.
      4.   All wind turbines must be equipped with manual (electronic or
mechanical) and automatic overspeed controls to limit the blade rotation speed
to within the design limits of the wind energy system.
   FIGURE 8-2. WIND TURBINES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/09fc73b1baa9c9185d886b27aa527b40ba0b85e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1516.png]
 
(Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-8-9: COMMUNICATION EQUIPMENT:
   A.   Amateur (ham) radio equipment.
      1.   Towers that solely support amateur (ham) radio equipment are, along
with any supporting structures or wires, permitted only in the rear yard and
must be located a minimum of ten feet (10') from any lot line. Towers are
limited to a maximum height of seventy-five feet (75').
      2.   Antennas may also be building-mounted and are limited to a maximum
height of seventy-five feet (75'), unless a taller antenna is technically
necessary to engage successfully in amateur radio communications and special
use approval is obtained.
      3.   Every effort must be made to install towers or antennas in locations
that are not readily visible from adjacent residential lots or from the public
right-of-way, excluding alleys.
      4.   An antenna or tower that is proposed to exceed the height
limitations may be approved as a zoning variance. The operator must provide
evidence that a taller tower and/or antenna is technically necessary to engage
successfully in amateur radio communications. In addition, the applicant must
provide evidence that the tower and/or antenna will not prove a hazard and that
it conforms to all applicable performance criteria of this Article. As part of
the application, the applicant must submit a site plan showing the proposed
location of the tower or antenna, as well as its relation to the principal
building and accessory structure.
      5.   Any such antennas and/or towers owned and operated by the Village
are exempt from these requirements.
   B.   Satellite dish antennas.
      1.   General Requirements.
         a.   Satellite dish antennas must be permanently installed on a
building, in the ground, or on a foundation, and cannot be mounted on a
portable or movable structure.
         b.   Subject to operational requirements, the dish color must be of a
neutral color, such as white or grey. No additional signs or advertising is
permitted on the satellite dish itself, aside from the logos of the satellite
dish service provider and/or dish manufacturer.
         c.   Cables and lines serving ground-mounted satellite dish antennas
must be located underground.
         d.   Compliance with all federal, state, and local regulations is
required in the construction, installation, and operation of satellite dish
antennas.
         e.   All exposed surfaces of the antenna must be kept clean and all
supports must be painted to maintain a well-kept appearance.
         f.   Antennas no longer in use must be immediately removed.
      2.   Small Satellite Dish Antennas. Small satellite dish antennas, which
are one meter (3.28 feet) or less in diameter, are subject to the general
requirements above.
      3.   Large Satellite Dish Antennas. Large satellite dish antennas, which
are greater than one meter (3.28 feet) in diameter, are subject to the general
requirements above as well as the following requirements:
         a.   Residential Districts.
            (1)   Large satellite dish antennas, which are greater than one
meter (3.28 feet) in diameter, are permitted only in the rear yard, and must be
set back a distance from all lot lines that is at least equal to the height of
the dish, but in no case less than five feet (5') from any lot line.
            (2)   The overall height of a large satellite dish antenna cannot
exceed twelve feet (12').
            (3)   A large satellite dish antenna must be located and screened
so that it cannot be readily seen from public rights-of-way or adjacent
properties. Screening includes privacy fences, plant materials, and/or earth
berms located to conceal the antenna and its support structure. Plants must be
a minimum of five feet (5') tall at the time of installation.
      4.   Non-Residential Districts.
         a.   Large satellite dish antennas are permitted only in the rear yard
and must be set back a distance from all lot lines that is at least equal to
the height of the dish, but in no case less than five feet (5') from any lot
line.
         b.   Roof-mounting is permitted only if the satellite dish antenna is
screened by a permanent architectural feature so that it is not visible from a
point six feet (6') above the ground level from the sidewalk across the street
from the structure and from a point six feet (6') above the ground level from
any required setback line that abuts a residential district or open space.
         c.   A large satellite dish antenna must be located and screened so
that it cannot be readily seen from public rights-of-way or adjacent
properties. Screening includes privacy fences, plant materials, and/or earth
berms located to conceal the antenna and its support structure. Plants must be
a minimum of five feet (5') tall at the time of installation. (Ord. O-24-22,
12-3-2024)
10-8-10:   OTHER ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES:
   A.   Book exchange box.
      1.   Only one (1) book exchange box is allowed per zoning lot.
      2.   No book exchange box may be located so that it impedes pedestrian
access or circulation, obstructs parking areas, or creates an unsafe condition.
Boxes cannot be constructed in a manner that obstructs visibility of
intersections.
      3.   Book exchange boxes are prohibited in the public right of way.
      4.   Each box must be designed and constructed in such a manner that its
contents are protected from the elements. All media must be fully contained
within a weatherproof enclosure that is integral with the structure that
comprises the book exchange box.
      5.   Boxes are permitted only in the front yard or side corner yard and
must be located a minimum of five feet (5') from any lot line.
      6.   Temporary foundations comprised of concrete or masonry pavers or
other similar movable materials may be utilized. Single metal or wooden posts
set in concrete for pedestal mounted boxes or to provide additional stability
to ground mounted boxes are allowed. Permanent concrete slab foundations are
prohibited.
   B.   Carports.
      1.   Carports must be located over a paved surface.
      2.   A carport is permitted in any yard however it may not be located
within the required front setback. A carport must be a minimum of ten feet
(10') from any lot line.
      3.   Carports are limited to a length of twenty-two feet (22'), a width
of twenty-two feet (22'), and a maximum building height of twenty feet (20')
and a maximum eave height of twelve feet (12'). However, no carport shall be
taller than the principal structure upon a lot.
      4.   A carport must be entirely open on at least two (2) sides except for
the necessary supporting columns and customary architectural features.
      5.   A carport must be constructed as a permanent structure. Temporary
tent structures are not considered carports.
   C.   Garage, detached.
      1.   Detached garages are permitted only in the rear, interior side, and
corner side yards.
      2.   Detached garages shall not be constructed in front of the front
building line and must be ten feet (10') from any lot line.
   D.   Mailbox. All mailboxes must adhere to applicable US Postal Service
regulations. Additionally, the following provisions apply.
      1.   Mailboxes may be located in a required setback. There is no minimum
distance from the lot line where it must be located, however it cannot be
located within the required sight triangle of this Article.
      2.   Mailboxes must be of break-away construction, which is a type of
assembly that bends or falls away when struck by a vehicle.
      3.   The use of mailboxes, heavy metal posts, concrete posts, and items
filled with concrete is prohibited.
   E.   Mechanical equipment.
      1.   Ground-mounted equipment.
         a.   Mechanical equipment is prohibited in the front yard. If
mechanical equipment is located in the front yard as of the effective date of
this title, the equipment may remain and may be repaired and maintained unless
it is replaced in its entirety or the principal structure is demolished.
         b.   Mechanical equipment is permitted only in the interior side,
corner side, or rear yards.
      2.   Roof-mounted equipment. Provisions for roof-mounted mechanical
equipment are found under design standards for commercial districts in Chapter
6 of this title.
   F.   Refuse dumpsters. Refuse dumpsters, for the purposes of this section,
include recycling containers of similar size. The temporary use of dumpsters,
e.g. for construction,
      1.   Refuse dumpsters are prohibited in the front or corner side yard,
unless a temporary permit for such placement has been obtained from the
Village. No dumpsters or recycling containers may be kept or stored in any
public right-of-way.
      2.   All dumpsters and recycling containers must be fully enclosed on
three sides by a privacy fence, wall, or wall extension of the principal
building a minimum of six feet (6') and a maximum of eight feet (8') in height.
The enclosure must be gated. Such a gate must be solid and have a minimum
vertical dimension of five feet (5'). This requirement does not apply to refuse
containers located in an alley, or to dumpsters for which a temporary permit
has been obtained from the Village.
      3.   Dumpsters must not be located so that the disposal area drains
toward a storm drain or off-site. Dumpsters must be covered and are not allowed
to drain freely.
      4.   Existing properties, as of the effective date of this title, whose
dumpsters and recycling containers are not required to be enclosed, are exempt
from this section unless the site is being redeveloped, or the existing
building or parking lot is being expanded. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-8-11:   ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   General application.
      1.   Uses must comply with the performance standards established in this
section unless any federal, state, or local law, ordinance, or regulation
establishes a more restrictive standard, in which case, the more restrictive
standard applies. Special protections are afforded agricultural uses, per item
2 below.
      2.   Agricultural uses are protected by the Illinois Farm Nuisance Suit
Act (740 ILCS 70), as amended. As per the Act (which may be amended following
the effective date of this title):
         “No farm or any of its appurtenances shall be or become a private or
public nuisance because of any changed conditions in the surrounding area
occurring after the farm has been in operation for more than one year, when
such farm was not a nuisance at the time it began operation, provided, that the
provisions of this Section shall not apply whenever a nuisance results from the
negligent or improper operation of any farm or its appurtenances.”
   B.   Standards.
      1.   Noise. No activity or use must be conducted in a manner that
generates a level of sound as measured on another property greater than that
allowed by federal, state, and local regulations, as amended from time to time.
These limits do not apply to construction noises, noises emanating from safety
signals or warning devices, noises not directly under the control of the owner
or occupant of the property, and transient noises from moving sources, such as
motor vehicles, railroads and aircraft.
      2.   Glare and Heat. Any activity or the operation of any use that
produces glare or heat must be conducted so that no glare or heat from the
activity or operation is detectable at any point off the lot on which the use
is located. Flickering or intense sources of light must be controlled or
shielded so as not to cause a nuisance across lot lines.
      3.   Stormwater Management. All development must comply with local,
county, state, and federal stormwater management requirements.
      4.   Vibration. No earthborne vibration from the operation of any use may
be detectable at any point off the lot on which the use is located.
      5.   Dust and Air Pollution. Dust and other types of air pollution, borne
by the wind from sources, such as storage areas, yards, roads, conveying
equipment and the like, within lot boundaries, must be kept to a minimum by
appropriate landscape, screening, sheltering, paving, fencing, wetting,
collecting, or other acceptable means.
      6.   Discharge and Disposal of Radioactive and Hazardous Waste. The
discharge of fluid and the disposal of solid radioactive and hazardous waste
materials must comply with applicable federal, state, and local laws, and
regulations governing such materials or waste. Radioactive and hazardous
material waste must be transported, stored, and used in conformance with all
applicable federal, state, and local laws.
      7.   Electromagnetic Interference. Electromagnetic interference from any
operation of any use must not adversely affect the operation of any equipment
located off the lot on which such interference originates.
      8.   Odors. Any condition or operation, including the keeping of animals,
which results in the creation of odors of such intensity and character as to be
detrimental to the public health and welfare, or which interferes unreasonably
with the comfort of the public, must be removed, stopped or modified so as to
remove the odor.
      9.   Fire and Explosion Hazards. Materials that present potential fire
and explosion hazards must be transported, stored, and used only in conformance
with all applicable Federal, state, and local regulations. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-
2024)
CHAPTER 9
THE KEEPING OF ANIMALS
SECTION:
10-9-1:    Purpose
10-9-2:    The Keeping of Animals In Agricultural Districts
10-9-3:    The Keeping of Animals In Residential Districts
10-9-4:    The Keeping of Animals In Other Districts
10-9-5:    Bees (Apiaries)
10-9-6:    Chickens (Hens And Roosters)
10-9-7:    Equines
10-9-8:    Barnyard Animals
10-9-1:   PURPOSE:
This Chapter governs the keeping of livestock, equines, barnyard animals,
poultry and bees within the Village. “Keeping” is construed to include all the
following meanings: to harbor, to raise, to shelter, to provide refuge, to care
for, to maintain on the property. These provisions do not apply to animals
typically kept as household pets, such as, but not limited to, the following:
dogs, cats, rodents and reptiles. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-9-2:   THE KEEPING OF ANIMALS IN AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS:
The keeping of livestock, bees, chickens and other poultry, equines, barnyard
animals and aquaculture within the F and FB zoning districts is allowed
pursuant to State and Federal regulations. Structures for the shelter of
animals and aviaries shall meet the locational requirements of this Chapter.
(Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-9-3:   THE KEEPING OF ANIMALS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
The keeping of animals in residential districts is permitted in accordance with
Table 9-1, Animals Allowed in Residential Districts, below, and to the
provisions of this Chapter.
   Table 9-1. Animals Allowed in Residential Districts
A "P" indicates the category is permitted; a "-" indicates the category is not
permitted.
   Animal CategoRE-1 RE- 2 RE-3 R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4
   Animal Category                RE-1 RE- 2 RE-3 R-1      R-2 R-3 R-4
Bees                                 P    P     P    P        P   P   P
Chickens - maximum of 25 per lot     -    -     -    P        P   P   P
Chickens - maximum of 50 per lot     P    P     P    -        -   -   -
Roosters                             P    P     P    -        -   -   -
Equines - See Section                                P
10-9-6 for maximum number of equines P    P     P    (Note 1) -   -   -
allowed on lots.
Barnyard animals                     P    P     P    P        -   -   -
Note:
1.   Equines allowed in the R-1 district only if lot size is 1.25 acres
or greater.
 
(Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-9-4:   THE KEEPING OF ANIMALS IN OTHER DISTRICTS:
The keeping of livestock, poultry, barnyard, bees and aquaculture is permitted
in the OSP district, subject to the provisions of this Chapter. The keeping of
the aforementioned animals is prohibited in all zoning districts not listed as
permitted in Section 9.1 and 9.2 above. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-9-5:   BEES (APIARIES):
The provisions of this Section govern the keeping of bees and apiaries in all
zoning districts where they permitted per Sections
10-9-1 ,
10-9-2  and
10-9-3  above.
   A.   Location requirements. All apiaries shall be:
      1.   Permitted only in a rear yard, except in F and FB zoning districts,
where they may be established in any side yard; and
      2.   A minimum of twenty feet (20') from any lot line, as measured from
the nearest point of the apiary to the lot line; and
      3.   A minimum of ten feet (10') from the principal structure on the
subject lot; and
      4.   A minimum of fifty feet (50'), at the time of installation, from the
principal structure on any adjacent lot. Apiaries already established shall not
be rendered nonconforming by the subsequent establishment of a principal
structure.
   B.   Registration. All property owners desiring to keep bees must register
their colonies with the Illinois Department of Agriculture in accordance with
the Illinois Bees and Apiaries Act and provide proof of registration and
required inspections to Village officials upon demand.
   C.   Swarming. While swarming is a natural honeybee behavior, property
owners with bee colonies should follow swarm management practices to prevent or
minimize swarming. Failure to do so may result in fines or other adverse
municipal actions under the property maintenance and nuisance provisions of the
Municipal Code.
   D.   Water. Each beekeeper shall at all times provide a convenient source of
water available to the bees. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-9-6:   CHICKENS (HENS AND ROOSTERS):
The provisions of this section govern the keeping of chickens in all zoning
districts where they permitted per Sections
10-9-2 ,
10-9-3  and
10-9-4  above.
   A.   General Requirements. The following provisions pertain to the keeping
of chickens in all zoning districts:
      1.   All property owners keeping chickens shall ensure the animals are
provided with access to feed and clean water. All food products shall be kept
and maintained in rodent-proof containers.
      2.   The accumulation of manure and dung shall not be offensive and must
be managed to minimize any health hazards or nuisance. Manure and dung must be
removed in a responsible manner on a regular basis.
      3.   Roosters are allowed in all zoning districts where chickens are
allowed per this Chapter, provided that the roosters are managed in a manner
that mitigates crowing and nuisance issues, such as by limiting exposure to
light during early morning hours.
      4.   Chickens must not be kept in a way that would create a nuisance, as
declared in Section
5-1-2  of the Village of Campton Hills municipal code.
   B.   Chicken coops and runs.
      1.   In the F, FP and FB districts chicken coops and runs may be
established in the rear, side and corner side yards.
      2.   In all other zoning districts chicken coops and runs are permitted
in the rear yard only.
      3.   In all zoning districts chicken coops and runs shall be a minimum of
fifteen feet (15') from any lot line and a minimum of fifty feet (50') from the
nearest adjacent residence.
      4.   All chickens must be provided with both a chicken coop and a fenced
outdoor enclosure, subject to the following provisions:
         a.   The chicken coop and run together must provide a minimum of ten
(10) square feet per chicken. The chicken coop and fenced enclosure must be
kept in good repair, maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, free of
vermin, obnoxious smells, and substances. The facility must be adequately
ventilated.
         b.   The maximum square footage of all chicken coops on a properties
in residential zoning districts shall be one hundred twenty (120) square feet.
There is no limit on the number of chicken coops. Additionally, chicken coops
shall count toward maximum accessory structure square footage standards of
Chapter 8.
         c.   The chicken coop must be designed to ensure the health and well-
being of the chickens, including protection from predators, the elements, and
inclement weather. Neither chicken coop nor run shall be built on a septic
field. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-9-7:   EQUINES:
The provisions of this section govern the keeping equines in all zoning
districts where they permitted per Sections
10-9-1 ,
10-9-2  and
10-9-3  above.
   A.   Number of equines allowed. The number of equines allowed on a
residentially zoned lot is based Table 9.1 and on the area of the lot, as
follows:
      1.   Lots 1.25-1.49 acres: a maximum of two (2) equines.
      2.   Lots one and a half (1.50) acres and above: a maximum of one (1)
equine per one half (0.5) acres, provided;
      3.   The number of equines on a lot, regardless of acreage, shall not
exceed eight (8) equines.
   B.   Stable and paddock. A stable or other enclosed shelter as well as a
paddock are required for the keeping of horses. The enclosure must accommodate
a space for each animal and sufficient area for storage of hay and feed.
Stables, shelters, and paddocks shall be located in accordance with the
following:
      1.   Roofed shelters are prohibited in the front or corner side yard.
      2.   Stables and shelters must be located a minimum of twenty-five feet
(25') from any lot line and one hundred feet (100') from any residence on
adjacent properties.
      3.   Paddocks or other fenced enclosures without roofs must be located at
least five feet (5') from any lot line. Such enclosures shall be a maximum of
seven feet (7') in height.
      4.   All shelters and enclosures must be designed to ensure the health
and well-being of the animals, including protection from predators, the
elements, and inclement weather.
      5.   Adequate utility services and drainage facilities, as determined by
the village engineer, shall be provided.
      6.   All equines must be kept in a manner to prevent any adverse impact,
including but not limited to odor, noise, drainage, or pest infestation, on any
other property.
      7.   The method of manure storage must be in a covered container and must
be conducted so as not to be offensive and to minimize any health hazards and
nuisance. Manure must be removed on a regular basis.
   C.   Ancillary activities. The following ancillary activities are permitted
as part of keeping horses and other equine:
      1.   Riding lessons; and
      2.   Boarding horses; and
      3.   Therapeutic riding. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-9-8:   BARNYARD ANIMALS:
The provisions of this section govern the keeping of barnyard animals in all
zoning districts where they permitted per Sections
10-9-1 ,
10-9-2  and
10-9-3  above.
   A.   Number of barnyard animals allowed. Where allowed on residentially
zoned lots per
Table 9-1 , the maximum number of barnyard animals shall be as follows:
      1.   The maximum number of hooved barnyard animals shall be three times
the number of equines allowed. For example, if the maximum number of equines
allowed on a lot is four (4) the total number of all hooved animals would be
twelve (12).
      2.   In addition to the hooved barnyard animals, an unlimited number of
non-hooved barnyard animals may be kept.
   B.   Shelter. An enclosed and roofed shelter shall be provided for all
animals. The shelter must accommodate a space for each animal. Shelters and
fenced enclosures shall be located in accordance with the following:
      1.   Shelters must be located a minimum of twenty-five feet (25') from
any lot line and one hundred feet (100') from any residence on adjacent
properties.
      2.   Enclosures shall be located at least five feet (5') from any lot
line.
   C.   Other requirements.
      1.   All shelters and enclosures must be designed to ensure the health
and well-being of the animals, including protection from predators, the
elements, and inclement weather.
      2.   Adequate utility services and drainage facilities, as determined by
the village engineer, shall be provided.
      3.   All animals must be kept in a manner to prevent any adverse impact,
including but not limited to odor, noise, drainage, or pest infestation, on any
other property.
      4.   The accumulation of manure and dung shall not be offensive and must
be managed to minimize any health hazards or nuisance. Manure and dung must be
removed on a regular basis. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
CHAPTER 10
LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
SECTION:
10-10-1: Landscape Plan
10-10-2: Tree Preservation Plan
10-10-3: Enforcement Of Landscape Plan
10-10-4: Selection, Installation And Maintenance
10-10-5: Landscape Design Standards
10-10-6: Parking Lot Landscaping
10-10-7: Site Landscaping
10-10-8: Buffer Yards
10-10-1:   LANDSCAPE PLAN:
   A.   Landscape Plan Required. A landscape plan is required as part of a site
plan review (Section
10-3-7 ) application for non-residential (including mixed-use) developments and
any planned unit development. The landscape plan must be approved prior to the
issuance of a building permit.
   B.   Content of Landscape Plan. The following details shall be included on
all landscape plans required by this chapter:
      1.   North arrow and graphic scale, the location and dimensions of all
existing and proposed structures, property lines, easements, parking lots and
drives, rights-of-way, refuse disposal and recycling areas, pedestrian and
bicycle paths, fences, mechanical equipment, overhead utility wires,
underground utilities, retention/detention facilities, and other drainage
facilities, such as drainage swales.
      2.   Tree preservation plan. See Section
10-10-2  below.
      3.   The location, quantity, size, root ball condition (e.g. B/B) and
scientific and common names of the proposed plants; and
      4.   Specification of the type, boundaries, size and spacing of all
proposed ground cover; and
      5.   The existing and proposed grading of the site indicating contours at
one-foot (1') intervals. Any proposed berming, earthwork, or stormwater
management basins must also be indicated using one foot contour intervals.
      6.   Elevations of all proposed fences, stairs, and retaining walls.
      7.   A title block indicating the preparer, applicant, date of plan and
any subsequent revisions to the plan.
      8.   Any other details as determined by the Zoning Officer.
   C.   Minor Revisions to Approved Landscape Plans. Once a landscape plan has
been approved, the Zoning Officer may authorize minor revisions to the plan,
such as substitution of equivalent plantings, where such revisions do not
diminish the benefits or aesthetics of the approved plan. Minor revisions are
situations where none of the following occur:
      1.   A reduction in the quality of material, e.g. replacing a native
plant with a non-native plant;
      2.   Significant changes in the size and location of plant material;
      3.   A change in the general category of plant material, e.g. replacing a
canopy, or street tree, with an ornamental tree. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-10-2:   TREE PRESERVATION PLAN:
   A.   Purpose and contents of tree preservation plan. The inventory of trees
on site is a fundamental step in assessing the opportunities for development
and tree preservation. Such a plan shall include:
      1.   A survey, to scale, that identifies the location of all trees on
site that are larger than six inches (6") Diameter Breast Height (DBH) as
measured at four and a half feet (4.5') above the ground;
      2.   Each tree’s DBH at four and a half feet (4.5') above ground;
      3.   The scientific name and common name for each of the trees;
      4.   Condition (e.g. grades 1 through 5 indicating overall health and
quality of tree);
      5.   Proposed fate of each tree (removal, replacement, relocation or
preservation);
      6.   Protection measures to minimize construction impacts on those trees
to be preserved. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-10-3:   ENFORCEMENT OF LANDSCAPE PLAN:
   A.   No certificate of occupancy will be issued until all the requirements
of this Chapterand the landscape plan have been fulfilled. Failure to implement
the landscape plan, or to maintain the lot in conformance with the landscape
plan, may result in the application of fines and penalties, as established in
this title. All landscapes are subject to periodic inspection.
   B.   If weather prohibits the installation of landscape at the time a
certificate of occupancy is applied for, a temporary certificate of occupancy
may be issued with provision of a cash bond of one thousand five hundred US
dollars ($1,500.00) or funds equaling one hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of
the cost of the item(s) to be completed are held in escrow with a bank or title
company or are available to be drawn down from an approved mortgage. (Ord. O-
24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-10-4:   SELECTION, INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Selection.
      1.   The most recent edition of the American Standards for Nursery Stock,
ANSI Z60.1, published by American Horticulture Industry Association (d/b/
a American Hort), shall be the guide for selection, measurement installation,
and maintenance of all plant material.
      2.   Each category of plant material (canopy trees, ornamental trees,
shrubs, grasses) shall consist of at minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) of
plant material that is native to Illinois. Forbs, groundcover plants, annuals
and perennials are exempt from this requirement.
      3.   Where appropriate, the use of drought and salt tolerant plant
material is preferred.
      4.   Invasive species of Illinois and the Great Lakes region (Wisconsin,
Michigan, Indiana) are prohibited. The Village may maintain a list of invasive
and prohibited species and may alter the list from time to time.
   B.   Installation.
      1.   All landscape materials must be installed in accordance with current
nursery industry standards and must be properly supported to ensure survival.
      2.   Support devices such as guy wires or stakes must not interfere with
pedestrian or vehicular movement. Plantings over three feet in height are
prohibited in the site triangle per Section
10-8-1  E.
      3.   All plant materials must be free of disease and installed so that
soil of sufficient volume, composition, and nutrient balance are available to
sustain healthy growth.
      4.   Installation of plant materials during the appropriate growing
season is encouraged.
      5.   Where overhead utilities are present, the following provisions apply
to the selection and installation of plant materials:
         a.   Only trees twenty-five feet (25') or less in anticipated height
at maturity are permitted within twenty feet (20') of any overhead utilities.
Shrubs, grasses, vines, and other plant materials less than twenty-five feet
(25') in height are also permitted.
         b.   Any tree species taller than twenty-five feet (25') at maturity
must be planted at a setback from utility lines that is equal to or greater
than the tree’s anticipated height at maturity.
   C.   Maintenance.
      1.   Landscape materials depicted on approved landscape plans are
considered a required site element in the same manner as structures, required
parking, lighting, and other improvements. As such, the owner of record or the
business or homeowner’s association is responsible for the maintenance, repair,
and replacement of all landscape materials, fences, steps, retaining walls, and
similar landscape elements.
      2.   All landscape materials must be maintained in good condition,
present a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance, and be kept free of refuse and
debris. Any dead, unhealthy, or missing plants must be replaced within sixty
(60) days of notification, unless an extension is approved by the Zoning
Officer. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-10-5:   LANDSCAPE DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Minimum planting sizes.
      1.   Canopy trees must have a minimum trunk size of two and one half
inches (2.5") in caliper at planting.
      2.   Single-trunk ornamental trees must have a minimum trunk size of two
inches (2") in caliper at planting.
      3.   Multi-stem ornamental trees must be at least six (6) feet in height
at time of planting.
      4.   Evergreens trees must have a minimum height of six feet (6') at
planting.
      5.   Single stem ornamental trees must have a minimum trunk size of two
and one half inches (2.5") in caliper at planting. Multiple stem ornamental
trees must have a minimum height of eight feet (8') at planting.
      6.   Evergreen or deciduous shrubs must have a minimum height of twenty-
four (24") or thirty (30") inches in height at planting.
   B.   Species diversity. Diversity among required plant material is required
for visual interest and to reduce the risk of losing a large population of
plants due to disease. Table 10-1: Plant Diversity Requirements indicates the
percentage of diversity required based on the total quantity of species being
used. For example, if a development requires forty-five (45) canopy trees, no
more than eighteen (18) trees can be of one species, and there must be a
minimum of five (5) different species within the forty-five (45) trees. When
the calculation of plant diversity requirements results in a fraction, the
fraction is rounded up.
   C.   Berming. Earthen berms and existing topographic features should be
incorporated into the landscape treatment of a site where there is sufficient
space and, in particular, when berms and existing topographic features can be
combined with plant material to facilitate effective screening. Minimum
unretained berm side slopes must be maintained at no steeper than a four to one
(4:1) slope ratio to prevent erosion and be properly and safely maintained,
unless a steeper slope is allowed by the Zoning Officer. Retained slopes may be
implemented with the appropriate terracing necessary to reduce the need for
safety railing. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-10-6:   PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Parking lot perimeter landscape yard. A perimeter landscape yard is
required for all parking lots that abut a public right-of-way and must be
established along the edge of the parking lot to screen vehicle parking. The
landscape treatment must run the full length of the parking lot perimeter along
the right-of-way and must be located between the lot line and the edge of the
parking lot. The landscaped area must be improved as follows:
      1.   The perimeter parking lot landscape area must be at least eight feet
in width. There must be a minimum linear distance of two feet between any wheel
stops or curbs to accommodate vehicle bumper overhang, which is not included in
the minimum eight-foot (8') calculation.
      2.   One shrub must be planted for every three feet (3') of landscape
yard length, spaced linearly. Alternatively, a mix of shrubs, perennials,
native grasses, and other planting types that provide screening of a minimum of
three feet (3') in height may be used.
      3.   A minimum of one canopy tree must be provided for each fifty (50)
linear feet of perimeter landscape yard. Two(2) ornamental trees may be
substituted for one (1) canopy tree.
      4.   Sixty percent (60%) of the landscape area outside of shrub and tree
masses must be planted in live groundcover, perennials, or ornamental grasses.
      5.   Alternatively, a low pedestrian wall a minimum of three feet (3') to
a maximum of four feet (4') in height may be used instead of shrubs and canopy
trees. Shrubs are encouraged between the sidewalk and the wall to provide a
softening effect on the fence or wall.
   B.   Interior parking lot landscaping. All parking lots consisting of ten
(10) or more spaces require interior parking lot landscape as described in this
paragraph.
      1.   All rows of parking stalls must terminate in a parking lot island or
landscape area.
      2.   Where more than ten parking stalls are provided in a row, one
parking lot island must be provided between every ten (10) parking spaces. As
part of the landscape plan approval, parking lot island locations may be varied
based on specific site requirements or design scheme, but the total number of
islands must be no less than the amount required of one island for every ten
(10) spaces.
      3.   Parking lot islands must be at least the same dimension as the
parking stall. Double rows of parking must provide parking lot islands that are
at least the same dimension as the double row.
      4.   A minimum of one (1) canopy tree must be provided in every parking
lot island or landscape area. If a parking lot island extends the width of a
double row, then two (2) canopy trees are required. In addition to the required
canopy trees, a minimum of sixty percent (60%) of every parking lot island must
be planted in ornamental trees, live groundcover, shrubs, perennials, or
ornamental grasses.
      5.   The use of stormwater management techniques, such as rain gardens
and bioswales, is encouraged in landscape areas. Parking lot islands and
landscape areas are encouraged to be designed to accommodate stormwater
infiltration.
      6.   In addition to parking lot islands, additional landscape areas must
be provided within the interior of parking lots when the parking area is ten
thousand (10,000) square feet or more in area. The minimum total landscape area
of a parking lot, including parking lot islands, must be ten percent (10%) of
the total parking lot area. Parking lot perimeter landscape is excluded from
the calculation of total parking lot area square footage and is not counted
toward required landscape area. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-10-7:   SITE LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Coverage. All areas of any lot that are not covered by structures or
pavement must be planted with live landscaping. Where non-residential
(including mixed-use) developments are located fifteen feet (15') or more from
a street lot line, and no parking located in front of the structure, the area
must be planted as described below. This does not apply when sidewalks,
driveways, and loading and service areas provide access to the building in the
yard adjacent to the street lot line or where fire department connections are
necessary. Outdoor seating areas, planted pots, and similar hardscape design
may be used to satisfy this requirement for up to thirty percent (30%) of this
area.
   B.   Plant and other materials. The landscape area must be planted with a
variety of canopy and/or ornamental trees, shrubs, live groundcover,
perennials, or ornamental grasses. Decorative stone, brick, or pavement may be
used for edging planting beds but may not cover more than twenty percent (20%)
of the landscaped area. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-10-8:   BUFFER YARDS:
This section establishes standards for the dimension and required landscape for
buffer yards between land uses and/or zoning districts within the rear or
interior side yard. Nothing in this section prevents the applicant’s voluntary
installation of buffer yards where they are not required.
   A.   When required. As of the effective date of this chapter, buffer yards
are required for new construction along interior side and rear yards in the
following cases:
      1.   Where a non-residential use is located within a residential
district. This does not include public parks.
      2.   Where a non-residential district abuts a residential district. This
does not include the OSP district or public parks.
   B.   Location. Buffer yards may be located within required yards but must be
reserved for the planting of material and installation of screening as required
by this section. No parking, driveways, sidewalks, accessory structures, or
other impervious surfaces are permitted within the buffer yard area.
   C.   Design requirements. The required design of buffer yards is as follows:
      1.   A buffer yard must be a minimum of ten feet (10') in width.
      2.   One canopy tree must be planted for every twenty-five (25) linear
feet of buffer yard length. As part of the landscape plan approval, trees may
be spaced at various intervals based on specific site requirements, but the
total number of trees planted must be no less than one per twenty-five (25)
linear feet of buffer yard length.
      3.   Existing trees that are preserved may count toward the buffer yard
tree requirement. This credit is at a ratio of one (1) existing tree for one
(1) proposed tree (1:1 ratio) regardless of the size of the existing tree.
      4.   Unless otherwise specifically required by the use standards of this
title, a solid fence or wall a minimum of six feet (6') and a maximum of eight
feet (8') in height must be erected along one hundred percent (100%) of the
buffer yard length.
      5.   One shrub, measuring a minimum of eighteen inches (18") in height at
planting and reaching a minimum of three feet (3') in height at maturity, must
be planted for every three (3) linear feet of buffer yard length, spaced
linearly.
      6.   Sixty percent (60%) of the landscape area outside of shrub and tree
masses must be planted in live groundcover, perennials, or ornamental grasses.
(Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
CHAPTER 11
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
10-11-1: General Application
10-11-2: Computation Requirements
10-11-3: Required Off-Street Vehicle Spaces
10-11-4: Required Off-Street Loading Spaces
10-11-5: Design Of Vehicle Parking Facilities
10-11-6: Driveway Design
10-11-7: Design Of Off-Street Loading Spaces
10-11-8: Shared Parking
10-11-9: Storage And Parking Of Large Vehicles
10-11-10: Storage Of Recreational Vehicles
10-11-1:   GENERAL APPLICATION:
   A.   Existing facilities.
      1.   The existing number of off-street vehicle and loading spaces may not
be reduced to below the minimum requirements of this title. If the number of
existing spaces is already less than the requirements of this chapter, it may
not be further reduced.
      2.   If a building permit was lawfully issued prior to the effective date
of this title, and if substantial construction has begun within ninety (90)
days of the issuance of a permit, the number of off-street vehicle and loading
spaces is that required by the building permit rather than the requirements of
this title.
   B.   New construction. The construction of a new principal building must
provide all required parking unless the site is eligible for a parking
exemption or other parking flexibility allowed by this chapter.
   C.   Change in use. When the existing use of a structure or land is changed
to a new use, vehicle parking spaces must be provided as required for the new
use.
   D.   Change in intensity of use. Whenever the intensity of a use is
increased, e.g. number of dwelling units, floor area, seating capacity, or
other unit of measurement used to calculate the number of required vehicle
parking spaces, additional spaces must be provided for the increase in
intensity.
   E.   Provision of additional spaces. The establishment of additional off-
street parking or loading facilities above the minimum required by this title
is not prohibited.
   F.   Use of parking facilities.
      1.   The sale, repair, or dismantling or servicing of any vehicles,
equipment, materials, or supplies, or the display of goods in off-street
parking areas is prohibited, unless otherwise permitted by this title.
      2.   The property owner is responsible for ensuring that parking and
loading facilities are only used by tenants, employees, visitors, or other
authorized persons.
      3.   Space allocated to any off-street loading space may not be used to
satisfy the requirement for any off-street vehicle parking space or access
aisle or portion thereof. Conversely, the area allocated to any off-street
vehicle parking space may not be used to satisfy the replacement for any off-
street loading space or portion thereof.
   G.    Prohibition of stand-alone parking structures. Stand-alone parking
structures are prohibited in the Village. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-11-2:   COMPUTATION OF REQUIREMENTS:
This section describes how the number of vehicle and loading spaces are
calculated based upon the requirements of this chapter. The total number of
required vehicle parking and loading spaces is based upon the requirements for
the principal use or uses located on the lot.
   A.   Multiple land uses. Where multiple land uses with different parking
requirements occupy the same structure or lot, the required vehicle parking and
loading spaces are the sum of the requirements for each use computed
separately, unless otherwise permitted by this title.
   B.   Fractions. A fraction of less than one-half (1/2) is disregarded, and a
fraction of one-half (1/2) or more is counted as one parking or loading space.
   C.   Seating as a standard. For uses where patrons or spectators occupy
benches, pews or open floor areas used for service, each forty-eight (48)
linear inches of benches, pews, or permanent seating areas, or five (5) square
feet of open floor areas used for seating is counted as one seat for the
purpose of determining the requirement for the required number of spaces. (Ord.
O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-11-3:   REQUIRED OFF-STREET VEHICLE SPACES:
   A.   General requirements.
      1.   Except as otherwise provided in this title, the minimum number of
off-street vehicle parking spaces to be provided for each use is listed in
Table 11-1 , Off-Street Vehicle Parking Requirements.
      2.   
Table 11-1  lists parking requirements for each use. In some cases, uses that
are considered part of a generic use category are listed with specific vehicle
parking requirements. These specific uses are listed only for the purposes of
this section and do not indicate whether such uses are permitted or special
uses within any district. Certain uses listed in
Table 7-1  are not listed in
Table 11-1  and therefore do not have vehicle parking requirements.
   B.   Provision of car-and bike-share facilities.
      1.   Spaces within parking lots and structures may include designated
parking spaces for car-share facilities. A car-share facility is a membership-
based car-sharing service that provides automobile rental to members, billable
by the hour or day, and is not considered a vehicle rental establishment.
Spaces reserved for car-share facilities may count toward the minimum parking
requirements of this title.
      2.   Spaces within parking lots and structures may include designated
areas for bike-share facilities. A bike-share facility provides bicycle rentals
to the public and it is not considered a vehicle rental establishment. When a
minimum of fifteen (15) bicycles are provided for rental, such bike-share
facilities may be substituted for up to four (4) automobile spaces or five
percent (5%) of the required parking spaces, whichever is less.
   C.   Provision of electric vehicle (EV) charging stations.
      1.   Spaces reserved for EV charging count toward minimum parking
requirements of this title.
      2.   The number of EV parking spaces shall be capped at twenty-five
percent (25%) of the overall spaces provided or the overall number of spaces
required.
      3.   At the parking lot owner’s discretion, EV parking spaces may be open
for parking of internal combustion engine vehicles.
   D.   Multi-tenant retail center parking calculation. A multi-tenant retail
center is defined as a group of three (3) or more separate commercial
establishments, primarily retail, but also including personal service,
restaurant, office, and similar non-residential uses, which is planned, owned,
and/or managed as a single property. The two (2) main configurations of multi-
tenant retail centers are large shopping centers and strip centers. Multi-
tenant retail centers require a minimum of one (1) parking space per three
hundred (300) square feet of total gross floor area, rather than calculation by
the individual uses.
Table 11-1. Off-Street Vehicle Parking Requirements
Table 11-1 lists the minimum off-street parking requirements for land uses
throughout the Village. Uses not listed have no minimum parking requirement.
"sf" means square feet; "GFA" means gross floor area.
Uses Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements
Table 11-1. Off-Street Vehicle Parking Requirements
Table 11-1 lists the minimum off-street parking requirements for land uses throughout the
Village. Uses not listed have no minimum parking requirement. "sf" means square feet; "GFA"
means gross floor area.
                                                                               Minimum Off-
Uses                                                                           Street
                                                                               Parking
                                                                               Requirements
   RESIDENTIAL AND ACCOMMODATION USES
Private household
                                                                               2 per
   Dwelling unit, single-family                                             dwelling
                                                                               unit
                                                                               2 per
                                                                               dwelling
                                                                               unit + 1
   Mixed use (apartment/condo above commercial)                             additional
                                                                               space for
                                                                               each 10
                                                                               dwelling
                                                                               units
Housing services for the infirm                                                per special
                                                                               use approval
Other accommodation services
                                                                               2 per
   Bed and breakfast                                                        dwelling
                                                                               unit + 1 per
                                                                               guest room
   Community residence, large                                               1 per 2 beds
   Community residence, small                                               1 per 2 beds
   Hotels, motels                                                           1.5 per
                                                                               guest room
   COMMERCIAL USES
Retail sales or service                                                        1 per 500 sf
                                                                               of GFA
   Auto body and auto repair                                                4 per
                                                                               service bay
   Auto parts and auto accessory sales                                      1 per 500 sf
                                                                               of GFA
   Beer, wine and liquor store                                              1 per 500 sf
                                                                               of GFA
                                                                               1 per car
                                                                               wash bay + 3
   Car wash                                                                 stacking
                                                                               spaces per
                                                                               bay
   Department store, membership club or superstore                          per special
                                                                               use approval
                                                                               2 per pump
                                                                               (in addition
                                                                               to pump
                                                                               space) + 1
   Gas station                                                              per 500 sf
                                                                               GFA of
                                                                               retail area+
                                                                               4 stacking
                                                                               spaces for
                                                                               car wash bay
   Home centers                                                             per special
                                                                               use approval
   Office                                                                   1 per 500 sf
                                                                               of GFA
   Grocery store, supermarket, bakery                                       1 per 300 sf
                                                                               of GFA
   Pharmacy, drug store                                                     If drive-
                                                                               thru, then S
                                                                               1 per 500 sf
                                                                               of GFA + 4
   Financial Institution                                                    stacking
                                                                               spaces per
                                                                               drive-thru
                                                                               lane
   Professional services                                                    1 per 300 sf
                                                                               of GFA
Food services
   Banquet hall/caterer                                                     1 per 300 sf
                                                                               of GFA
   Bar/brew pub                                                             1 per 100 sf
                                                                               of GFA
   Convenience store                                                        1 per 300 sf
                                                                               of GFA
   Restaurant, full service                                                 1 per 100 sf
                                                                               of GFA
   Restaurant, limited service (cafeteria)                                  1 per 200 sf
                                                                               of GFA
   Studio, physical activity and hobbies                                    1 per 300 sf
                                                                               of GFA
Personal services                                                              1 per 500 sf
                                                                               GFA
   Funeral home                                                             1 per 200 sf
                                                                               of GFA
   Massage therapy establishment                                            1 per 500 sf
                                                                               of GFA
   Personal services establishment                                          1 per 500 sf
                                                                               of GFA
   Physical therapy establishment                                           1 per 500 sf
                                                                               of GFA
Pet and animal services
   Animal hospital or veterinarian                                          1 per 300 sf
                                                                               of GFA
   Animal kennel, commercial                                                5 spaces
   Animal shelter                                                           1 per 300 sf
                                                                               of GFA
   MANUFACTURING
                                                                               1per1,000 sf
                                                                               of GFA up to
                                                                               40,000 sf,
                                                                               then 1 per
                                                                               2,500 sf for
   Industrial, Light                                                        additional
                                                                               GFA above
                                                                               40,000 sf
                                                                               (excludes
                                                                               any outdoor
                                                                               storage)
   Industrial design                                                        1 per 500 sf
                                                                               of GFA
   TRANSPORTATION/LOGISTICS
   Airport                                                                  per special
                                                                               use approval
                                                                               1 per 300sf
   Contractor office with equipment                                         of GFA of
                                                                               office bldg
                                                                               1 per 300 sf
                                                                               of GFA of
   Warehouse                                                                office + 1
                                                                               per 20,000
                                                                               sf of GFA of
                                                                               warehouse
   COMMUNICATIONS
   Broadcasting facility (TV/radio)                                         1 per 1,000
                                                                               sf of GFA
   UTILITIES
   Utilities                                                                per 300 sf
                                                                               of GFA
   ARTS, ENTERTAINMENT, RECREATION AND OPEN SPACE
   Amusement arcade                                                         1 per 500 sf
                                                                               of GFA
                                                                               1 per 500 sf
   Amusement facility, outdoor                                              of total
                                                                               site area
   Campground                                                               2 per
                                                                               campsite
                                                                               1 per 200 sf
                                                                               of GFA of
                                                                               office,
   Cemetery                                                                 chapel/
                                                                               parlor, and/
                                                                               or
                                                                               preparation
                                                                               area
   Fitness, recreational sports, gym, or athletic club,10,000 SF GFA or less1 per 200 sf
                                                                               of GFA
   Fitness, recreational sports, gym, or athletic club, more than 10,000 SF per special
GFA                                                                            use approval
                                                                               4 per golf
                                                                               hole and/or
   Golf course/driving range                                                4 per tee of
                                                                               driving
                                                                               range.
   Museum, cultural facility                                                1 per 400 sf
                                                                               of GFA
                                                                               t0.75 per
   Performing arts establishmen                                             patron
                                                                               seating
   Private club or lodge                                                    1 per 500 sf
                                                                               of GFA
   Sports team or club facilities                                           per special
                                                                               use approval
   EDUCATION, PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION, HEALTH CARE, AND OTHER INSTITUTIONAL USES
   Adult education services                                                 10 per
                                                                               classroom
   Community center                                                         1 per 500 sf
                                                                               of GFA
   Day care center                                                          1 per 500 sf
                                                                               of GFA
   Health care facility                                                     1 per 300 sf
                                                                               of GFA
                                                                               3 per
   Hospital                                                                 patient room
                                                                               OR PER
                                                                               SPECIAL USE
   Medical clinic/dental clinic                                             1 per 300 sf
                                                                               of GFA
   Pre-school                                                               1 per 500 sf
                                                                               of GFA
   Public administration                                                    1 per 300 sf
                                                                               of GFA
   Public safety facility                                                   1 per 300 sf
                                                                               of GFA
   Public works facility                                                    1 per 300 sf
                                                                               of GFA
                                                                               1 per 3
                                                                               seats + 1
                                                                               per 1,000 sf
                                                                               of
   Religious institutions                                                   residential
                                                                               living
                                                                               component
                                                                               (convent,
                                                                               rectory,
                                                                               etc.)
   Research and development                                                 1 per 300 sf
                                                                               of GFA
   School, alternate education services                                     per special
                                                                               use approval
   School, college or university                                            per special
                                                                               use approval
   School, elementary or secondary                                          per special
                                                                               use approval
   School, trade or vocational                                              per special
                                                                               use approval
   Urgent care center                                                       per special
                                                                               use approval
   AGRICULTURE
   Equine boarding facility                                                 1 per 2
                                                                               stalls.
                                                                               1 per 500sf
                                                                               of GFA
   Green house/nursery                                                      (includes
                                                                               any outdoor
                                                                               display or
                                                                               storage)
 
(Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-11-4:   REQUIRED OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES:
   A.   When required. Off-street loading spaces must be provided for any use
that distributes or receives materials or merchandise by trucks or other
commercial vehicles. In the case of multi-tenant developments, required loading
spaces are calculated on the basis of each individual tenant. For example, if
only one tenant of a multi-tenant development is over ten thousand (10,000)
square feet in gross floor area, only one loading space is required; if all
tenants are under ten thousand (10,000) square feet, no loading is required.
   B.   Standards. The number of minimum loading spaces required for commercial
uses, including industrial uses, is listed in Table 11-2 below.
 
   Table 11-2. Off-Street Loading Space Requirements
Table 11-1 lists the minimum off-street parking requirements for land uses
throughout the Village, where "sf" means square feet and "GFA" means gross
floor area.
Gross Floor Area                             Minimum Off-Street Loading Space
                                             Requirements
10,000 sf or more but less than 20,000 sf in 1 loading space
GFA
20,000 sf or more but less than 40,000 sf in 2 loading spaces
GFA
40,000 sf or more in GFA                     3 loading spaces
 
(Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-11-5:   DESIGN OF VEHICLE PARKING FACILITIES:
   A.   Location.
      1.   Residential Uses.
         a.   All required off-street vehicle parking spaces for residential
uses and the residential component of mixed-use developments must be located on
the same lot as the structure.
         b.   For single-family (detached and attached) and two-family
dwellings, required vehicle parking spaces are permitted in private driveways,
but must not encroach onto the public right-of-way.
      2.   Non-Residential Uses. Vehicle parking for a non-residential use may
be located on the same lot or within five hundred feet (500') of the use
served. This maximum distance restriction does not apply to valet parking
services. However, valet parking services must provide evidence of a lot
reserved for vehicle parking.
   B.   Dimensions of vehicle parking spaces.
      1.   Off-street vehicle parking space dimensions must meet the standards
of
Table 11-3  and
Figure 11-1 . All vehicle parking spaces must have a minimum vertical clearance
of seven and a half feet (7.5').
      2.   As of the effective date of this title, stall width must be a
minimum of nine feet (9') for all parking angles, as per
Table 11-3  and
Figure 11-1 .
   C.   Circulation requirements for off-street vehicle parking areas.
      1.   Each off-street vehicle space must open directly upon an aisle or
driveway of adequate width to provide access to a vehicle parking space. All
off-street parking facilities must provide access in a manner that least
interferes with traffic movement. For all uses except single-family detached
and two-family dwellings, the parking area must be designed so that the driver
of the vehicle proceeds forward into traffic rather than backs out.
      2.   All required off-street parking facilities must have vehicular
access from a street, alley, driveway, or cross-access easement.
      3.   Clearly delineated crosswalks of paving, brick paver, bituminous
brick pattern stamping, or painted striping must connect landscaped areas and
parking lot islands to building entrances to improve safe passageway for
pedestrians. Curb cuts must be included on landscaped areas or islands where
such crosswalks are located.
      4.   All parking lots must comply with the “ADA Accessibility Guidelines
for Buildings and Facilities” regulations issued by federal agencies under the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and State of Illinois requirements for
the amount and design of accessible vehicle parking spaces in parking lots and
structures.
   D.   Striping. Off-street parking areas must be marked by painted lines a
minimum of four inches (4") in width and maintained in clearly visible
condition. Signs or markers should be used as necessary to ensure efficient and
safe circulation within the lot. Vehicle parking spaces for handicapped persons
must be identified with the appropriate sign and visible at all times of the
year, regardless of plant growth or similar conditions.
   E.   Curbing and wheel stops. Wheel stops or curbing are required when a
parking space abuts a pedestrian walkway, landscape area, or fence.
   F.   Surfacing. All parking lots must be surfaced with a durable all-weather
material, such as asphalt, concrete, or other product, as approved by the
Village. Pervious paving may be allowed, subject to review and approval by the
Village.
   G.   Drainage. Off-street parking facilities must be drained to eliminate
standing water and prevent damage to abutting property and/or public streets
and alleys. All drainage must comply with any stormwater management
requirements.
   H.   Maintenance. Off-street parking areas must be maintained in a clean,
orderly, and dust-free condition at the expense of the owner or lessee.
   I.   Lighting. Parking lot lighting must meet the exterior lighting
standards of Chapter 8.
   J.   Landscape and screening. All parking lots must be landscaped and
screened in accordance with Chapter 10.
   K.   Prohibition on dead-end parking lots. Dead end parking lots are
prohibited. A turnaround space does not qualify as creating a non-dead-end lot.
   Table 11-3. Off-Street Parking Space Dimensions
Table 11-3 is to be used with Figure 11-1.
Parking Stall Width Stall Depth Skew Width Aisle Width Aisle Width Vertical
Angle   (A)         (B)         (C)        Two-Way     One-Way     Clearance
                                           (D)         (E)
   Table 11-3. Off-Street Parking Space Dimensions
Table 11-3 is to be used with Figure 11-1.
Parking       Stall Stall Depth Skew Width Aisle Width Aisle Width
              Width                                                Vertical
Angle         (A)   (B)         (C)        Two-Way     One-Way     Clearance
                                           (D)         (E)
0° (Parallel)9'    18'         18'        24'         12'         10' 6"
90° (Head-In 9’  18’       10’      24’       20’       10' 6”
)
60°          9’  21’       9.8’     N/A         18’       10' 6”
45°          9’  19.8’     12’      N/A         12.5’     10' 6”
 
   FIGURE 11-1. OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE DIMENSIONS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/09fc73b1baa9c9185d886b27aa527b40ba0b85e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1518.png]
 
(Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-11-6:   DRIVEWAY DESIGN:
   A.   Single-family dwelling driveways.
      1.   Residential driveways are limited to twenty-four feet (24') in width
at the lot line for a distance of twenty-four feet (24') towards the rear of
the lot. There is no limit on driveway width past that distance.
      2.   A residential driveway may be located five feet (5') from any
interior side or corner side lot line, unless a shared driveway is established
per Item 3 below.
      3.   A residential driveway may be shared by adjacent lots. This shared
driveway location is only allowed if agreed to by the owners of each lot, and
the agreement is recorded as a shared driveway easement on each plat of survey.
      4.   Single-family detached dwellings are permitted to construct
driveways that consist of two (2) concrete wheel strips, each of which is at
least eighteen inches (18") wide and at least twenty feet (20') long. Space
between wheel strips must be planted with turf or groundcover.
      5.   Residential driveways may be surfaced with gravel, or a durable all-
weather material, such as asphalt, concrete, or other product. Pervious paving
is allowed.
   FIGURE 11-2. RESIDENTIAL WHEEL STRIPS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/09fc73b1baa9c9185d886b27aa527b40ba0b85e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1520.png]
 
   B.   Cross-access easements.
      1.   Adjacent non-residential uses, including mixed-use development, with
dedicated parking areas are encouraged to provide a cross-access drive to allow
circulation between sites. Property owners are encouraged to pursue cross-
access with adjacent property owners at the time of development. If cross-
access is provided, the Zoning Official may require that the property owner
provide proof that adjacent property owners have been contacted in writing
regarding the provision of cross-access.
      2.   Joint use driveways and cross-access easements must incorporate site
design features to make it visually obvious that the abutting properties are
tied together.
      3.   Pursuant to this section, property owners who establish cross-access
easements must:
         a.   Record an easement allowing cross-access to and from properties
served by the joint use driveways and cross-access easement.
         b.   Close and eliminate any pre-existing driveways following
construction of the joint-use driveway.
         c.   Record a joint maintenance agreement defining the maintenance
responsibilities of each property owner. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-11-7:   DESIGN OF OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES:
   A.   Location. All off-street loading spaces must be located on the same lot
as the use served. No off-street loading spaces may project into a public
right-of-way. No off-street loading spaces are permitted in the front yard.
   B.   Dimensions. All required off-street loading spaces must be a minimum of
twelve feet (12') in width, a minimum of thirty-five (35) feet in length,
exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space, and have a minimum vertical clearance
of fifteen (15) feet.
   C.   Surfacing. All off-street loading spaces must be paved with a durable,
all-weather material paving.
   D.   Drainage and maintenance. Off-street loading facilities must be drained
to eliminate standing water and prevent damage to abutting property and/or
public streets and alleys. Off-street loading areas must be maintained in a
clean, orderly, and dust-free condition at the expense of the owner or lessee.
   E.   Access. Each required off-street loading space must be designed with
adequate means of vehicular access to a street or alley and in a manner that
will minimize interference with traffic movement.
   F.   Lighting. Parking lot lighting must meet the exterior lighting
standards of Chapter 8.
   G.   Landscape and screening. All parking lots must be landscaped and
screened in accordance with Chapter 10. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-11-8:   SHARED PARKING:
   A.   Separate and mixed uses. Off-street parking spaces for separate uses
and mixed uses may be provided collectively if the aggregate number of spaces
provided equals or exceeds the sum of the spaces required in
Table 11-4 , Shared Parking Calculation.
   B.   Application of
Table 11-4 . Table 11-4 is applied in the following manner:
      1.   The required number of spaces for each use is calculated according
Table 11-1 .
      2.   The required number of spaces for each use is then applied to the
percentages for each timeframe according to the appropriate land use category
in
Table 11-3  to determine the number of required spaces. This is done for each
timeframe category.
      3.   The numbers are summed for within each timeframe and the highest sum
total in a timeframe is the required number of spaces.
      4.   Shared parking may be located off-site so long as it complies with
the location requirements of this chapter. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-11-9:   STORAGE AND PARKING OF LARGE VEHICLES:
   A.   Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to vehicles with B,
C, D, or higher classifications of license plates. The provisions do not apply
to vehicles being used by contractors, utility companies and the like that are
engaged in work on the subject properties.
   B.   Residential Districts. The following provisions apply to the overnight
outdoor parking of large vehicles in all residential zoning districts:
      1.   An unlimited number of vehicles with B- and C-plates; and
      2.   A maximum of two (2) non-commercial D-plated pick-up trucks, one of
which may be a commercial D-plated pick-up truck; and
      3.   Notwithstanding sub-paragraphs 1 and 2 above, a maximum three (3)
commercial vehicles, regardless of license plate category.
      4.   The following shall not be parked overnight in residential
districts, regardless of license plate: box trucks, flatbed trucks semi-truck
tractor units, with or without attached trailers, commercial trailers, grain
trucks, buses, tow trucks, construction equipment.
   Table 11-4. Shared Parking Calculation
   Land Weekday                            Weekend
Use        Mid - 7:00 7:00 a.m. - 6:00 p.m. - Mid - 7:00 7:00 a.m. - 6:00 p.m -
           a.m.       6:00 p.m.   Mid         a.m.       6:00 p.m.   Mid
   Table 11-4. Shared Parking Calculation
            Weekday                          Weekend
   Land UMid - 7:00 7:00 a.m. 6:00 p.m. - Mid - 7:00 7:00 a.m. - 6:00 p.m -
            a.m.       - 6:00    Mid         a.m.       6:00 p.m.   Mid
                       p.m.
Residential 100%       100%      100%        100%       100%        75%
Commercial  0%         100%      80%         0%         100%        60%
Restaurant  50%        70%       100%        45%        70%         100%
Hotel       100%       50%       90%         100%       65%         80%
Office      5%         100%      5%          0%         40%         10%
Industrial  5%         100%      5%          0%         60%         10%
 
   C.   Commercial Districts. In all commercial zoning districts the outdoor
parking or storage of trucks, tractors and trailers or construction vehicles or
other equipment shall be permitted when the afore-mentioned vehicles are
operated in the service of an active and legal principal use on the lot.
   D.   Agricultural and Natural Area Districts. In all agricultural and
natural area zoning districts the outdoor parking or storage of trucks,
tractors and trailers or construction vehicles or other equipment shall be
permitted when the afore-mentioned vehicles are operated in the service of an
active and legal principal use on the lot.
   E.   Logos. For non-residential uses in the non-residential districts,
commercial vehicles with the logo of the commercial business painted on or
applied to the vehicle that are being operated and stored in the normal course
of business, such as signs located on delivery trucks, promotional vehicles,
moving vans, and rental trucks, are permitted to be stored on the lot in areas
related to their use as vehicles, provided that the primary purpose of such
vehicles is not the display of signs. All such vehicles must be in operable
condition. Signs placed or painted on parked vehicles where the only purpose is
to advertise a product or service, or to direct the public to a business or
activity located on or off the premises, are prohibited. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-
2024)
10-11-10:   STORAGE OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES:
   A.   Location requirements. Recreational vehicles may be stored in a
residential district if the storage location is located inside the required
setback line and:
      1.   Within a fully enclosed structure; or
      2.   Within the interior side yard behind the front building line; or
      3.   Within the rear yard; or
      4.   In the residential driveway. The recreational vehicle must be
located inside the required setback line and required side yard width.
   B.   As living quarters. No recreational vehicle may be used for living,
sleeping, or housekeeping purposes in any district for more than fourteen (14)
consecutive days. Recreational vehicles may be connected to electricity at a
residence in order to maintain the battery life of the vehicle, but otherwise
shall not be hooked up to any public utilities.
   C.   Safety. All recreational vehicles must be maintained in mobile and
operable condition. No recreational vehicle may be parked or stored in such a
manner as to create a dangerous or unsafe condition on the lot where it is
parked or stored. If the recreational vehicle is parked or stored, whether
loaded or not, so that it may tip or roll, it is considered to be a dangerous
and unsafe condition. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
CHAPTER 12
SIGNS
SECTION:
10-12-1: Purpose
10-12-2: Substitution Clause
10-12-3: Exempt And Prohibited Signs
10-12-4: General Standards For Signs
10-12-5: Relation To Planned Unit Developments
10-12-6: Regulations For Signs, By Type Of Sign
10-12-7: Measuring Signs For Conformance To Ordinance
10-12-1:   PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to balance the need for signage as a means of
communication, identification and direction with the need to protect the safety
and welfare of the public, to protect and enhance property values, and to
maintain and enhance the appearance and unique character of the Village. This
chapter is intended to fulfill the following objectives:
   A.   To preserve the unique character and appearance of the Village of
Campton Hills by regulating new signs, removing obsolete signs, and restricting
certain types of signs.
   B.   To provide safe passage for pedestrian and vehicular traffic by
regulating location, illumination, design, construction, installation, and
maintenance of signs.
   C.   To avoid clutter and minimize competition in relation to signs among
neighbors by regulating the number, size, location, and illumination of signs.
   D.   To provide for legible signage by regulating the size and quality of
sign graphics so they are visible and readable by the viewing public.
   E.   To promote signs that are compatible with adjacent land uses as well as
the general character of the area and/or zoning district in which the signage
is located.
   F.   To ensure that signs are designed to complement the architectural
elements of the building and site to which they principally relate. (Ord. O-24-
22, 12-3-2024)
10-12-2:   SUBSTITUTION CLAUSE:
Any sign, display, or device allowed under this title may contain, in lieu of
any other copy, any otherwise lawful noncommercial message. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-
3-2024)
10-12-3:   EXEMPT AND PROHIBITED SIGNS:
   A.   Exempt signs. Certain signs are exempt from regulation under this
chapter. This exemption is based on type, nature, and size of the particular
sign. The installation of exempt signs does not require a sign permit. The
following signs are exempt:
      1.   Signs identifying only the address and/or name of a building or the
name of an occupant thereof. A maximum of one (1) such sign is allowed per
building entry, whichever is greater. Signs must be wall-mounted and no more
than three (3) square feet in area unless safety codes require a larger size.
      2.   Logos and labels located on mechanical equipment, recycling bins,
trash containers and the like, which are part of the equipment as manufactured
and/or installed.
      3.   Signs mounted on gas station pumps, provided that: such signs are
oriented toward the vehicle fueling; sign area does not exceed one and a half
(1.5) square feet; only one (1) sign per pump.
      4.   Signs installed by or on behalf of federal, state or local
governments or taxing bodies Such signs may be illuminated as required by the
agency. Electronic message signs are permitted only for temporary roadway work,
utility work, or emergency information.
      5.   Clocks and barber poles.
   B.   Prohibited signs. Any sign not expressly permitted in this Zoning
Chapter is prohibited. The following signs are expressly prohibited:
      1.   Animated signs.
      2.   Balloon signs.
      3.   Beacons/searchlights.
      4.   Changeable copy signs with the following exemptions:
         a.   Gas station signs displaying price of fuels; and
         b.   Institutional uses are permitted changeable copy as part of a
wall or freestanding sign. Institutional signs may include changeable copy
provided that the area of the sign containing such copy does not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the total area of the sign face or forty (40) square feet,
whichever is less.
      5.   Electronic message signs, with the exception of time and temperature
components as part of a larger sign or those components of gas station signs
that show the price of fuel.
      6.   Flashing signs.
      7.   Marquees, excluding those that are part of a designated historical
building.
      8.   Moving signs including any sign that rotates, revolves, or has any
visible moving part. Any sign that gives the appearance of movement, including
signs designed to be moved by wind or other natural elements.
      9.   Off-premises commercial signs – permanent. These signs are also
known as billboards.
      10.   Off-premises commercial signs – temporary. Also known as push or
snipe signs.
      11.   Pennants.
      12.   Portable sign structures, excluding A-frame signs.
      13.   Projecting signs. Also known as blade signs.
      14.   Roof signs.
      15.   Signs located or displayed on wireless telecommunications towers,
except for warning signs.
      16.   Signs painted directly on the exterior of a building. This does not
include ghost signs per Section
10-12-6 .
      17.   Signs that contain unlawful, obscene, or misleading information.
      18.   Signs that constitute a traffic hazard, including signs that:
         a.   Interfere with, obstruct the view of, or may be confused with any
authorized traffic sign, signal, or device because of its position, shape, or
color, including signs illuminated in red, green, or amber color designed to
resemble a traffic signal.
         b.   May be confused with any public safety lighting, including signs
illuminated with red and blue colors.
         c.   Make use of the words STOP, LOOK, DETOUR, DANGER, CAUTION,
WARNING, or any other word, phrase, symbol, or character in a manner that
misleads, interferes with, or confuses traffic.
      19.   Vehicular signs whose primary apparent purpose is to advertise
business. Motor vehicles primarily engaged in the primary cartage of goods, or
the transportation of passengers are exempt from this restriction as are
vehicles parked at the residence of the owner and/or operator of the vehicle.
      20.   Video display signs. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-12-4:   GENERAL STANDARDS FOR SIGNS.
   A.   Permit required. A sign permit is required for the installation of new
signs and the relocation or alteration of existing signs. Changing a business
name or changing the business logo on existing signs shall be deemed an
alteration.
   B.   Property owner consent. No person may install, alter, or relocate any
sign without first obtaining the express consent of the owner of the property
on which the sign is to be installed, altered, or relocated.
   C.   Sign maintenance. The following standards shall apply to existing all
signs, including those listed as exempt under Section
10-11-3  of this chapter:
      1.   Signs and all their components shall be maintained in good repair
and remain structurally sound as not to pose a threat to the public health,
safety or welfare; and
      2.   All landscaping surrounding signs, as required by this title or
special use approval, shall be maintained in good condition. Dead or dying
plants shall be replaced.
   D.   Location of signs.
      1.   Signs shall not be installed in a location that poses a threat or
obstruction to pedestrians or traffic.
      2.   Signs shall not extend beyond any vertical corner edge of a wall,
canopy, or awning. Any sign placed on a wall cannot obscure a wall opening,
architectural feature, or project more than six inches (6") beyond the sides of
the wall to which it is affixed.
      3.   Signs shall not be placed closer than ten feet (10') from a lot line
except for those erected by a government body or unless this chapter requires a
different setback.
      4.   Signs shall not obstruct the sight triangle. For the purposes of
this section the sight triangle is defined as the triangular area twenty-five
feet (25') from the point of intersection of two (2) street right of way lines
on a corner lot and a height above grade of thirty-six inches (36"). The sight
triangle also applies to the intersection of a street and driveway.
      5.   Signs shall not be installed in a location that violates the
building code, fire code, and other applicable Village codes or ordinances.
Signs shall not be installed in a manner that obstructs access to any ingress
or egress to the structure, fire escapes, standpipes or similar fire safety
connections.
      6.   With the exception of signs placed by federal, state, county or
local government authority, signs shall not be installed on public property or
within the public right of way. Any sign installed on public property or within
the public right of way may be removed by the Village without notice. Signs
expressly allowed at polling places pursuant to the Illinois Election Code (10
ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.) are exempt from the provisions of this paragraph.
      7.   Signs shall not be installed on private property without the consent
of the property owner or his/her authorized agent. Such authorization shall be
part of, or attached to, the sign permit application.
   E.   Construction standards for signs.
      1.   All signs must be designed and constructed in compliance with the
building code, electrical code, and all other applicable codes and ordinances.
      2.   Glass comprising any part of a sign must be safety glass.
      3.   All letters, figures, characters, or representations in cut-out or
irregular form, maintained in conjunction with, attached to, or superimposed
upon any sign must be safely and securely built into or attached to the sign
structure.
      4.   Conduits and other components of a sign illumination system must be
designed as an integral part of the overall sign structure and obscured from
public view to the extent technically feasible.
   F.   Illumination. Any sign that is illuminated, either by external or
internal means, shall comply with the following provisions:
      1.   With the exception of signs exhibiting the time and temperature, all
signs with illumination in direct line of sight of dwellings in a residential
district must be turned off between the hours of eleven o’clock (11:00) p.m.
and seven o’clock (7:00) a.m. unless the establishment associated with the sign
is operating during those hours, in which case the sign can remain illuminated
for the remainder of the operating hours.
      2.   Any sign illumination, including gooseneck reflectors, external
illumination, and internal illumination, must be designed, located, shielded,
and directed to prevent the casting of glare or direct light upon roadways and
surrounding properties, and prevent the distraction of motor vehicle operators
or pedestrians in the public right-of-way.
      3.   The sign face of internally illuminated signs must function as a
filter to diffuse illumination. The sign face must cover all internal
illumination components so that no exposed bulbs are visible.
      4.   All external illumination of a sign must concentrate the
illumination upon the printed area of the sign face. Uplighting, where
permanent ground-based lighting is installed and directed upwards to the sky
and not focused directly on the sign face, is prohibited.
      5.   No sign illumination shall be combined with reflective materials,
such as mirrors, polished metal, or highly-glazed tiles, which would increase
glare.
      6.   Signs should be shielded to prevent light trespass on any
residential property, a park, or a public right-of-way.
      7.   Illumination must be constant in intensity and color and cannot
consist of flashing, animated, chasing, or other illumination conveying the
sense of movement.
      8.   Neon or LED lighting to outline doors, windows, architectural
features, and building facades is prohibited.
      9.   Strobe lights are prohibited.
      10.   Beacons/searchlights are prohibited, unless properly permitted as a
temporary promotional sign and not as a permanent sign.
      11.   Exposed light bulbs and LED tubes are prohibited.
   G.   Audio components. Audio components are prohibited on or as a part of
any sign, with the exception of menu boards. For menu boards, the audio
component is limited to communication between the customer and service window.
(Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-12-5:   RELATION TO PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS:
Signs located within a planned unit development are governed by those standards
of the underlying zoning district unless other standards and permissions have
been granted as part of the PUD approval. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-12-6:   REGULATIONS FOR SIGNS, BY TYPE OF SIGN:
   A.   A-frame signs.
      1.   One (1) A-frame sign is permitted per non-residential establishment
within the commercial districts, including one for each tenant in a multi-
tenant development. A minimum fifteen-foot (15') separation is required between
all A-frame signs.
      2.   An A-frame sign must be placed within fifteen feet (15') of the
primary entrance of the business and must not interfere with pedestrian traffic
or violate standards of accessibility as required by the ADA or other
accessibility codes.
      3.   A-frame signs may be placed in the sidewalk or parkway concurrent
with the lot of the establishment being advertised, but must maintain a five
foot (5') sidewalk clearance at all times.
      4.   A-frame signs are limited to six (6) square feet in area per side
and four feet (4') in height.
      5.   The placement of A-frame signs outdoors is limited to business hours
only. A-frame signs must be stored indoors at all other times.
      6.   A-frame signs must not be used outdoors when high winds or heavy
rain conditions exist.
      7.   Illumination of A-frame signs is prohibited. No A-frame sign may
have any type of electronic component.
      8.   A-frame signs that meet the requirements of this paragraph do not
require a sign permit.
   FIGURE 12-1. A-FRAME SIGN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/09fc73b1baa9c9185d886b27aa527b40ba0b85e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1496.png]
 
   B.   Signs for historic sites and/or structures. Where a structure or a site
memorializes a historic person, event, building, site, or construction date, a
sign is allowed as follows:
      1.   Memorial signs are permitted in any district.
      2.   Memorial signs may be constructed as either freestanding or wall
signs, subject to the following:
         a.   Memorial signs are limited to six (6) square feet.
         b.   Freestanding signs are limited to five feet (5') in height and
must be located ten feet (10') from any lot line.
         c.   Wall mounted signs must be inlaid to be an integral part of the
structure, cut into stone or masonry, or be a permanently affixed plaque of
bronze or aluminum
         d.   Signs may be internally or externally illuminated.
         e.   Memorial signs are limited to one (1) per street frontage.
         f.   Memorial signs that meet the requirements of this paragraph do
not require a sign permit.
   C.   Multiple-tenant building entryways. Multiple-tenant buildings are
permitted a sign at building entryways subject to the following:
      1.   Such signs may be constructed as either freestanding or wall signs,
subject to the following:
         a.   Signs are limited to six (6) square feet in area.
         b.   Freestanding signs are limited to five feet (5') in height and
must be located within five feet (5') of the building entry and no less than
ten feet (10') from any lot line. Freestanding building entryway signs must be
installed so that they are primarily viewed from the building entryway and not
intended to be viewed from a public right-of-way.
         c.   Signs may only be internally illuminated.
      2.   Signs are limited to one (1) per building entry.
   messages are subject to the following standard. Noncommercial messages may
also be displayed on any sign authorized to display commercial messages.
      1.   Noncommercial message sign structures may be constructed as either
freestanding, wall, or window non-permanent signs. There is no limit on the
number of signs permitted.
      2.   Freestanding and wall-mounted sign structures in residential
districts are limited to thirty-two (32) square feet in area and six feet (6')
in height.
      3.   Window-mounted sign structures must meet the coverage limitations of
window signs. If no coverage is specified, the limitation is twenty-five
percent (25%) of the window area.
      4.   Freestanding noncommercial message sign structures must be located
ten feet (10') from any lot line.
      5.   Noncommercial message sign structures posted on private property
must have the permission of the property owner.
      6.   Noncommercial message sign structures cannot be placed on public
rights-of-way.
      7.   Noncommercial message sign structures cannot be used as a temporary
off-premise sign.
      8.   Non-commercial message signs that meet the requirements of this
paragraph do not require a sign permit.
   E.   Parking lots. Parking lots are permitted the following signs, whether
such parking lots or structures are a principal or ancillary use.
      1.   A sign is permitted at each entrance/exit, driveway intersection,
drive-through lane, and other circulation points.
      2.   Signs are limited to four (4) square feet in area.
      3.   A freestanding sign is limited to six feet (6') in height and must
be ten feet (10') from any lot line that abuts a street.
      4.   Signs located at an entrance/exit, driveway intersection, drive-
through lane, and other circulation points may be internally or externally
illuminated.
      5.   Parking lot signs that meet the requirements of this paragraph do
not require a sign permit.
   F.   Real estate activity signs. When a structure or lot is offered for
sale, lease, or rent, such lot is permitted a temporary sign as follows:
      1.   Real estate activity signs are permitted in all districts. Real
estate signs must be located on the site of the property for sale, lease, or
rent.
      2.   Signs in residential districts:
         a.   Signs are limited to freestanding signs, not exceeding ten (10)
square feet in area and six feet (6') in height.
         b.   Signs must be located on the subject property.
         c.   One sign is permitted per street frontage, with a maximum of two
(2) signs.
      3.   Signs in non-residential districts:
         a.   Signs may be freestanding, wall, or window signs, not exceeding
thirty-two (32) square feet in area and eight feet (8') in height.
         b.   Signs must be located on the subject property.
         c.   One (1) sign is permitted per street frontage, with a maximum of
two (2) signs.
      4.   Signs must be removed within seven (7) days after the consummation
of the real estate transaction or within seven (7) days after the real estate
is no longer listed for sale or lease.
      5.   Real estate activity signs that meet the requirements of this
paragraph do not require a sign permit.
   G.   Temporary construction activity sign. On a lot where active
construction is taking place, a temporary sign is permitted subject to the
following.
      1.   Such signs are permitted in all districts on all sites with active
construction projects.
      2.   One (1) sign is permitted per street frontage.
      3.   Signs may be constructed as either freestanding signs, wall signs,
or installed on accessory structures such as fences. Freestanding signs must be
located ten feet (10') from any lot line.
      4.   Signs are limited to thirty-two (32) square feet in area and eight
feet (8') in height.
      5.   Signs may not be illuminated.
      6.   Signs may be installed only after approval of a building permit for
such activity and must be removed within seventy-two (72) hours once
construction is complete.
   H.   Temporary new development signs. On a lot under development, a
temporary sign is permitted in conjunction with such development subject to the
following.
      1.   Such signs are permitted in all districts on all sites with active
development or construction projects.
      2.   One (1) sign is permitted per street frontage.
      3.   Signs may be constructed as either freestanding signs, wall signs,
or installed on accessory structures such as fences. Freestanding signs must be
located ten feet (10') from any lot line.
      4.   Signs are limited to thirty-two (32) square feet in area and eight
feet (8') in height.
      5.   Signs may not be illuminated.
      6.   Signs may be installed only after approval of a building permit for
such activity and must be removed within seventy-two (72) hours of issuance of
a certificate of occupancy.
   I.   Temporary renovation activity sign. On a lot where active renovation of
an existing structure is taking place, a temporary sign is permitted subject to
the following. Renovation includes landscape work on the site.
      1.   Such signs are permitted in all districts on all sites with active
renovation projects.
      2.   Signs may be constructed only as freestanding signs and must be
located ten feet (10') from any lot line.
      3.   Signs are limited to four (4) square feet in area and two feet (2')
in height.
      4.   Signs may not be illuminated.
      5.   Signs may be installed only after the renovation activity has
commenced on the site and must be removed within seventy-two (72) hours once
complete.
   J.   Window signs.
      1.   Window signs are permitted for all non-residential uses in all
districts.
      2.   The total area of window signage, both temporary and permanent, is
limited to twenty-five percent (25%) or less of each window area. Window area
is counted as a continuous surface until divided by an architectural or
structural element. Mullions are not considered an element that divides window
area.
      3.   An illuminated window sign is permitted but limited to a maximum
area of six (6) square feet. This is included in the maximum twenty-five (25%)
calculation.
      4.   Window signs that meet the requirements of this paragraph do not
require a sign permit.
   FIGURE 12-2. WINDOW SIGN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/09fc73b1baa9c9185d886b27aa527b40ba0b85e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1498.png]
 
   K.   Temporary signs for non-profit organization events.
      1.   Non-profit organization events are allowed temporary signs in all
zoning districts. A sign permit is required but this sign type is exempt from
any permit fees.
      2.   Temporary signs allowed with non-profit organization events must be
displayed no more than thirty (30) days prior to the event it is advertising
and removed within five days following the event.
      3.   The area of the sign is limited to thirty-two (32) square feet and
six feet (6') in height.
      4.   Temporary signs allowed with non-profit organization events posted
on private property must have the permission of the property owner.
      5.   Temporary signs allowed with non-profit organization events cannot
be placed on public rights-of-way.
      6.   Temporary signs allowed with non-profit organization events shall
not be used as a temporary off-premise sign.
   L.   Temporary promotional signs. Temporary promotional signs are allowed in
the C-1, C-2, and RD Districts. A permit is required and all signs must meet
the following standards:
      1.   Only one (1) type of promotional sign is permitted to be displayed
per establishment at any given time. A-frame signs are regulated separately in
Section
10-11-8  C.1. and are not considered promotional signs.
      2.   Display of temporary promotional signs is limited to five (5)
periods per calendar year with thirty (30) days between such periods.
      3.   Temporary promotional signs cannot be used as a temporary off-
premise sign.
      4.   Wall-mounted banners are limited to thirty-two (32) square feet in
area.
      5.   Freestanding signs, including banners mounted between two (2) posts
rather than wall-mounted, are limited to a maximum height of six feet (6') and
thirty-two (32) square feet in area.
      6.   All freestanding signs must be located a minimum of ten feet (10')
from a lot line, as measured from the outermost portion of the sign.
      7.   Display is limited to thirty (30) days.
   M.   Freestanding signs. Freestanding signs are permitted as follows. A sign
permit is required for all freestanding signs. All freestanding signs are
subject to the sight triangle regulations of Section
10-11-3  D., which control over any other sign sitting regulations.
Freestanding signs are governed by location and/or purpose as follows:
      1.   Agricultural Use and FP District. Lots in agricultural use in any
district and all lots in the FP District, are permitted the following
freestanding signs.
         a.   One permanent freestanding sign up to a maximum of twenty (20)
square feet. If the agricultural use is located in the F District, it may be up
to a maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet.
         b.   One (1) temporary freestanding sign no larger than two (2) square
feet. Such sign is not permitted in the required setbacks and may only be
displayed between June 1 and December 1.
         c.   In the FP District, a designated agricultural conservation
easement is permitted one (1) sign no larger than six (6) square feet. Such
sign requires Village and/or County approval to determine if the location of
the sign would interfere with any anticipated public highway improvements or
create a hazard to public highway safety.
         d.   Signs are limited to eight feet (8') in height.
         e.   No freestanding sign may be used as an off-premise sign.
      2.   Residential Subdivisions. Residential subdivisions in any district
are permitted the following freestanding signs:
         a.   Temporary residential subdivision development signs.
            (1)   In connection with the development and sales within a
residential subdivision, a single sign or double-faced sign on a common support
or structure, up to a maximum of one hundred (100) square feet in area for each
sign face, limited to two (2) sides, is permitted on the premises being
developed, for a period not to exceed three (3) years, with the ability for the
Village Board to approve an extension of up to three (3) years.
            (2)   The sign cannot exceed eight feet (8') in height.
            (3)   Only one (1) sign is allowed per entrance to the subdivision.
         b.   Permanent residential subdivision development signs.
            (1)   Masonry entry monuments may be constructed on both sides of
the street.
            (2)   The total height, including the base of the sign, cannot
exceed seven feet (7') in height.
            (3)   The sign area cannot exceed forty (40) square feet per side,
limited to two (2) sides.
            (4)   A homeowner’s association or similar organization shall be
responsible for the maintenance of residential development signs.
         c.   All residential subdivision development signs must be located a
minimum of twenty feet (20') from the back of the curb or edge of road pavement
where there is no curb of an adjacent public street and five feet (5') from a
lot line.
         d.   Landscaping. All permanent residential subdivision development
signs must be landscaped so that the signs blend with the landscape where they
are located.
      3.   Institutional uses. Institutional uses in any district are permitted
the following freestanding signs.
         a.   One (1) sign is permitted per zoning lot. If the use is on the
corner, one (1) per frontage is allowed.
         b.   The area of the sign is limited to forty (40) square feet per
side, limited to two (2) sides, and a maximum height of eight feet (8').
         c.   All signs must be located a minimum of twenty feet (20') from the
back of the curb or edge of road pavement where there is no curb of an adjacent
public street and five feet (5') from a lot line.
      4.   Commercial uses. Commercial uses in any district are permitted the
following freestanding signs.
         a.   Multi-tenant commercial development signs, four (4) or more
tenants.
            (1)   Multi-tenant commercial development signs are limited to a
maximum of sixty-four (64) square feet per side, limited to two (2) sides.
            (2)   Signs are limited to eight feet (8') in height.
            (3)   All signs must be located a minimum of twenty feet (20') from
the back of the curb or edge of road pavement where there is no curb of an
adjacent public street and five feet (5') from a lot line.
            (4)   One sign is permitted per entry with a minimum separation of
one hundred feet (100') between signs.
            (5)   Freestanding signs for commercial uses are limited to a
maximum of forty square (40) feet per side and limited to two (2) sides.
            (6)   Signs are limited to eight feet (8') in height.
            (7)   All signs must be located a minimum of twenty feet (20') from
the back of the curb or edge of road pavement where there is no curb of an
adjacent public street and five feet (5') from a lot line.
            (8)   One sign is permitted per lot.
         b.   Residential dwellings that have been converted to a commercial
use are permitted freestanding signs as described in this section:
            (1)   Only one (1) freestanding sign or wall sign is permitted per
lot.
            (2)   The sign cannot exceed eight feet (8') in height measured
from its base.
            (3)   The area of the sign is limited to twenty (20) square feet
per side and limited to two (2) sides.
            (4)   All freestanding signs must be located a minimum of twenty
feet (20') from the back of the curb or edge of road pavement where there is no
curb of an adjacent public street and five feet (5') from a lot line.
   N.   Wall Signs. Wall signs are allowed for non-residential uses in all
districts. A sign permit is required and all signs must meet the following
standards:
      1.   Wall signs are permitted on all building elevations that face a
right-of-way, parking area, or other public space. Wall signs are not permitted
on building elevations that face only building service areas. On a site
consisting of multiple structures, each structure is permitted wall signs per
the regulations of this section. The square footage from different structures
cannot be combined to create a larger sign on any one structure.
      2.   The maximum size of a wall sign is established at one (1) square
foot per linear foot of building wall where the wall sign will be mounted or
thirty-two (32) square feet, whichever is greater. The square footage from
different building elevations cannot be combined to create a larger sign on any
one building elevation.
      3.   For a structure that contains multiple tenants, each tenant that has
exterior business frontage is permitted a total wall sign area of one (1)
square foot per linear foot of business frontage or thirty-two (32) square
feet, whichever is greater, along their individual frontage(s). The square
footage from different tenants cannot be combined to create a larger sign than
allowed by this section.
      4.   The number of individual wall signs on a building elevation is not
limited. However the cumulative sign area of all signs on a particular building
elevation cannot exceed the maximum allowable sign area per the requirements of
this Section.
      5.   Wall signs may be internally or externally illuminated. If
externally illuminated, all light must be directed onto the sign face. No
uplighting is permitted.
      6.   Wall signs must be safely and securely attached to the building
wall. Wall signs shall not project more than eighteen inches (18") from the
building wall. Wall signs shall not encroach into the public right-of-way more
than eighteen inches (18").
      7.   No wall sign affixed to a building, including sign support
structure, may project beyond the ends or top of the wall or higher than the
roofline of the structure to which it is attached.
      8.   Wall signs must be constructed of wood or simulated wood, metal,
durable, weather-resistant material such as canvas, canvas-like material, nylon
or vinyl-coated fabric, plastic, or high-density urethane (HDU) foam board or
similar durable foam construction. Wall signs constructed of material must be
mounted so that they are held taut against the wall.
      9.   Walls signs shall not be painted on buildings or structures. This
does not apply to ghost signs as permitted in this Section.
      10.   A ghost sign is a painted wall sign that remains from an earlier
time or advertises the use of a building that provides evidence of the history
of the use of the building or activities of the community.
         a.   Ghost signs are considered wall signs.
         b.   A ghost sign is not considered an off-premise sign.
         c.   Existing ghost signs are exempt from these requirements and are
considered conforming.
         d.   Existing ghost signs may be repainted to their original image. No
new business or product may be added to the sign.
   FIGURE 12-3. WALL SIGN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/09fc73b1baa9c9185d886b27aa527b40ba0b85e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1500.png]
 
   O.   Awning and canopy signs. Awning signs are allowed in the C-1, C-2, and
RD Districts. A sign permit is required and all signs must meet the following
standards:
      1.   Sign copy on any awning sign surface is limited to thirty-five
percent (35%) of each surface area. A valiance is considered a separate surface
area.
      2.   Signs may encroach into the public right-of-way but can only
encroach a maximum of two-thirds (2/3) the distance from the lot line to the
back of curb.
      3.   Signs must maintain a minimum vertical clearance of eight feet (8').
Support posts of canopy signs must maintain a minimum separation of five feet
(5') between posts and five feet (5') between the posts and any building wall.
      4.   Signs must be made of a durable, weather-resistant material such as
canvas, canvas-like material, nylon, vinyl-coated fabric, or permanent building
material such as metal.
      5.   Solid canopies and awnings are permitted lettering attached to and
located above the top of the awning to a maximum height of eighteen inches
(18").
      6.   Signs may be externally illuminated. Such illumination shall be
focused on the printed area.
      7.   Back-lit awnings and canopies are prohibited.
   FIGURE 12-4. AWNING SIGN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/09fc73b1baa9c9185d886b27aa527b40ba0b85e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1502.png]
 
   FIGURE 12-5. CANOPY SIGN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/09fc73b1baa9c9185d886b27aa527b40ba0b85e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1504.png]
 
   P.   Menu board signs. Menu boards are permitted for all drive-through
facilities in any district. A sign permit is required and all signs must meet
the following standards:
      1.   Menu boards are limited to a maximum of two (2) signs per drive-
through lane.
      2.   Menu boards are limited to seventy-five (75) square feet in sign
area and eight feet (8') in height.
      3.   Menu boards must be located a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from any
residential district lot line. This is measured from sign face to lot line,
including any public right-of-way.
      4.   Menu boards may be internally illuminated.
      5.   Menu boards may contain an electronic screen and audio for
interaction with each customer.
   FIGURE 12-6. MENU-BOARD SIGN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/09fc73b1baa9c9185d886b27aa527b40ba0b85e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1506.png]
 
      6.   One permanent sign is allowed on the property of up to eight (8)
square feet per sign face and may be attached to the exterior or placed in the
window of the residence or an accessory structure, or placed within the front
setback, mounted on an architectural post not to exceed four feet (4') in
height, or a monument sign not to exceed four feet (4') above grade in the
front setback. No sign may interfere with vision clearance on adjoining public
rights-of-way. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-12-7:   MEASURING SIGNS FOR CONFORMANCE TO ORDINANCE:
   A.   Calculation of sign area. The sign area of each sign is the total
exposed surface devoted to the sign’s message, including all ornamentation,
embellishment, symbols, logos, letters, characters, other figures, or frames,
whether structural or decorative. The calculation of sign area does not include
any supports or bracing. For channel letters or freestanding logos/symbols, the
sign area is calculated as the customary, applicable mathematical formula for
the total area of each square, circle, ellipse, rectangle, or triangle, or
combination thereof, that encompasses each individual letter, logo, background
or display.
   FIGURES 12-7 AND 12-8. SIGN AREA
   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/09fc73b1baa9c9185d886b27aa527b40ba0b85e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1508.png]
 
   B.   Window signs. The maximum area of window signs is calculated as a
continuous surface until divided by an architectural or structural element.
Mullions are not considered an element that divides window area. Only the
individual letters or logos of the window sign shall be used in the calculation
of surface area. The transparent film around the perimeter of the individual
letters or logos comprising the window sign and used to affix the window sign
to the interior or exterior of a windowpane or glass door shall be exempt from
the area calculations, provided that such portion of the transparent film
maintains one hundred percent (100%) transparency of the window.
   C.   Determination of number of sign faces. If the interior angle between
two sign faces is forty-five degrees (45°) or less, the sign area is computed
as the area of one face only. If the angle between two (2) sign faces is
greater than forty-five degrees (45°), the total sign area is computed as the
sum of the areas of the two (2) faces.
   FIGURE 12-9. SIGN FACE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/09fc73b1baa9c9185d886b27aa527b40ba0b85e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1510.png]
 
   D.   Measurement of sign height. For ground signs, sign height is measured
as the vertical distance measured from the normal grade at the base of the sign
to the highest point of the sign, including any decorative elements. Normal
grade shall be construed to be the existing grade prior to construction or the
newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any fill, berm, mound,
or excavation solely for the purpose of locating the sign, whichever is lower.
   FIGURE 12-10. SIGN HEIGHT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/09fc73b1baa9c9185d886b27aa527b40ba0b85e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1512.png]
 
   E.   Sign setback. A required setback is measured from the applicable lot
line or other designated point to the closest point of the sign. (Ord. O-24-22,
12-3-2024)
CHAPTER 13
NONCONFORMITIES
SECTION:
10-13-1: General Applicability
10-13-2: Nonconforming Uses
10-13-3: Nonconforming Structures
10-13-4: Nonconforming Lots Of Record
10-13-5: Nonconforming Site Elements
10-13-6: Nonconforming Signs
10-13-1:   GENERAL APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Purpose. This chapter governs nonconformities: those uses, structures,
buildings, lots or other aspects of development that complied with previous
zoning regulations, but through the adoption of this title, amendments to this
title, or PUD ordinances, no longer comply. The intent of this chapter is to
clarify to what extent and under what circumstances such nonconformities may be
altered, expanded, or allowed to continue. Other purposes of this section are
to:
      1.   Allow for the preservation and adaptive re-use of existing
structures; and
      2.   Recognize the interests of property owners whose property and its
uses were lawfully established; and
      3.   Place reasonable limits on nonconformities that have or potentially
may have adverse effects on surrounding properties or the community.
   B.   Authority to continue a nonconformity. Any nonconformity that existed
on the effective date of this title or any situation that results in a
nonconformity because of the adoption of this title or any amendment hereto,
shall be allowed to exist and continue in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. A nonconformity may only continue so long as it remains otherwise
legal. A use, structure, lot, or site element that was illegal before this
title was adopted remains illegal.
   C.   Burden on property owner. The burden of establishing the legality of a
nonconformity under the provisions of this title is the responsibility of the
property owner of the subject use, structure, lot, or site element, or the
operator of the subject use.
   D.   Continued status of a nonconformity. Nonconforming status rests with
the property, not with the property owner. Such status is not affected by
changes in tenancy, or management. However, a change in business name shall
result in the removal of all nonconforming signs.
   E.   Safety regulations. All police power regulations enacted to promote
public health, safety, and welfare including, but not limited to, all building,
fire and health codes apply to nonconformities. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-13-2:   NONCONFORMING USES:
   A.   Definition. A nonconforming use is the use of a structure or land that
at one time was an lawful use within a zoning district, but because of the
adoption of this title or subsequent amendments to this title is no longer
permitted or requires special use approval.
   B.   Expansion. A nonconforming use of a structure or land cannot be
expanded, extended, enlarged, or increased in intensity. Such prohibited
activity includes additions or enlargements of any structure devoted entirely
to a nonconforming use, and any expansion, extension, or relocation of a
nonconforming use to any other structure, any portion of the floor area, or any
land area currently not occupied by such nonconforming use.
   C.   Relocation. A nonconforming use of a structure or land cannot be
relocated, in whole or in part, to any other structure or location on the same
lot. The nonconforming use may only be relocated to another structure or lot if
the use conforms to all regulations of the zoning district where it is
relocated.
   D.   Change of use. A nonconforming use can only be changed to a use allowed
within the zoning district where it is located. When a nonconforming use has
been changed, in whole or in part, to an allowed use, the whole or part that
conforms cannot be changed back to a use that is not allowed in the district. A
change of use occurs when an existing nonconforming use has been terminated and
another use has commenced. Any change in use in violation of this title is
deemed an abandonment of the previously existing nonconforming use.
   E.   Discontinuation or abandonment. If a nonconforming use is discontinued,
or the structure that it occupies becomes vacant and remains unoccupied for a
continuous period of one year, the nonconforming use is terminated. Any
subsequent use or occupancy of such land or structure must comply with all
regulations of the zoning district in which the structure or land is located. A
period of discontinuance caused by acts of God are not included in calculating
the length of discontinuance for this section.
   F.   Damage or destruction. In the event that any structure that is devoted
in whole or in part to a nonconforming use is structurally damaged or destroyed
through no fault of the property owner or tenant, the nonconforming use may be
re-established provided that no new nonconformities are created and the degree
of the previous nonconformity is not increased. If the structure containing the
nonconforming use is also a nonconforming structure, the structure may only be
rebuilt, restored, repaired, or reconstructed in accordance with Section 10-14-
3. However, if a building permit is not obtained within one year of the date of
damage or destruction, then the nonconforming use may not be reestablished.
(Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-13-3: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
   A.   Definition. A nonconforming structure is a principal or accessory
structure that at one time conformed to applicable zoning regulations, but
because of the adoption of this title or subsequent amendments to the Ordinance
no longer conforms to applicable dimensional regulations.
   B.   Maintenance. Normal maintenance and repair may be performed on any
nonconforming structure. No repairs or reconstruction are permitted that would
create any new nonconformity or increase the degree of the previously existing
nonconformity.
   C.   Structural Alterations. No structural alterations are permitted on any
nonconforming structure, except in the following situations:
      1.   When the alteration is required by law or is necessary to restore
the structure to a safe condition upon the order of any official charged with
protecting public safety.
      2.   When the alteration will eliminate the nonconformity.
      3.   When the alteration will not create any new nonconformity or
increase the degree of any existing nonconformity. (For example, if a structure
is nonconforming in terms of the required front setback (i.e., does not meet
the required minimum), the structure may add a rear addition if that addition
meets all other bulk and setback requirements of the district.)
   D.   Relocation. A nonconforming structure cannot be relocated, in whole or
in part, to any other location on the same lot unless such relocation would
render the structure conforming. A nonconforming structure may be relocated to
another lot if the structure conforms to all regulations of the zoning district
where it is relocated.
   E.   Damage or destruction.
      1.   Non-residential nonconforming structures are subject to the
following:
         a.   In the event that any non-residential nonconforming structure is
damaged or destroyed to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or more of its
replacement value at the time, then the structure may not be restored or
rebuilt unless the structure, including foundation, conforms to all regulations
of the zoning district in which it is located.
         b.   When a non-residential nonconforming structure is damaged or
destroyed to the extent of less than fifty percent (50%) of the replacement
value at the time, it may be repaired and reconstructed to its pre-damaged
state provided that no new nonconformities are created and that the existing
degree of the nonconformity is not increased. A building permit must be
obtained for such rebuilding, restoration, repair, or reconstruction within one
(1) year of the date of damage or destruction. In the event that the building
permit is not obtained within one (1) year, then the structure cannot be
restored unless it conforms to all regulations of the district in which it is
located.
      2.   If a nonconforming single-family or two-family structure is
destroyed or damaged by an act of God, regardless of the percent of damage, it
may be rebuilt to its original condition before such casualty or loss if a
building permit is obtained within one (1) year of the date of damage or
destruction. In the event that the building permit is not obtained within one
(1) year, then the structure cannot be restored unless it conforms to all
regulations of the district in which it is located.
      3.   The replacement value of the structure is based on:
         a.   The sale of that structure within the previous year or, if that
is not applicable;
         b.   An appraisal within the last two (2) years or, if that is not
available;
         c.   The amount for which the structure was insured prior to the date
of the damage or destruction; or
         d.   An alternative method determined acceptable by the Village. (Ord.
O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-13-4:   NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD:
   A.   Definition. A nonconforming lot of record is a lot of record that at
one time conformed to the lot dimension requirements of the zoning district in
which it is located, but because of the adoption of this title or subsequent
amendments to the Ordinance no longer conforms to the applicable lot
dimensions.
   B.   Use. A nonconforming lot of record may be used for a permitted or
special use allowed within the zoning district.
   C.   Development. Development of a nonconforming lot of record must meet all
applicable dimensional or bulk regulations of the district in which it is
located with the exception of that lot dimension requirement that renders it
nonconforming.
   D.   Lot division. No division of a nonconforming lot is permitted that
creates a nonconforming lot and/or renders a lot or lots remaining
nonconforming.
   E.   Common ownership limitation. If two (2) or more lots with contiguous
street frontage are held in common ownership that have historically been used
as a single zoning lot, and one or more of the lots does not meet the
requirements for lot width or lot area as established by this title, the land
is considered to be a single zoning lot for the purposes of this title. No
portion of the lots may be used, transferred, or conveyed unless all lots
created meet the lot width and lot area requirements of this title. No division
of the lot may be made which leaves the remaining lot or lots with lot width or
lot area below the minimum requirements of this title without approval of a
variation. No building permit may be issued for the use of any lot or portion
of a lot transferred or conveyed in violation of this section.
   F.   Building permits. No building permit will be issued for the use of any
lot or portion of a lot, transferred or conveyed in violation of this chapter.
(Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-13-5:   NONCONFORMING SITE ELEMENTS:
   A.   Definition A nonconforming site element is an aspect or part of the
development of the property, such as landscape or lighting, that at one time
conformed to the requirements of this title, but because of the adoption of
this title or subsequent amendments, has been made nonconforming. This does not
include nonconforming signs, which are regulated separately.
   B.   Maintenance. Normal maintenance and incidental repair to a
nonconforming site element may be performed. No repairs or reconstruction are
permitted that would create any new nonconformity or increase the degree of the
previously existing nonconformity.
   C.   Required conformance.
      1.   General. All nonconforming site elements must be brought into
conformance when the following occurs:
         a.   A new principal building is constructed on a site.
         b.   An existing principal building is increased in building footprint
square footage by thirty percent (30%) or more.
      2.   Nonconforming Parking Lot Landscape. When a parking lot of ten (10)
or more spaces does not conform to required parking lot landscape requirements,
it must be brought into conformance when such parking lot is fully
reconstructed or expanded by an additional fifty percent (50%) or more spaces,
i.e. the total number of spaces after expansion is one hundred and fifty
percent (150%) or more of the spaces prior to expansion.
         a.   Resealing, repaving, resurfacing, and/or re-striping of an
existing parking lot are not considered reconstruction.
         b.   If installing landscape would result in a parking lot that cannot
accommodate the required number of spaces, such existing parking lot is not
required to that portion of the required landscape that would reduce the number
of spaces below that required. The applicant is required to show that landscape
cannot be accommodated on the site, which must be verified by the Zoning
Officer. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-13-6:   NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
   A.   Definition. Any sign that existed lawfully prior to the adoption of
this title but no longer conforms to this title is considered a nonconforming
sign and permitted to remain.
   B.   Removal of nonconforming signs. A nonconforming sign shall be removed
by the owner or tenant of the subject property if:
      1.   If the principle use on a zoning lot ceases to exist for ninety (90)
consecutive days any sign which was accessory to that use must be removed.
      2.   The sign is damaged or destroyed to the extent that the cost of
repair or replacement exceeds fifty percent of its replacement cost as of the
date it became nonconforming.
      3.   The owner of the property requests and is approved for a rezoning
that will cause the sign to be obsolete or substandard.
      4.   The sign becomes a danger to the safety and welfare of the public.
   C.   Other situations. Signs that are moved or affected by redevelopment of
the property, façade improvement program, or roadway widening cannot be
reinstalled but must be brought into compliance with this chapter unless they
are found to be of historic value to the Village. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
CHAPTER 14
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-14-1: Rules Of Interpretation
10-14-2: Definitions Of Terms
10-14-1:   RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Rules. The terms in the text of this title must be interpreted in
accordance with the following rules of construction:
      1.   The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the
singular.
      2.   The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the
future tense includes the present
      3.   The terms “must,” “shall,” and “will” are mandatory, while the terms
“may” and “can” are permissive.
      4.   The terms “must not,” “will not,” “shall not,” “cannot,” and “may
not” are prohibiting.
      5.   Any gender includes all genders.
      6.   Any word not defined in this title will have the meaning given in
any applicable Village code or ordinance or, if none, in Merriam-Webster’s
Third New International Dictionary, Unabridged, except for words that refer to
the permitted and special uses of this title, which will be interested in
accordance with the meaning established in the North American Industry
Classification System (NAICS) in effect at that time.
   B.   Abbreviations. Abbreviations used throughout the Ordinance are expanded
and defined in Section
10-14-2 . below. They are listed alphabetically within this section.
   C.   Sign measurements. The various types of signs are defined in this
chapter. Details on how to measure minimum and maximum thresholds for signs are
found in
Chapter 12 , Signs. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
10-14-2:   DEFINITIONS OF TERMS:
ABUT: To share a common wall or lot line without being separated by a street or
alley, or other public right of way.
ACCESSIBILITY RAMP: A ramp or similar structure that provides wheelchair or
similar access to a structure.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU): A smaller additional living space on the same
lot as a single-family home. An ADU includes space for living, sleeping,
cooking and bathrooms independent of the primary residence. While the ADU may
or may not include access to the primary residence, it must be accessible
without going through the primary residence and there is some expectation of
privacy from the home. ADUs are clearly subordinate and secondary in size,
scope and nature to the primary residence on the lot.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A detached structure that is located on the same zoning
lot as the principal building and that is incidental to the use of the
principal building.
ACCESSORY USE: A use of land or a structure, or portion thereof, customarily
incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or structure.
ADDITION: Construction that increases the size of a structure in terms of
building footprint, height, or floor area.
AGRICULTURE: Farming in all its branches and among other things including the
cultivation and tillage of the soil, dairying, the production, cultivation,
growing, and harvesting of any agricultural or horticultural commodities
(including commodities defined as agricultural commodities in section 15(g) of
the Agricultural Marketing Act, as amended), the raising of livestock, bees,
fur-bearing animals, or poultry, and any practices (including any forestry or
lumbering operations) performed by a farmer or on a farm as an incident to or
in conjunction with such farming operations, including preparation for market,
delivery to storage or to market or to carriers for transportation to market.
AGRICULTURAL SUPPORT SERVICES: Establishments that provide services to farms,
such as rental of equipment, crop harvesting assistance, siloing, cleaning,
shelling, curing, packing, soil preparation and fertilizer services, etc.
ALLEY: A public right-of-way that normally affords a secondary means of access
to abutting property.
AMATEUR (HAM) RADIO EQUIPMENT: An amateur (HAM) radio station licensed by the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC), including equipment such as, but not
limited to, a tower or building-mounted structure supporting a radiating
antenna platform and other equipment.
AMBIENT LIGHTING: The general overall level of lighting in an area.
AMUSEMENT ARCADE: A indoor place or facility where pinball, computer games, or
other similar electronic games are played for amusement only. “Amusement
arcade” does not include bingo games or gambling devices.
AMUSEMENT FACILITY, OUTDOOR: Commercial premises where the primary use is
predominantly participant activities conducted in open or partially screened
enclosures. Typical facilities include driving ranges, miniature golf, swimming
pools, tennis courts, paint ball fields and woodlands, motorbike trails. May
include ancillary uses such as concession stands, restaurants and retail sales.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL AND/OR VETERINARIAN: A facility where animals receive medical
or surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment. An
animal hospital may be used as a kennel if such use is limited to short-time
boarding or where such kennel usage is incidental to medical or surgical
treatment.
ANIMAL KENNEL, COMMERCIAL: An establishment where dogs over six (6) months of
age are boarded, bred, raised, and trained for commercial gain. A commercial
animal kennel does not include animal shelters or shelter and training
facilities for canine units of public safety agencies.
ANIMAL SHELTER: An establishment that houses and provides care for homeless,
lost, or abandoned dogs, cats, and/or other animals until such animals are
reclaimed by their owner, placed in a new home, placed with another
organization for adoption, and/or euthanized.
APIARY: A structure for the keeping of honeybees.
AQUACULTURE: The raising of aquatic animals such as fish, crustaceans,
mollusks, and aquatic plants under controlled conditions.
AQUAPONICS: Food production that combines aquaculture—the raising of
animals—with hydroponics, the raising of aquatic plants.
ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE: A part or projection that contributes to the aesthetics
of a structure, exclusive of signs, which is not necessary for the structural
integrity of the structure or to make the structure habitable.
ARCHITECTURAL LIGHTING: Outdoor lighting directed at buildings, facades,
structures, monuments, and other architectural features.
AUTO BODY AND AUTO REPAIR: A building, structure or land used for the repair
and maintenance of automobiles and light trucks including but not limited to
collision repair, painting, muffler, upholstery work, oil change and
lubrication, tire service, installation of stereo equipment, and periodic or
scheduled maintenance.
AUTO PARTS AND AUTO ACCESSORY SALES: An establishment specializing in the
retail sale of new or used parts for automobiles, light trucks or vans,
trailers, or recreational vehicles. Establishments performing work repairing or
replacing auto parts, such as tire sales and installation, are categorized as
“auto body and auto repair.”
AWNING: A roof-like structure typically made of cloth, metal, or other material
normally attached to a frame that extends from and is supported by a building.
Awnings are typically erected over a window, doorway, or building front.
Awnings may be raised or retracted to a position adjacent to the building. See
also “CANOPY– NON-STRUCTURAL.”
BALCONY: A roofed or unroofed platform that projects from the exterior wall of
a structure above the ground floor, which is exposed to the open air, has
direct access to the interior of the building, and is not supported by posts or
columns extending to the ground.
BANNER: A sign with copy on flexible material, such as cloth, plastic, fabric
or paper.
BANQUET HALL/CATERER: Caterers provide single event-based food services. They
transport food via equipment and vehicles to events or prepare food at an off-
premise site. Banquet halls with catering staff are included in this
subcategory. Examples of events catered by these establishments are trade
shows, graduation parties, wedding receptions, and business or retirement
luncheons.
BAR/BREW PUB: These establishments, also known as bars, taverns, nightclubs or
drinking places, primarily prepare and serve alcoholic beverages for immediate
consumption. These establishments may also provide limited food and
entertainment (primarily music) services.
BARN: A relatively large building originally built or currently used for one or
more of the following purposes: the storage of farm products or feed; the
housing or sheltering of livestock or barnyard animals; the storage of farm
equipment. In Illinois, barns have historically been painted red or white, have
included hay lofts and have been built with large doors and gambrel or similar
roofs.
BARNYARD ANIMAL: Any of the following: Alpacas (Vicugna pacos); Ducks,
domesticated (Anas platyrhynchos domesticus); Geese (Anser anser); Goats (Capra
aegagrus hircus); Llamas (Lama glama); Rabbits, (any of twenty-nine (29)
species of long-eared mammals belonging to the family Leporidae, excluding
hares, genus Lepus); Sheep, (Ovis aries); (Swans (family Anatidae). Alpacas,
goats, llamas and sheep are hooved barnyard animals.
BAY WINDOW: An area that protrudes from the external wall of a building forming
a bay or alcove on the interior side of the building. The area of the bay
window extends to the ground. A bay window typically consists of: a central
windowpane parallel to the exterior wall; and two (2) or more flanking windows
at angles to the exterior wall and central windowpane which serve to connect
the central windowpane with the exterior wall. The term “bay window” includes
all protruding window constructions, whether they are curved or angular or
extend more than one story. A “bay window” differs from an “oriel” in that the
protruding area begins on the ground and extends upward at least one floor. An
“oriel” is an upper floor protrusion only. See also ORIEL.
BEACON OR SEARCHLIGHT: A stationary or revolving light which flashes or
projects illumination in order to attract attention, not including, however,
any lighting prescribed by safety regulations of the Federal Aviation Agency,
highway departments, or similar agencies.
BED AND BREAKFAST: A single-family detached dwelling where a resident/owner,
who lives on the premises, provides lodging for a daily fee in guest rooms with
no in-room cooking facilities and prepares meals for guests.
BERM: An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest on a site, screen
undesirable views, reduce noise, or fulfill other similar purposes.
BLOCK AND BLOCKFACE:
   1.   A block is a tract of land bounded by streets, or a combination of
streets and railroad right-of-way or municipal boundary lines.
   2.   Blockface is measured as that portion of a block or tract of land
facing the same side of a single street and lying between the closest
intersecting streets.
   FIGURE 14-1. BLOCK AND BLOCKFACE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/09fc73b1baa9c9185d886b27aa527b40ba0b85e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1473.png]
BOARDING HOUSE: A residential building, or portion thereof - other than a
motel, apartment hotel, or hotel-containing lodging rooms for accommodation of
three (3), but not more than ten (10) persons who are not members of the
keeper’s family and where lodging or meals or both are provided.
BODY ART: The practice of physical body adornment, including, but not limited
to, the following techniques: body piercing, tattooing, branding and
scarification. This definition does not include practices that are considered
medical procedures by the Illinois State Medical Board, such as implants under
the skin. Nor does this definition include piercing of the non-cartilaginous
portion or lobe of the ear with pre-sterilized single-use stud-and-clasp ear-
piercing systems.
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment that offers or performs all or any
kind of body art, either individually or in combination, whether public or
private, temporary or permanent in nature or location, profit or not for
profit.
BODY PIERCING: Penetrating the skin to make a hole, mark, or scar that is
generally permanent in nature, including, but not limited to, micro-dermal
anchors, acts of suspension and sub-dermal/trans-dermal implants. "Body
piercing" does not include practices that are considered medical procedures or
the puncturing of the non-cartilaginous portion or lobe of the ear using a pre-
sterilized, single-use stud-and-clasp ear piercing system.
BOOK EXCHANGE BOX: An outdoor accessory structure maintained by a property
owner on private property where books and recorded performing arts and media
are kept for public and/or exchanges with no fees or sales and are publicly
accessible.
BROADCASTING FACILITY - TV/RADIO: A facility engaged in broadcasting and
information relay services for radio and television signals, including studio
facilities. A broadcasting facility may or may not include antennas to
broadcast the signal. This broadcasting classification includes establishments
that operate broadcasting studios and facilities for over the air or satellite
delivery of radio and television programs of entertainment, news, talk, etc.
BUFFER YARD: Land area with landscape plantings and other components used to
separate one use from another and to shield or block noise, lights, or other
nuisances.
BUILD-TO LINE (BTL): A build-to line (BTL) is a set building line on a lot,
located parallel to the applicable lot line, where the structure must be
located. The building facade must be located on the build-to line. Facade
articulation, such as window or wall recesses and projections are not counted
as the building façade line, which begins at the applicable façade wall.
   FIGURE 14-2. BUILD-TO LINE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/09fc73b1baa9c9185d886b27aa527b40ba0b85e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1475.png]
 
BUILD-TO ZONE (BTZ): A build-to zone (BTZ) is the area on a lot, located
parallel to the applicable lot line, where a structure must locate within the
minimum and maximum range of setback provided. The building facade must be
located within the build-to zone. Facade articulation, such as window or wall
recesses and projections are not counted as the building façade line, which
begins at the applicable façade wall.
   FIGURE 14-3. BUILD-TO ZONE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/09fc73b1baa9c9185d886b27aa527b40ba0b85e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1477.png]
 
BUILD-TO PERCENTAGE: Build-to percentage specifies the percentage of the
building facade that must be located within a build-to line or build-to zone,
as a percentage of the lot width. Facade articulation, such as window or wall
recesses and projections, do not count against the required build-to
percentage.
   FIGURE 14-4. BUILD-TO PERCENTAGE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/09fc73b1baa9c9185d886b27aa527b40ba0b85e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1485.png]
 
BUILDABLE AREA: The portion of a lot, excluding required setbacks, where a
structure or building improvements may be erected.
BUILDING: Any structure for the enclosure, protection, shelter, or support of
persons, animals, or property of any kind and which is permanently affixed to
the ground. The term building does not include fences.
BUILDING ENVELOPE: The three-dimensional space within which a structure is
permitted to be built on a lot and which is defined by regulations governing
building setbacks, maximum height, and bulk, by other regulations, and/or by
any combination thereof.
BUILDING COVERAGE: That portion of the lot that is covered by principal
buildings and accessory structures.
BUILDING ELEVATION: A side of a building, including the façade.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the average finished grade of all
building corners facing a street to the highest point of the roof as indicated
in Figure 14-5, Building Height.
   FIGURE 14-5. BUILDING HEIGHT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/09fc73b1baa9c9185d886b27aa527b40ba0b85e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1483.png]
 
BUILDING LINE: A line measured at the building wall of a structure between
parallel lot lines. For the purposes of establishing a building line, the
building wall does not include permitted encroachments of architectural
features, such as eaves, and steps and stoops.
CAMPS/ CAMPGROUNDS: Establishments that operate sites to accommodate campers
and their equipment, including tents, tent trailers, travel trailers, and
recreational vehicles; also, establishments that provide overnight recreational
camps, such as children’s camps, family vacation camps, hunting and fishing
camps, and outdoor adventure retreats that offer trail riding, white-water
rafting, hiking, and similar activities. These establishments may provide
facilities and services, such as cabins, washrooms, food services, recreational
facilities and equipment, and organized recreational activities.
CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT (NON-DISPENSING): A cultivation center, craft
grower, processing organization, or transporting organization, as these terms
are defined in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410 ILCS 705/1-10.
CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION: A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Department of Financial and Professional
Regulation to acquire cannabis from a cultivation center, craft grower,
processing organization, or another dispensing organization for the purpose of
selling or dispensing cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds,
paraphernalia, or related supplies, to adults or to qualified registered
medical cannabis patients and caregivers, under the Cannabis Regulation and Tax
Act, 410 ILCS 705/1-1, et seq.
CANOPY, NON-STRUCTURAL: A roof-like non-structural cover that projects from the
wall of a structure with support posts that extend to the ground. See also
AWNING.
CANOPY - STRUCTURAL: A permanent structure, with support posts that extend to
the ground, that serves as an overhanging shelter that forms the structure of a
building and is constructed in such a manner as to allow pedestrians and/or
vehicles to pass underneath. A structural canopy may be attached to the
building or freestanding.
CARPORT: An open sided, roofed structure used for the parking and shelter of
vehicles from sun and precipitation. A carport is normally formed by the
extension of the roof from a building to which it is attached. A carport is
normally attached to a building and formed by the extension of the building’s
roof. A carport may also be a freestanding structure.
CAR WASH: An establishment for the washing and cleaning of vehicles, including
trucks, or other light duty equipment, whether automatic, by hand, or self-
service. The car wash facility may be within an enclosed structure, an open bay
structure, or similar configurations.
CEMETERY: A place used for or intended for the interment of human or animal
remains or cremated remains. Cemeteries may include: structures for performing
religious ceremonies related to the entombment of the deceased; mortuaries,
including the sales of items related to the internment of remains; and related
accessory structures, such as sheds for the storage of maintenance equipment.
CHICKEN: A domesticated fowl of the Gallus family.
CHICKEN COOP: A roofed and enclosed structure that provides indoor space for
poultry or other fowl, where such birds may lay eggs, rest, and be protected
from the elements and predators. See also CHICKEN RUN.
CHICKEN RUN: A cage or pen, often with a roof, that provides an outdoor area
for chickens or other fowl to rest, exercise, eat and drink. See also CHICKEN
COOP.
CHIMNEY: A primarily vertical structure containing one or more flues, for the
purpose of carrying gaseous products of combustion and air from a fuel-burning
appliance or heating source to the outdoor atmosphere.
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS, OR C DISTRICTS: Zoning districts that allow a variety of
non-residential uses such as retail, restaurant, entertainment, service, and
office, where such types of uses are the primary uses allowed, and/or where a
wide range of commercial uses are allowed with some residential uses to create
mixed-use development.
COMMERCIAL USE: A structure or land arranged, designed, used, or intended to be
used for non-residential uses, such as, but is not limited to: retail,
restaurant, entertainment, service, office, and similar uses.
COMMUNITY CENTER: A facility used as a place of meeting, recreation, or social
activity, that is open to the public and is not operated for profit, and offers
a variety of social, educational, community service activities.
COMMUNITY GARDEN: The cultivation of fruits, flowers, vegetables, or ornamental
plants by more than one person or family. Community gardens do not include the
raising of livestock or the use of heavy machinery.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE: A group residence consisting of a group home or
specialized residential care home licensed, certified or accredited by the
appropriate state or federal agencies, and serving as a single housekeeping
unit for the housing of unrelated persons with functional disabilities who
share responsibilities, meals, recreation, social activities and other aspects
of residential living. "Community Residence" does not include a residence which
services persons as an alternative to incarceration for a criminal offense, or
persons whose primary reason for placement is substance or alcohol abuse, nor
does it include a nursing or medical facility.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE, LARGE: A community residence providing living
accommodations for more than eight (8) residents, including live-in staff.
Visiting staff who do not reside within the community residence are not counted
for purposes of establishing the number of residents.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE, SMALL: A community residence providing living
accommodations for no more than eight (8) residents, including live-in staff.
Visiting staff who do not reside within the community residence are be counted
for purposes of establishing the number of residents.
CONSERVATION DESIGN: A subdivision technique intended to preserve natural and
environmentally sensitive areas while allowing for residential development.
CONTRACTOR OFFICE, WITH EQUIPMENT STORAGE: Offices for businesses in the
conduct of any building trade, building craft or industrial-type supply,
together with land and/or structures used for the storage of equipment,
vehicles, machinery, or building materials related to and used by the building
trade or craft. A contractor’s office with no equipment storage is considered
an office.
CONTRACTOR/ STORAGE YARD:
   1.   Land used primarily for the storage of equipment, vehicles, machinery
(new or used), building materials, paints, pipe, lumber or electrical
components used by the owner or occupant of the premises in the conduct of any
building trades, building craft, road construction, or industrial supply. A
contractor/storage yard may or may not have an office for administrative
functions of the business. A contractor office with no equipment storage is
considered an office.
   2.   Land used primarily for the storage of RVs, trailers, semi-truck
tractors and trailers or other vehicles, whether rented or owner-occupied.
CONVENIENCE STORE/FOOD MART: Convenience stores or food marts (except those
with fuel pumps) primarily retail a limited line of goods that generally
includes milk, bread, soda, and snacks. These establishments also sell gifts,
crafts, maps, and other goods normally associated with travel and tourism.
CROP/ANIMAL PRODUCTION: The raising of crops and/or animals primarily for sale
and profit.
CROSS-ACCESS: A vehicular and/or pedestrian connection between abutting
properties that connects the two (2) sites and allows vehicles and/or
pedestrians to travel between sites without having to exit to the street.
DAY CARE CENTER: Any child care facility which regularly provides day care for
less than twenty-four (24) hours per day for more than eight (8) children in a
family home or more than three (3) children in a facility other than a family
home, including senior citizen buildings. The term does not include: programs
operated by public or private elementary school systems or secondary level
school units or institutions of higher learning that serve children who shall
have attained the age of three (3) years; private entities on the grounds of
public or private elementary or secondary schools that serve children who have
attained the age of three (3) years, except that this exception applies only to
the facility and not to the private entities' personnel operating the program;
programs or that portion of the program which serves children who shall have
attained the age of three (3) years and which are recognized by the State Board
of Education; educational program or programs serving children who shall have
attained the age of three (3) years and which are operated by a school which is
registered with the State Board of Education and which is recognized or
accredited by a recognized national or multi-state educational organization or
association which regularly recognizes or accredits schools; programs which
exclusively serve or that portion of the program which serves handicapped
children who shall have attained the age of three (3) years but are less than
twenty-one (21) years of age and which are registered and approved as meeting
standards of the State Board of Education and applicable fire marshal
standards; facilities operated in connection with a shopping center or service,
religious services or other similar facility where transient children are cared
for temporarily while parents or custodians of the children are occupied on the
premises and readily available; any type of day care center that is conducted
on federal government premises; special activities programs, including
athletics, crafts instruction and similar activities conducted on an organized
and periodic basis by civic, charitable and governmental organizations; part
day child care facilities, as defined in Section 2.10 of the Child Care Act of
1969; or Illinois Department of Children and Family Services Rules 407 – (9)
programs or that portion of the program which: serves children who shall have
attained the age of three (3) years; is operated by churches or religious
institutions as described in section 501(c)(3) of the federal Internal Revenue
Code; receives no governmental aid; is operated as a component of religious,
nonprofit elementary school; operates primarily to provide religious education;
and meets appropriate State or local health and fire safety standards. For
purposes of this Section, "children who shall have attained the age of three
(3) years" shall mean children who are three (3) years of age, but less than
four (4) years of age, at the time of enrollment in the program. (Section 2.09
of the Child Care Act of 1969) "Department" means the Illinois Department of
Children and Family Services. (Section 2.02 of the Child Care Act of 1969).
DAY CARE HOME: Family homes which receive more than three (3) and up to a
maximum of twelve (12) children for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day.
The maximum of twelve (12) children includes the family's natural, foster, or
adopted children and all other persons under the age of twelve (12). The term
does not include facilities which receive only children from a single household
(Section 2.18 of the Child Care Act of 1969 [225 ILCS 10]).
DECK: A roofless outdoor space built as an above-ground platform projecting
from the wall of a structure and connected by structural supports at grade or
by the structure.
DEPARTMENT STORE, MEMBERSHIP CLUB OR SUPERSTORE: These establishments are
unique in that they have the equipment and staff capable of retailing a large
variety of goods from a single location. They retail a wide range of products
with no one merchandise line predominating. Products may include: apparel,
furniture, appliances and home furnishings, paint, hardware, toiletries,
cosmetics, photographic equipment, jewelry, toys, and sporting goods.
Merchandise lines may be arranged in separate departments. Such establishments
often require membership as a prerequisite for shopping or reduced prices on
merchandise. Use this classification for establishments known as membership
clubs, superstores or super centers retailing a general line of groceries in
combination with general merchandise. See also: HOME CENTER.
DEVELOPMENT: The construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure, any mining,
excavation, landfill or land disturbance, or any change in use, or alteration
or extension of the use, of land.
DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (DBH): A tree's diameter at breast or chest height is
the most common tree measurement made on a tree by tree professionals. It is
also called "DBH" for short. Breast height is specifically defined as a point
around the trunk at four and a half feet (4.5') (1.37 meters in metric using
countries) above the forest floor on the uphill side of the tree. For the
purposes of determining breast height, the forest floor includes the duff layer
that may be present but does not include unincorporated woody debris that may
rise above the ground line. The two (2) most common instruments used to measure
DBH are a girthing (or diameter) tape and calipers.
DRIVE-THRU FACILITY: An establishment or facility which contains a building
opening or mechanical device through which occupants of a motor vehicle receive
a product or service. ATMs positioned so that customers must access the device
while outside their vehicle are not included in this definition.
DRIVEWAY: A pathway for motor vehicles from a street to a lot used only for
service purposes or for access to the lot.
DWELLING: A structure, or portion thereof, designed or used exclusively for
human habitation, including single-family dwellings, but excluding manufactured
homes and hotels.
DWELLING UNIT, SINGLE-FAMILY, DETACHED (SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING UNIT):
A structure containing only one dwelling unit on a single lot.
DWELLING UNIT: A structure or portion of a structure providing complete,
independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.
EASEMENT: Land designed by lawful agreement between the owner(s) of the land
and a person(s) for a specified use only by such person(s).
EAVE: The projecting lower edges of a roof overhanging the wall of a structure.
ENCROACHMENT: The extension or placement of any structure, or a component of
such, into a required setback or right-of-way.
ENERGY SYSTEM, PRINCIPAL USE: A solar and/or wind turbine energy system
operated by a public, private, or cooperative company for the generation,
transmission, distribution, storage, or processing of solar and/or wind energy.
EQUINE: A member of the horse family (Equidae), including horse ass, donkey,
mule and hinny.
EXTERIOR LIGHTING: The illumination of an outside area or object by any man-
made device that produces light by any means.
FAÇADE: The face of a building that looks on to a street or public open space
such as a square.
FAMILY: A family is defined as one (1) or more persons related by blood,
marriage, civil union, domestic partnership, or adoption (including foster
children), or a group of no more than three (3) unrelated persons maintaining a
common household in a single dwelling unit.
FARMER'S MARKET: Temporary use of structures and/or land for the sale of a
variety of fresh fruits, flowers, vegetables, or ornamental plants, and other
locally produced farm and food products, including value-added products,
directly to consumers from two (2) or more farmers or from vendors that have
taken such items on consignment for retail sale.
FARMSTAND: A temporary structure where agricultural products produced on the
premises are sold.
FENCE: An enclosure or barrier, such as wooden posts, wire or masonry, used as
a boundary, for screening, privacy, confinement, or decoration, but not
including hedges, shrubs, trees, or other vegetation.
FENCE, NON-PRIVACY: A fence that has, over its entirety, more than twenty
percent (20%) of the superficial surface consisting of regularly distributed
openings.
FENCE, PRIVACY: A fence that has, throughout its entirety, no distributed
openings. A shadowbox design fence is considered a solid fence.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION: An establishment licensed as a receiver of deposits, a
savings and loan, credit union, or mortgage office. Financial institution does
not include “pawn shop.” See also: “investment banking, securities and
brokerages.
FITNESS, RECREATIONAL SPORTS, GYM, OR ATHLETIC CLUB, 10,000 SF OR LESS: An
establishment where an art, type of art or activity is taught, studied, or
practiced such as dance, martial arts, photography, music, painting,
gymnastics, Pilates, or yoga. A studio also includes private exercise studios
for private sessions with trainers and/or private classes.
FITNESS, RECREATIONAL SPORTS, GYM, OR ATHLETIC CLUB, MORE THAN 10,000 SF: An
establishment where individuals or groups participate in physical training or
sports, such as weight training, aerobics, swimming, yoga and the like. This
category can include accessory uses and activities such as saunas, snack bars,
and physical therapy.
FLOODLIGHT: A light designed for illuminating a scene or object to a luminance
greater than its surroundings.
FOOT-CANDLE: A unit of measure of illuminance equal to one lumen of light
spread over an area of one square foot.
FUNERAL HOME: An establishment where the dead are prepared for burial display
and for rituals before burial or cremation, including chapels for the display
of the deceased and the conducting of rituals before burial. A funeral home may
or may not perform cremation and have crematoriums.
GAMING (GAMBLING) PARLOR: An establishment where the primary function, activity
and source of revenue is video gaming. Such establishment, per State statute,
must have a liquor license for pouring and thus will serve alcohol and food or
snacks.
GARAGE: A building or indoor space designed or used for the parking or storage
of a motor vehicle. For the purposes of this definition, garage does not
include a commercial parking structure.
GAS STATION: An establishment that primarily retails automotive fuels (e.g.,
diesel fuel, gasohol, gasoline) which may or may not be in combination with
convenience stores or food marts or car wash bays. These establishments may
further provide services such as automotive repair, automotive oils,
replacement parts and accessories, or food and beverage sales.
GAZEBO: A freestanding, pavilion-like structure with roof and open sides, used
for recreation or entertainment but not for habitation.
GOLF COURSE OR DRIVING RANGE: A tract of land design with at least nine (9)
holes for playing a game of golf and improved with tees, greens, fairways, and
hazards. A golf course may include a clubhouse, restrooms and shelters, and
country club facilities. A driving range may be designed as a standalone
facility or included as part of a larger golf course.
GRADE: The average level of the finished surface of the ground measured at the
front lot line.
GREENHOUSE: A structure constructed chiefly of glass, glasslike or translucent
material, cloth, or lath, which is devoted to the protection or cultivation of
flowers or other tender plants.
GREEN HOUSE OR NURSERY: An establishment where flowers, shrubbery, vegetables,
trees, and other horticultural and floricultural products are propagated and
sold, and may include gardening and landscape supplies and products, such as
hardware, garden tools and utensils, paving stones and bricks, and other
related items for sale.
GREEN ROOF: A building roof partially or completely covered with vegetation and
a growing medium, planted over a waterproofing membrane. It may also include
additional layers such as a root barrier and drainage and irrigation systems.
GROCERY STORE, SUPERMARKET, OR BAKERY: Supermarkets and other grocery (except
convenience) stores retail a general line of food, such as canned and frozen
foods; fresh fruits and vegetables; and fresh and prepared meats, fish, and
poultry. Included in this class are meat and seafood markets, delicatessen-type
establishments, and establishments retailing baked goods (not for immediate
consumption and made off-premises).
GROSS FLOOR AREA (GFA): The gross floor area of a structure is the sum of the
gross horizontal areas of all floors of the structure as measured from the
exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating
two (2) buildings.
HEAVY EQUIPMENT SALES AND SERVICE: The use of any building or portion of a
building, or other premises or portion thereof, for the display, sale, rental,
or lease of heavy construction or farm equipment, including: cranes, earth
moving or grading equipment, heavy trucks, tractors, and any warranty repair
work and other repair service conducted as an accessory use.
HOME-BASED BUSINESS: Any gainful business, occupation, or profession conducted
within a dwelling unit by a member of the family residing in the dwelling unit
which is incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for dwelling
purposes.
HOME CENTER: These establishments primarily retail materials and supplies for
home building or repairs. They also sell other products, such as lumber,
plumbing goods, electrical goods, tools, house wares, hardware, and, sometimes,
lawn and garden supplies. Outdoor display and/or storage or partially enclosed
display and/or storage, is typical of these establishments. See also:
“department store” and “warehouse club and superstore.”
HOSPITAL: Any institution, place, building, buildings on a campus, or agency,
public or private, whether organized for profit or not, devoted primarily to
the maintenance and operation of facilities for the diagnosis and treatment or
care of two (2) or more unrelated persons admitted for overnight stay or longer
in order to obtain medical, including obstetric, psychiatric and nursing, care
of illness, disease, injury, infirmity, or deformity.
HOTEL: A facility that provides sleeping accommodations for a fee and customary
lodging services. Related ancillary uses include, but are not limited to,
meeting facilities, restaurants, bars, and recreational facilities for the use
of guests." Hotel" does not include boarding house.
HOUSING SERVICES FOR THE INFIRM: Establishments that offer a wide range of
housing services residential settings for those who cannot care for themselves,
such as especially as the elderly. These establishments have primarily evolved
from two (2) service areas: housing and custodial care, and include the
following: retirement housing services; congregate living facility; assisted
living facility; life care or continuing care facility; skilled nursing
facility.
IES: Illuminating Engineering Society of North America.
ILLUMINANCE: The total luminous flux incident on a surface, per unit area.
ILLUMINANCE GRID PLOT: A photometric report indicating the average horizontal
illumination delivered to each of the squares of a gridded area illuminated by
one or more luminaires.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE COVERAGE: Impervious surface coverage is a measure of
intensity of land use that represents the portion of a lot that is occupied by
structures, pavement, and other impervious surfaces that do not allow for the
absorption of water into the ground. The maximum impervious surface of a lot is
calculated as the percentage of all impervious surface area against the total
area of the lot. When pervious paving is used, it is calculated at a reduced
percentage of impervious coverage, as follows:
   1.   Pervious concrete and open grid paving systems are calculated as fifty
percent (50%) impervious surface, provided that no barrier to infiltration is
installed beneath the material. Open grid pavers must be installed on a sand
base, without an impervious liner, to qualify forthe fifty (50%) calculation.
   2.   Other types of pervious surfaces, such as permeable pavers, porous
asphalt, or gravel-crete, are credited based upon field performance data and
coefficients of permeability provided by the manufacturer.
INDUSTRIAL DESIGN: An establishment where the design, marketing, brand
development and sales of various products are researched and developed. An
industrial design establishment may create prototypes of products but may not
manufacture products for direct sale and distribution from the premises.
INDUSTRIAL, LIGHT: The manufacturing of products from processed or unprocessed
raw materials, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and
packaging of such products, and incidental storage, sales, and distribution of
such products. This manufacturing may produce noise, vibrations, illumination,
or particulate that is perceptible to adjacent land users. These industrial
uses typically have ancillary outdoor storage areas. Light industrial does not
include outdoor storage yards as a principal use.
INFRASTRUCTURE: Facilities and services needed to sustain residential,
commercial, industrial, institutional, and other activities, including, but not
limited to, water lines, sewer lines, and rights-of-way.
ISO-FOOT-CANDLE PLOTS: A plot that graphically represents a particular
luminaire's lighting pattern, in illuminance, as the light strikes a horizontal
surface. It includes foot-candle calculations shown with the luminaire at
various mounting heights. Contour lines are drawn through illuminance values.
INVESTMENT BANKING, SECURITIES AND BROKERAGES: These establishments primarily
engage in one of the following:
   1.   Underwriting securities issues or making markets for securities and
commodities;
   2.   Acting as agents (i.e., brokers) between buyers and sellers of
securities and commodities;
   3.   Providing securities and commodity exchange services; and
   4.   Providing other services, such as managing portfolios of assets;
providing investment advice; and trust, fiduciary, and custody services.
See also: FINANCIAL INSTITUTION.
LAWN AND GARDEN SUPPLIES: Lawn and garden supply establishments offer
specialized products and services for lawn and garden. They come in two (2)
variations:
   1.   Some sell new outdoor power equipment which may or may not be
accompanied with repair services and replacement parts;
   2.   Others sell nursery and garden products, such as trees, shrubs, plants,
seeds, bulbs, and sod, that are predominantly grown elsewhere (these
establishments may sell a limited amount of a product they grow themselves).
LIGHT POLE: Pole on which a luminaire is mounted.
LIGHT TRESPASS: Light that falls on property other than that of the owner of
the light source.
LIGHTING PLAN: An overall plan that describes the outdoor lighting. See also
“photometric plan.”
LIVESTOCK: Any of the following animals which are generally raised for food or
commodities such as meat, milk, leather and wool: bison, cattle, hogs, and
pigs. This definition of livestock does not include those animals listed under
“barnyard animal” or “equine.”
LIVESTOCK SHELTER: Any structure intended or used for the keeping and
protecting of animals from the elements and predators. “Livestock shelter”
includes barns, pavilions and chicken coops.
LOADING BERTH: A space within a loading facility exclusive of driveways,
aisles, maneuvering areas, ramps, columns, landscape, and structures for the
temporary parking of a commercial delivery vehicle while loading or unloading
goods or materials.
LOT: A tract or parcel of land owned or meant to be owned by some owner(s). A
lot is the basic development unit for determination of lot area, depth, and
other dimensional regulations; or a parcel of land whose boundaries have been
established by some legal instrument such as a recorded deed or recorded map
and which is recognized as a separate legal entity for purposes of transfer of
title. See also “zoning lot.”
LOT AREA: Lot area equals the total area within the boundaries of a lot,
excluding any street right-of-way, usually defined in acres or square feet.
LOT, CORNER: A corner lot is a lot situated at the junction of, and abutting
on, two (2) or more intersecting streets. See
Figure 14-9.
LOT DEPTH:
The distance measured from the front lot line to the rear lot line. For lots
where the front and rear lot lines are not parallel, the lot depth is the depth
calculated at the deepest part of the lot. excluding any street right-of-way
LOT, FLAG: A flag lot is a lot shaped so that the main building area is set
back from the street on which it fronts by a narrow access strip connecting the
main building site with the right-of-way, where the narrow access strip does
not meet the lot width requirements of the district. See Figure 14-6.
   FIGURE 14-6. FLAG LOT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/09fc73b1baa9c9185d886b27aa527b40ba0b85e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1487.png]
 
LOT, INTERIOR: An interior lot is a lot other than a corner or through lot,
bounded by two (2) interior side lot lines.
LOT LINE: A line of record bounding a lot, as indicated on an approved, filed,
and recorded subdivision plat, which divides one lot from another lot or from a
public or private street or any other public or private space. See
Figure 14-7.
LOT LINE, CORNER: On a corner lot, the corner side lot line is perpendicular or
approximately perpendicular to the front lot line and is the longer street
abutting lot line of a corner lot. See
Figure 14-7.
LOT LINE, FRONT: A front lot line is the lot line separating a lot from a
street right-of-way. The front lot line of a corner lot is the shortest street
lot line of a corner lot abutting a street. A front lot line for a through lot
is both lot lines that abut a street. See
Figure 14-7.
LOT LINE, INTERIOR: On an interior lot, the interior side lot line is
perpendicular or approximately perpendicular to the front lot line and abuts
the adjacent lot. See
Figure 14-7.
LOT LINE, REAR: A rear lot line is the lot line opposite and most distant from
the front lot line, or in the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly
shaped lots, an assumed line at least ten feet (10') in length entirely within
the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, STREET: A street lot line is any lot line separating a lot from a
street right-of-way.
   FIGURE 14-7. LOT LINES, LOT AREA, AND LOT DEPTH
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/09fc73b1baa9c9185d886b27aa527b40ba0b85e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1469.png]
LOT, THROUGH: A through lot is a lot which fronts upon two (2) parallel
streets, or which fronts upon two (2) streets which do not intersect at the
boundaries of the lot. A through lot is also called a double frontage lot.
LOT WIDTH:
   1.   For regular lots, lot width is the horizontal distance between the side
lot lines measured at right angles to its depth along a straight line parallel
to the required front setback, build-to line, or farthest build-to line
comprising a build-to zone.
   2.   For cul-de-sac lots, on those lots with a curved front lot line, lot
width is measured as follows:
      a.   A line is drawn at the midpoint of the lot between the side lot
lines, extending from the front lot line to the rear lot line.
      b.   Where the required front setback intersects the midpoint line at a
right angle, a line is drawn perpendicular to the midpoint line.
      c.   Lot width is determined as the length of the line between side lot
lines.
      d.   Where the side lot lines angle to increase width towards the rear,
the required lot width measured at the required setback is seventy-five (75%)
of the lot width required by the zoning district.
   3.   For flag lots, lot width is measured at the required front setback as
defined in this section. See Figure 14-8.
   FIGURE 14-8. LOT WIDTH
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/09fc73b1baa9c9185d886b27aa527b40ba0b85e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1467.png]
 
   FIGURE 14-9. LOT TYPES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/09fc73b1baa9c9185d886b27aa527b40ba0b85e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1465.png]
 
LUMINAIRE, FULL CUT-OFF: A luminaire having zero intensity at or above
horizontal and limited to a value not exceeding ten percent (10%) of lamp
lumens at or above eighty degrees (80°). Such luminaire is determined by a
photometric test and certified by the manufacturer.
LUMINAIRE, LIGHT LUMINAIRE: The complete lighting assembly (including the lamp
(s), housing, ballasts, photocells, globes, reflectors or refractors, lenses,
sensors and shield(s) and excluding the support assembly or pole, mounting
bracket and base) consisting of one or more lamps, together with the attachment
parts designed to distribute light, position and connect the lamp to the power
supply.
LUMINOUS FLUX: The power emitted from a source of electromagnetic radiation,
such as a light bulb, in the form of visible light. Luminous flux is measured
in lumens and is typically specified by the manufacturer for a given lamp or
luminaire.
MANUFACTURED HOME: Factory-built structures but are designed and constructed to
comply with the national HUD code. Mobile homes are built entirely in the
factory. They are constructed on a steel chassis with axles and wheels, which
enables them to be transported to their final location. Once delivered, they
are typically placed on blocks or piers rather than a permanent foundation. See
also: “modular home.”
MARQUEE: A permanent roof-like structure or canopy of rigid attached to a
building and extending over the building’s main entrance.
MASSAGE OR MASSAGE THERAPY: A system of structured palpation or movement of the
soft tissue of the body. The system may include, but is not limited to,
techniques such as effleurage or stroking and gliding, petrissage or kneading,
tapotement or percussion, friction, vibration, compression, and stretching
activities as they pertain to massage therapy. These techniques may be applied
by a licensed massage therapist with or without the aid of lubricants, salt or
herbal preparations, hydromassage, thermal massage, or a massage device that
mimics or enhances the actions possible by human hands. The purpose of the
practice of massage, as licensed under this Act, is to enhance the general
health and well-being of the mind and body of the recipient. "Massage" does not
include the diagnosis of a specific pathology. "Massage" does not include those
acts of physical therapy or therapeutic or corrective measures that are outside
the scope of massage therapy practice as defined in this Section.
MASSAGE THERAPIST: A person who is licensed by the State of Illinois for
massage therapy and administers massage for compensation.
MEDICAL CLINIC OR MEDICAL OFFICE: A facility for providing medical,
psychiatric, surgical, dental, or optometric services on an out-patient basis,
including emergency treatment, diagnostic services, training, administration,
and services to outpatients, employees, or visitors.
MIXED USE: An arrangement of land uses whereby the ground floor of a structure
is occupied by commercial uses and upper floor or floors are occupied by
residential uses, such as studios, apartments, or condominiums.
MOBILE FOOD TRUCK (BASE OF OPERATIONS): A tract of land and a structure on the
tract of land used by mobile food truck operators as their base. Such a
location is where office functions are carried out, where trucks are restocked
and parked when not in use.
MODULAR HOME: Modular homes are built in separate modules or sections in the
factory, which are then transported to the site and assembled together on a
permanent foundation. See also: MANUFACTURED HOME.
MULTI-TENANT RETAIL CENTER: A group of three (3) or more commercial
establishments that is planned, owned, and/or managed as a single property. The
two (2) main configurations of multi-tenant retail centers are large shopping
centers/malls and strip centers.
MUSEUM/CULTURA L FACILITY: These establishments preserve and exhibit objects of
historical, cultural, or educational value, such as a historic farm or
buildings housing a historical society. They are open to the public and may
include uses such as, but not limited to, retail sales of related items and
restaurants as ancillary uses.
NATURE PRESERVE: Designated open space that preserves and protects natural
features, wildlife, and critical environmental features, such as forest,
savanna and prairie. A nature preserve may include opportunities for passive
recreation, such as hiking trails and lookout structures, and environmental
education.
NONCOMMERCIAL MESSAGE: Signs, words or images intended to direct attention to a
political, social, community or public service issue or an idea, aim,
viewpoint, aspiration or purpose and not intended to produce any commercial
benefit or tend to encourage a commercial transaction.
NONCONFORMING LOT: A lot of record that at one time conformed to the lot
dimension standards (lot area, lot width, lot depth) of the zoning district in
which it is located but because of subsequent amendments to the zoning
ordinance no longer conforms to one or more lot dimension standards.
NONCONFORMING SIGN: A sign that once conformed to sign regulations but because
of subsequent amendments to the zoning ordinance no longer conforms to one or
more of the ordinance’s regulations.
NONCONFORMING SITE ELEMENT: A site development element, such as landscape,
fences or walls, lighting, and parking, that at one time conformed to the
standards of the zoning ordinance, but because of subsequent amendments to the
Ordinance, no longer conforms to one or more of ordinance’s standards.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE: A structure that was legally established and at one
time conformed to all of the zoning ordinance standards (or its existence pre-
dated the very first zoning ordinance), but now due to amendments to the
ordinance the structure, no longer conforms to one or more of the zoning
standards.
NONCONFORMING USE: A land use that was legally established and at one time
conformed to all zoning ordinance standards (or its existence pre-dated the
very first zoning ordinance), but now due to amendments to the zoning ordinance
that land use no longer is permitted in the zoning district in which it is
located.
NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATION: An organization that does not distribute its surplus
funds to owners or shareholders, but instead uses them to help pursue its
goals.
NORTH AMERICAN INDUSTRY CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM (NAICS): The standard used by
federal statistical agencies in classifying business establishments for the
purpose of collecting, analyzing, and publishing statistical data related to
the U.S. business economy.
NURSERY: See also: GREEN HOUSE.
OFFICE: An establishment that engages in the processing, manipulation, or
application of business information or professional expertise. Such an office
may or may not offer services to the public. An office is not materially
involved in fabricating, assembling, or warehousing of physical products for
the retail or wholesale market, nor engaged in the repair of products or retail
services. An office does not include bank or financial institution, government
facility, or industrial design.
OFF-STREET PARKING: The storage space for an automobile on premises other than
streets or rights-of-way.
OPEN SPACE: That portion of land, either landscaped or left unimproved, which
is used to meet active or passive recreation or spatial needs, and/or to
protect water, air, or plant resources.
ORGANIZED SPORTING EVENT: A prearranged sports or recreational event involving
at least one group or team with a roster and schedule.
ORIEL: An area that protrudes from the external wall of a building forming a
bay or alcove on the interior side of the building. Unlike a bay window, an
oriel protrudes from an upper floor of a building and is normally supported by
brackets or corbels. An oriel may have curved construction, however it
typically consists of: central windowpane, parallel to the exterior wall; and
two (2) or more flanking windows at angles to the exterior wall and central
windowpane which serve to connect the central windowpane with the exterior
wall. See also BAY WINDOW.
OUTDOOR DINING: A seating area that is located outdoors and contiguous to a
restaurant or bar/brew pub, typically in addition to an indoor seating area.
Outdoor dining areas may be roofed or covered with an awning.
OUTDOOR DISPLAY AND SALES AREA: Part of a lot used for outdoor sales and/or
display of goods accessory to the principal use.
OUTDOOR LIGHTING: Light generated from an indoor or outdoor source that
provides illumination to any exterior surface, building, sign, structure,
device, or other outdoor feature (including land) which is visible to an
observer located outdoors. For the purposes of this chapter, the light source
inside an internally illuminated sign is not considered outdoor lighting.
OUTDOOR STORAGE, SEASONAL: Temporary outdoor retail operations or displays of
plants, fruits and vegetables that are, by their nature, sold during a specific
or peak season, including such items as Christmas trees, pumpkins, watermelons,
sweet corn, and bedding plants.
OWNER: Any person, including the owner of the title or a mortgage whose
interest is shown of record in the mortgage and conveyance records; a person
shown as owner in the records of the tax assessor of the county in which the
property is situated; or the agent of any such person and those in possession
of a dwelling, dwelling unit, or premises.
PADDOCK: An enclosed area that is used for exercising or pasturing horses and
other equines.
PARAPET: The extension of a false front or wall above a roofline.
PARK: A facility that serves the recreational needs of residents and visitors.
Park includes, but is not limited to, playgrounds, ballfields, football fields,
soccer fields, basketball courts, tennis courts, dog parks, skateboard parks,
passive recreation areas, and field houses. Public parks may also include non-
commercial indoor or outdoor amusement facilities, including zoos and
amphitheaters, ancillary uses such as, but not limited to, restaurant and
retail establishments, and temporary outdoor uses such as festivals and
performances.
PARKING LOT: An open, hard-surfaced area, other than a street or public way,
used for the storage of operable vehicles, whether for compensation or at no
charge. This includes park-and-ride lots, where commuters and others park their
vehicles and transfer to a bus, rail system (rapid transit, light rail, or
commuter rail), or carpool, and the vehicle is left in the lot during the day
and retrieved when the owner returns.
PARKING STRUCTURE: A structure of one or more levels or floors used for the
parking or storage of operable vehicles, whether for compensation or at no
charge.
PARTY WALL: A wall starting from the foundation and extending continuously
through all stories to or above the roof that separates one building from
another but is in joint use by each building.
PATIO: A paved surface, at grade, adjacent to or near a building and used for
recreation, but not used as a parking space.
PHARMACY OR DRUG STORE: Pharmacies and drug stores primarily retail
prescription or nonprescription drugs and medicines.
PHOTOMETRIC PLAN: A plan or map that indicates the calculated illumination
levels, foot candle readings, and light distribution for a specific area.
PAWN SHOP: An establishment that, in whole or in part, loans money on deposit
of personal property or deals in the purchase or possession of personal
property on condition of selling the same back again to the pledger or
depositor, or loans or advances money on personal property by taking chattel
mortgage security thereon, and takes or receives such personal property.
PERFORMING ARTS ESTABLISHMENT: Establishments in this category produce or
organize and promote live presentations. The classification recognizes the
following basic processes: producing events; organizing, managing, and
promoting events; managing and representing entertainers; and providing the
artistic, creative and technical skills for the production of these live
events. Although nightclubs may offer live entertainment, they are excluded
from this category. Use the appropriate food, drink, or recreational category
for nightclubs.
PERGOLA: A freestanding, open structure that forms a partially shaded
pedestrian walkway, passageway, or sitting area, and is constructed of a semi-
open roof and vertical posts that support crossbeams and a sturdy open lattice.
It may also be used as an extension of a building entryway.
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment that provides frequent or
recurrent needed services of a personal nature. Typical uses include, but are
not limited to, beauty shops, barbershops, tanning salons, electronics repair
shops, nail salons, laundromats dry cleaners, and tailors. Personal service
establishment also includes counseling services or charitable services.
Personal service establishment does not include vehicle rental agencies,
fitness clubs, or body art establishments.
PERVIOUS PAVING: A range of sustainable materials and techniques for permeable
paving with a base and sub-base that allow the movement of stormwater through
the surface. Gravel and loose rock are not considered pervious paving.
PHOTOMETRIC PLAN: A plan that will indicate light distribution and the
performance of lighting fixtures.
PHYSICAL THERAPY: "Physical therapy" includes, but is not limited to:
   1.   Performance of specialized tests and measurements;
   2.   Administration of specialized treatment procedures;
   3.   Interpretation of referrals from physicians, dentists, advanced
practice registered nurses, physician assistants, and podiatric physicians;
   4.   Establishment, and modification of physical therapy treatment programs;
   5.   Administration of topical medication used in generally accepted
physical therapy procedures when such medication is either prescribed by the
patient's physician, licensed to practice medicine in all its branches, the
patient's physician licensed to practice podiatric medicine, the patient's
advanced practice registered nurse, the patient's physician assistant, or the
patient's dentist or used following the physician's orders or written
instructions;
   6.   Supervision or teaching of physical therapy; and
   7.   Dry needling.
PHYSICAL THERAPIST: A person who practices physical therapy and who holds a
current and valid State of Illinois license as a physical therapist.
PHYSICAL THERAPY CENTER: An establishment offering physical therapy services,
as defined by this title, and employing at least one person licensed by the
State of Illinois as a physical therapist.
PICKLEBALL COURT: A venue used for the playing of the paddle sport of
pickleball.
PLAYING FIELD: An open outdoor field or court used for, but not limited to,
playing sports such as baseball, soccer, football, tennis, volleyball, and
basketball.
PORCH: An architectural feature that projects from the exterior wall of a
structure, has direct access to the street level of the building, and is
covered by a roof or eaves.
PORCH, ENCLOSED: A porch enclosed by walls, screens, lattice or other material.
A screened-in porch is an enclosed porch.
PORCH, UNENCLOSED: A porch that is open on all sides that does not abut a
principal building wall.
PORTE COCHERE: A permanent structure built over a driveway or entry drive that
provides temporary shelter to persons exiting a vehicle, but not serving as the
only covered or enclosed vehicle shelter on-site. A “port cochere” is a type of
structural canopy. See also “carport.”
POULTRY: Domesticated fowl, such as chickens or turkeys, raised for eggs and/or
meat.
PRE-SCHOOL: An establishment, for profit or non-for-profit, offering
educational and recreational settings for pre-K aged children.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING: A non-accessory structure in which the main, or primary,
use of the zoning lot on which it is located is conducted.
PRINCIPAL USE: The main or primary use of land or structures on a zoning lot as
distinguished from an accessory use.
PRIVATE CLUB OR LODGE: Buildings, related facilities and land used for the
meeting, social or recreational activities of members of a non-profit
philanthropic, social service, athletic, business or fraternal organization,
without on-site dwellings or hotel or motel rentable units. Private clubs and
lodges may include eating and drinking establishments and rooms for assembly. A
private club or lodge does not include clubs organized primarily for-profit or
to render a service which is customarily carried out as a business.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES ESTABLISHMENT: The establishments categorized here sell
expertise and perform professional, scientific, and technical services for
others. Examples are: architects, attorneys, tax specialists, licensed medical
professionals not otherwise categorized, professional engineers and land
surveyors. This category also includes establishments that offer tutoring or
learning assistance, such as preparation for standardized tests.
PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION: A building or structure owned, operated and/or occupied
by a governmental agency to provide a governmental service to the public.
"Government Facility and Offices" does not include "Public Safety Facility" or
"Public Works Facility," nor does it include government-owned field houses or
recreation centers, which would be considered a "Park," or school buildings,
which would be considered “school.”
PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITY: This category comprises government-owned establishments
providing fire and rescue, police, and emergency response services. For private
establishments offering such services, use the appropriate professional service
or health care category.
PUBLIC WORKS FACILITY: A facility operated by the municipal or parish public
works departments to provide municipal and parish services, including dispatch,
storage, and maintenance of municipal vehicles.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV): Any vehicle or boat designed for recreation,
temporary living quarters or temporary human habitation and not used as a
commercial vehicle including, but not limited to, the following: boat/
watercraft, camper trailer, motorized trailer, off-road vehicle, racing car or
cycle, travel trailer, and truck camper.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION: A facility where people regularly assemble for religious
purposes and related social events and may include group housing for persons
under religious vows or orders. Places of worship may also include ancillary
day care facilities and/or classrooms for weekly religious instruction.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT FACILITY: A facility where research and development is
conducted in industries that include, but are not limited to, biotechnology,
pharmaceuticals, medical instrumentation or supplies, communication, and
information technology, electronics and instrumentation, and computer hardware
and software. A research and development establishment may create prototypes of
products but may not manufacture products for direct sale and distribution from
the premises.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS (R DISTRICTS): Zoning districts where the primary
permitted use is residential. Residential districts may allow very limited
compatible non-residential uses, such as primary educational facilities and
places of worship.
RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION: A residential neighborhood developed as an integrated
whole and typically with a specific identity.
RESIDENTIAL USE: A structure arranged, designed, used, or intended to be used
for residential occupancy by one or more families or households, which
includes, but is not limited to, single-family dwellings. Structures with
dwellings above ground floor non-residential uses are considered mixed-use.
RESTAURANT, FULL SERVICE: Full-service restaurants provide food services to
patrons who order and are served while seated (i.e. waiter/waitress service)
and pay after eating. They may provide this service in combination with selling
alcoholic beverages, providing takeout services, or presenting live
nontheatrical entertainment.
RESTAURANT, LIMITED SERVICE (CAFETERIA): These provide food services (except
snack and nonalcoholic beverage bars) where patrons order or select items and
pay before eating. Food and drink may be consumed on premises, taken out, or
delivered to customers’ location. Some establishments in this subcategory may
provide food services in combination with selling alcoholic beverages. This
subcategory includes cafeterias, which use cafeteria-style serving equipment, a
refrigerated area, and self-service beverage dispensing equipment, and which
display food and drink items in a continuous cafeteria line.
RETAIL SALES AND SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment that provides physical
goods, products, or merchandise directly to the consumer, where such goods are
typically available for immediate purchase and removal from the premises by the
purchaser. Some establishments may further provide after-sales services, such
as repair and installation, or offer services related to the retail goods
offered. Retail goods establishment does not include establishments of a
heavier and larger-scale commercial character typically requiring permanent
outdoor service or storage areas and/or partially enclosed structures, such as
large-scale home improvement centers with outdoor storage, display, and rental,
lumberyards, truck rental establishments, and sales, rental, and repair of
heavy equipment. Retail goods establishment also does not include department
stores, home centers or vehicle dealerships.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: A path, corridor or strip of land dedicated for use as a public
way. In addition to the roadway, it typically incorporates the curbs, parkways,
sidewalks, and shoulders.
ROOFLINE: The top edge of a roof or building parapet, whichever is higher,
excluding any cupolas, pylons, chimneys or minor projections.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA: A dish antenna designed for transmitting signals to a
receiver or receiving station or for receiving television, radio, data,
communication or other signals from other antennas, satellites or other
services.
SCHOOL, ALTERNATE EDUCATION SERVICES: A school below the university level
offering specialized services, such as for the physically or mentally disabled.
SCHOOL, COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY: This category comprises junior colleges,
colleges, universities, and professional schools. These establishments furnish
academic or technical courses and grant degrees, certificates, or diplomas at
the associate, baccalaureate, or graduate levels. The requirement for admission
is at least a high school diploma or equivalent general academic training. They
may include research facilities, lodging for students, cafeterias, indoor or
outdoor recreational facilities, retail sales or similar ancillary uses.
SCHOOL, ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY: This category comprises all public, private,
and specialty schools between the preschool and university level.
SCHOOL, TRADE OR VOCATIONAL: A facility that offers vocational and technical
training in a variety of technical subjects and trades, e.g. plumbing,
carpentry, administrative. The training often leads to job-specific
certification. Also included in this category is driving schools.
SELF-STORAGE FACILITY: A facility for the storage of personal property where
individuals rent storage space and have access to the storage spaces. Ancillary
retail sales of related items, such as moving supplies, and facility offices
may also be included.
SETBACK: The minimum distance by which any structure, or obstruction is
separated from a lot line, as measured from the lot line to the closest point
of the building, structure, or obstruction, excluding open stairs or stoops.
Where lot lines extend into the public right-of-way, setbacks shall be measured
from the right-of-way. See
Figure 14-10.
SETBACK, CORNER SIDE YARD: A setback measured from the corner side lot line.
See
Figure 14-10.
SETBACK, FRONT YARD: A setback measured from the front lot line. See
Figure 14-10.
SETBACK, INTERIOR SIDE YARD: A setback measured from the interior side lot
line. See
Figure 14-10.
SETBACK, REAR YARD: A setback measured from the rear lot line. See
Figure 14-10.
   FIGURE 14-10. TYPES OF SETBACKS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/09fc73b1baa9c9185d886b27aa527b40ba0b85e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1463.png]
SHED: An accessory structure used for storage of items concomitant with the
operations or maintenance of land uses on the lot. Sheds are often purchased
pre-built or in a kit in prefabricated sections. A shed can be attached or
unattached to a foundation or footing and is distinct from a storage container.
SHORT-TERM RENTAL: A dwelling unit, portion of a dwelling unit, or accessory
dwelling unit that is rented or occupied as a rental for overnight
accommodation for a period of less than thirty (30) days and does not meet the
conditions and requirements of a bed and breakfast as found in this title.
SIGN: A symbol, lettering, pictorial representation, or combination thereof,
attached to fixed property, buildings or structures readily visible from public
property and used directs attention to an object, product, place, activity,
person, institution, organization, or business. However, a sign does not
include any display of official court or public office notices nor does it
include the flag, emblem, or insignia of a nation, political unit, school, or
religious group.
SIGN, ANIMATED: Any sign that uses movement or changes lighting to depict
action or create a special effect or scene.
SIGN, AWNING: A sign incorporated into or attached to an awning.
SIGN, BALLOON: An inflatable object or balloon shaped as an animal, person, or
other form meant to attract attention. Inflatable advertising displays designed
to inflate or move by use of a fan or blower are considered balloon signs.
SIGN, CANOPY: A sign printed or displayed upon a canopy.
SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY: A sign with letters, numerals, or other graphics that
are not permanently affixed to a structure and/or set for permanent display and
are intended to be alterable through manual means.
SIGN, COMMERCIAL: Any sign wording, logo or other representation that directly
or indirectly names, advertises or calls attention to business, product,
service or other commercial activity.
SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE: A sign designed where all or a portion of the sign
area uses changing light emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber optics, light bulbs or
other illumination devices within the electronic display panel(s) to form a
message or messages in text and/or image from where the sequence of messages
and the rate of change is electronically programmed and can be modified by
electronic processes. Time/temperature signs are not considered electronic
message signs.
SIGN, FLASHING: Any illuminated sign in which each artificial light unit is not
maintained in a stationary condition, or in which all light units are not
constant in intensity or color at all times when the sign is illuminated.
SIGN, FREESTANDING: Any sign supported by structures or supports that is placed
on, or anchored in the ground, and is independent from any building or other
structure.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED, EXTERNAL: Any sign illuminated by light cast upon its
surface or face, causing the sign to be illuminated only by reflection.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED, INTERNAL: Any sign illuminated by artificial or neon
lighting.
SIGN, MOVING: A sign where the entire sign structure or a portion of which
rotates, moves, elevates, or in any way alters position or geometry. A tri-
vision sign where triangular prisms rotate inside a frame to show a new message
and/or information are considered moving signs. Moving signs do not include
clocks or barber poles.
SIGN, NON-PERMANENT : A sign constructed for short-term use, which is not
permanently installed, and may be easily moved or removed from the site.
Temporary signs are non-permanent signs.
SIGN, OFF-PREMISE COMMERCIAL, PERMANENT: A permanent sign that advertises an
activity, service, or commodity that is not the primary activity, service or
commodity provided on the site where the sign is located. Also called a
billboard.
SIGN, OFF-PREMISE COMMERCIAL, TEMPORARY: A temporary sign that advertises an
activity, service, or commodity that is not the primary activity, service or
commodity provided on the site where the sign is located. Also called a push,
snipe, or bandit sign.
SIGN, PENNANT: Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material either
containing a message or not containing a message, suspended from a rope, wire,
string or other material, usually in a series.
SIGN, PERMANENT: A sign permanently attached to a building, affixed to a
window, or anchored to the ground made of durable, weatherproof materials and
constructed for long-term use and intended to exist for the duration of time
that the use or occupant is located on the premises.
SIGN, PROJECTING: Any sign affixed to a building or other structure that
extends by more than six inches (6") beyond the line of the building or
structure or that portion of the building or structure to which it is attached.
SIGN, ROOF: Any sign erected, constructed, or maintained entirely or partially
upon or over the roof of any building with the principal support being on the
roof. A sign that is attached to a parapet or mansard roof and protrudes,
wholly or partially, above the highest point of the parapet or mansard roof of
the building or structure to which the mansard or parapet is attached is
considered a roof sign. Signs attached and displayed on Mansard roofs are not
considered roof signs unless the sign extends above the roofline.
SIGN STRUCTURE, PORTABLE: A sign structure that is intended, by design and
construction, to rest upon the ground for support and can be moved and reused.
Portable signs include, but are not limited to, signs mounted upon a trailer,
wheeled carrier, or other non-motorized mobile structure, with wheels or with
wheels removed. Portable sign structures do not include A-frame signs.
SIGN, TEMPORARY PROMOTIONAL: Any sign that is used only temporarily and not
permanently mounted, generally made from cloth, canvas, cardboard, light fabric
or other light materials, intended to be displayed for a short period of time.
SIGN, WALL: A sign that is attached directly to an exterior wall of a building
or dependent upon a building for support and projects six inches (6”) or less
from the wall of a structure with the exposed face of the sign in a plane
substantially parallel to the face of the wall. Window signs are not considered
wall signs.
SIGN, WINDOW: Any sign affixed to the interior or exterior of a window, or any
sign located inside a building within six feet (6') of the interior side of a
window and displayed so as to attract the attention of people outside the
building. Merchandise included in a window display is not considered a window
sign. However, shadowbox design within display windows, where the window
display is designed with a background enclosure against which signs are mounted
that blocks view into the establishment, is considered a window sign and the
entire area of the shadowbox is subject to the maximum sign area limitation.
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING UNIT: See: DWELLING UNIT, SINGLE-FAMILY,
DETACHED.
SMOKING, HOOKAH OR VAPING LOUNGE: An establishment for smoking. “Smoke” or
“smoking” means inhaling or exhaling the fumes of any organic or synthetic
material, including but not limited to plants, herbs, or tobacco.
SOCIAL ASSISTANCE, WELFARE, AND CHARITABLE SERVICES: These establishments
provide social assistance or counseling services directly to individuals. They
do not offer residential or accommodation services.
SPORT TEAM OR CLUB FACILITIES: Fields, pitches, diamonds, courts, clubhouses,
etc. for practice and live sporting events before an audience. These facilities
are used by professional or semiprofessional sports teams or clubs
participating in live sporting events, such as baseball, basketball, football,
hockey, soccer, etc. These establishments may or may not lease the facilities
to school teams or other sporting clubs.
STABLE: A building in which horses or other equines are sheltered.
STACKING SPACE: A space specifically designed and designated as a waiting area
for vehicles patronizing a drive-through facility or service bay.
STOOP: An exterior floor typically constructed of stone, concrete, and/or
masonry, with a finished floor elevation higher than the adjacent ground level,
often with steps leading up to it, and utilized primarily as an access platform
to a structure. A stoop may be roofed and designed with railings but cannot be
enclosed.
STREET: A public or private right-of-way that affords a primary means of
vehicular access to abutting property but does not include alleys or driveways.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change, other than incidental repairs, which would
prolong the life of supporting members of a structure, such as the addition,
removal, or alteration of bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or
foundations.
STRUCTURE: A combination of materials to form a construction for use,
occupancy, or ornamentation, whether installed on, above, or below, the surface
of land or water.
TENNIS COURT: A venue for playing tennis. Tennis court surfaces can be of
asphalt, clay, grass or carpet. A tennis court includes fences used to enclose
the playing surface.
TOBACCONIST: An establishment for the retail sale of tobacco and related
products. Tobacco is further defined as any of genus Nicotiana of chiefly
American plants of the nightshade family with viscid foliage and tubular
flowers.
UNIFIED CONTROL: The combination of two (2) or more tracts of land wherein each
owner has agreed that his tract of land will be developed under the same
development approvals.
UPLIGHTING: Lighting applications that direct light above a horizontal plane.
USE: The purpose or activity for which the land or structure is designed,
arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
VEHICLE DEALERSHIP: The use of any building or land area for the display and
sale of new or used automobiles, trucks, vans, or recreational vehicles
including any major or minor automobile repair or service uses conducted as an
accessory use.
WALL: A constructed solid barrier of concrete, stone, brick, tile, or similar
type of material that closes, marks, or borders a field, yard, or lot, and that
limits visibility and restricts the flow of air and light.
WHITE ROOF: A roof designed to deliver high solar reflectance, reducing heat
transfer to the building and the ability to radiate absorbed, or non-reflected
solar energy.
YARD: A yard is the open space area between the principal building on a lot and
the adjoining lot lines, exclusive of facade articulation, such as window or
wall recesses and projections. See
Figure 14-11.
YARD, CORNER SIDE: A corner side yard is the yard between a principal building
line and the corner side lot line. The corner side yard extends from the front
yard to the rear lot line. See
Figure 14-11.
YARD, FRONT: A front yard the yard between a principal building line and the
front lot line. The front yard extends the full width of the lot between side
lot lines measured perpendicular to the front lot line. See
Figure 14-11.
YARD, INTERIOR SIDE: An interior side yard is a yard between a principal
building line and the interior side lot line. The interior side yard extends
between the front yard and the rear yard. See
Figure 14-11.
YARD, REAR: A rear yard is the yard between a principal building line and the
rear lot line. The rear yard extends between both side lot lines, from the rear
lot line to the interior side yards or corner side yard. See
Figure 14-11.
   FIGURE 14-11. TYPES OF YARDS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/09fc73b1baa9c9185d886b27aa527b40ba0b85e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1461.png]
ZONING (DISTRICT) MAP: The map or maps that are a part of this title and which
delineate the boundaries of all zoning districts within the corporate boundary
of the Village.
ZONING LOT: A single track of land located within a single block, that (at the
time of filing for a building permit) is designated by its owner or developer
as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single
ownership or control. (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
APPENDIX A: OPEN SPACE OWNERSHIP
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/09fc73b1baa9c9185d886b27aa527b40ba0b85e5/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1494.png]
 
   (Ord. O-24-22, 12-3-2024)
 
