CITY CODE
of
CANTON, ILLINOIS
1975
Code current through:
Ord. 4505, passed 10-7-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
This code of the City of Canton, as supplemented, contains ordinances up to and
including ordinance 4505, passed October 7, 2025. Ordinances of the City
adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
American Legal Publishing
Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 495
   AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE CITY CODE
   OF CANTON, ILLINOIS
BE IT ORDAINED by the mayor and city council of the city of Canton, Illinois,
an Illinois municipal corporation:
   SECTION 1. From and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the city
code of the city of Canton, Illinois, prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
under the direction of the government body of the city, containing all
ordinances of a general nature in effect at the time of such codification,
shall be accepted in all courts without question as the official code and law
of the city as enacted by the mayor and city council.
   SECTION 2. There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding to or deleting
provisions of the official city code is identified by the proper catchline and
is inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies. Each such new
provision shall become effective upon the passage of the ordinance and the
insertion of the proper replacement pages in the copies of the code, three (3)
copies of which shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk, certified
as to correctness and available, for inspection at any and all times that said
office is regularly open.
   SECTION 3. All ordinances of a general nature included in this official city
code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the
fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing
body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said official city code. All ordinances of a special
nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating
ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect
unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the city code. Such
ordinances are not intended to be included in the official city code.
   SECTION 4. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be
misrepresented thereby.
Any person, firm or corporation violating this section shall be punished as
provided in section
1-1-5 of the city code of Canton, Illinois.
   SECTION 5. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are,
to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
   SECTION 6. This ordinance and the code adopted by the same shall be in full
force and effect from and after its passage and approval in accordance with
law, as printed and published in book form by order of the mayor and city
council.
Passed by the city council of the city of Canton, Illinois and approved by the
mayor thereof this 17th day of June, 1975.
         APPROVED: Robert F. Jennings    
   MAYOR
ATTEST: Nellie Crawford          
      CITY CLERK
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Interpretations
1-1-5: Code Alteration
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the city council this code is hereby declared to be and shall
hereafter constitute the official city code of the city of Canton. This code of
ordinances shall be known and cited as the CANTON MUNICIPAL CODE, and it is
hereby published by authority of the city council and shall be kept up to date
as provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter under the direction of the city attorney, acting for said
city council. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall
be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate
chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto,
as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to this code by title
in any legal document. (1975 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (1975 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute a
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this code
within thirty (30) days from the date of its final passage. (1975 Code)
1-1-4: INTERPRETATIONS:
In the determination of the provisions of each section of this code the
following rules shall be observed:
   (A)   Intent To Defraud: Whenever an intent to defraud is required in order
to constitute an offense, it shall be sufficient if an intent appears to
defraud any person.
   (B)   Liability Of Employers And Agents: When the provisions of any section
of this code prohibit the commission of an act, not only the person actually
doing the prohibited act or omitting the directed act, but also the employer
and all other persons concerned with or in aiding or abetting the said person
shall be guilty of the offense described and liable to the penalty set forth.
(1975 Code)
1-1-5: CODE ALTERATION:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
city council. The clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the clerk.
Any person having in his custody an official copy of this code shall make every
effort to maintain said code in an up to date and efficient manner. He shall
see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered to him or made available to him through the office of the city clerk.
Said code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested
persons, shall be and remain the property of the city and shall be returned to
the office of the clerk when directed so to do by order of the city council.
(1975 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances; Exceptions
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Pending Suits
1-2-4: Saving Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES; EXCEPTIONS:
All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this code
are hereby repealed, except such as are referred to herein as being still in
force or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to
the saving clause contained in section
1-2-4 of this chapter), from which are excluded the following ordinances which
are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances;
ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and
other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract
ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the
issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or
vacating streets, alleys or other public places; improvement ordinances; bond
ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the
transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the city; and all special
ordinances. (1975 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinances relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets or other
public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public
utilities, shall be repealed by virtue of the passage of this code, except as
this code may contain provisions for such matters, in which case this code
shall be considered as amending such ordinances in respect to such provisions
only. (1975 Code)
1-2-3: PENDING SUITS:
   (A)   No new ordinance shall be construed, or held, to repeal a former
ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, so as to
excuse, release or pardon any offense violating the former ordinance, nor to
waive any penalty accrued to claim arising under such former ordinance; and the
proceedings thereafter to enforce such former ordinance shall as far as
practicable, conform to the provisions of the ordinance then in effect. If any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by the provisions of a new
ordinance, such provisions may, with the consent of the party affected, be
applied to any judgment pronounced after the effective date of such new
ordinance.
   (B)   Nothing contained in the preceding section shall be construed as
abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of
the city herein repealed, or as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering
any penalty accrued, or as affecting the liability of any person, or as waiving
any right of the city under any ordinance existing prior to the effective date
of this code. (1975 Code)
1-2-4: SAVING CLAUSE:
If any section or part thereof of this chapter shall be held to be
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the
provisions hereof shall be deemed to continue in full force and effect. (R.O.
1959, Ch. 6, Sec. 23)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural number is
used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any single
matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive
words may not have been used.
When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this code by words
importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender, several matters,
parties or persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be
deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of construction shall not be
applied to any section of this code which contains any express provision
excluding such construction or where the subject matter or content may be
repugnant thereto. (1975 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code they shall have the
meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
CITY: The city of Canton, county of Fulton, state of Illinois.
CODE: Unless otherwise specifically stated, shall mean this code.
COUNCIL: The council of the city of Canton.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city employee by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the city of
Canton".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the city for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
KNOWINGLY: Imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which bring the act or
omission within the provisions of this code. It does not require any knowledge
of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense deemed a violation of the provisions of this code
which is a lesser offense than a felony as defined by state law.
NEGLIGENT, NEGLECT, NEGLIGENCE AND NEGLIGENTLY: Imports a want of such
attention to the nature of probable consequences of the act or omission as a
prudent man ordinarily bestows in acting in his own concern.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the city or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a hazard
to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or to the
community.
OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the city of
Canton".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: Applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner,
tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of such
building or land.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation, joint stock association or
the state of Illinois or any subdivision thereof, and including any trustee,
receiver, assignee or personal representative thereof.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities to
the consumer.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public squares, public
places and sidewalks.
TENANT: Applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the
whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
WHOLESALER AND WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall
be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things
in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WILFULLY: When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted,
implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the omission
referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law, or to injure
another, or to acquire an advantage.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in
the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his
proper mark. (1975 Code)
CHAPTER 4
ELECTIONS
SECTION:
1-4-1: Polling Places; Judges
1-4-2: Conduct Of Elections
1-4-3: Canvassing Of Returns
1-4-4: Tie Vote
1-4-5: Notice To Persons Elected
1-4-6: Failure To Elect, New Election
1-4-7: Order Preserved At Polls
1-4-8: Compensation Of Judges
1-4-9: Contest Of Election Of Aldermen
1-4-10: Election Procedures
1-4-1: POLLING PLACES; JUDGES:
The council shall at least thirty (30) days before any election (if not
otherwise provided by the statutes of the state) designate the place for
holding an election and also appoint the judges. The clerk shall give notice to
the persons so appointed, publish notices of the election, prepare and deliver
ballots and distribute election supplies as required by the statute. (R.O.
1959, Ch. 16, Sec. 1)
1-4-2: CONDUCT OF ELECTIONS:
Such election shall be conducted under the Australian ballot law and all the
general laws of the state on that subject, and after the closing of the polls,
the ballots shall be counted and returns made out and delivered, under seal, to
the city clerk, within two (2) days after the election. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 16,
Sec. 2)
1-4-3: CANVASSING OF RETURNS:
At the first regular meeting of the council after such election, the returns
shall be canvassed and the result shall be declared, and the clerk shall enter
the same at large on the journal, with the names of all persons voted for and
the number of votes received by each, as well as the office. (R.O. 1959, Ch.
16, Sec. 3)
1-4-4: TIE VOTE:
In the case of a tie vote, the city clerk shall notify the persons interested
to be present at the next regular session of the council, at which time the tie
shall be determined by lot, in the following manner: There shall be placed in
the ballot box as many folded slips of paper of equal size as there are persons
having an equal number of votes for any office; upon one shall be written the
name of the office, upon the others, the word "Canton". The candidate drawing
the ballot or slip upon which the name of the office is written shall be
declared elected. If any candidate fails to appear or refuses to draw, the
mayor may appoint someone else to do so for such candidate. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 16,
Sec. 4)
1-4-5: NOTICE TO PERSONS ELECTED:
The clerk shall, within five (5) days after any person is declared elected to
any office by the city council, notify him in writing of his election, naming
the office for which he has been declared elected, and requesting him to
qualify within ten (10) days after such notice, and stating that unless such
person shall qualify in ten (10) days after such notice the office will become
vacant. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 16, Sec. 5)
1-4-6: FAILURE TO ELECT, NEW ELECTION:
If at any election there is a failure to elect any officer required to be
elected by or in pursuance of law, or if the person declared elected should
fail to qualify, or should be ineligible to the office because of any legal
disqualification, the council may forthwith order and call a new election
therefor. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 16, Sec. 6)
1-4-7: ORDER PRESERVED AT POLLS:
The chief of police and all other police officers shall attend at all elections
for the purpose of maintaining order and keeping the peace. The judges shall
maintain order at the polls, and may command any police officer in attendance
to arrest any person who shall disturb the peace by riotous or disorderly
conduct. Any person who at the polls of any election shall disturb the peace,
or conduct himself in a riotous or disorderly manner, shall be subject to a
penalty not exceeding twenty five dollars ($25.00). (R.O. 1959, Ch. 16, Sec. 7)
1-4-8: COMPENSATION OF JUDGES:
The compensation of each judge shall be thirty five dollars ($35.00) for each
election; and the room rent allowed for each room or building used as a polling
place shall be five dollars ($5.00). (Ord. 666, 7-18-1978)
1-4-9: CONTEST OF ELECTION OF ALDERMEN:
Any elector of the city may contest the election of any member of the council,
and the method of procedure shall be as follows: Within thirty (30) days after
the vote is canvassed and the result is declared, the contestant shall file
with the city clerk a written statement, under his oath, setting forth clearly
the grounds of contest, and shall cause a copy thereof to be served upon the
person whose election is contested, personally, if he may be found in the city,
or if he cannot be so found, by leaving a copy at his usual place of residence,
proof of which service shall accompany the statement filed. Thereupon the
council shall fix a time and place for hearing testimony, which testimony may
be heard in open session of the council, or before a committee appointed by the
mayor for the purpose, substantially in the same manner as evidence is taken
before a master in chancery. In case a ground of contest shall be an improper
count of the ballots, a recount shall be had before evidence is taken, which
recount shall be had only in the open session of the council. When the case is
closed the council shall determine by a yea and nay vote to be entered upon the
journal its decision in such contest. No member of the council interested shall
take any part in such proceedings. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 16, Sec. 9)
1-4-10: ELECTION PROCEDURES:
The city hereby adopts a nonpartisan manner of electing municipal officers with
respect to all municipal elections held subsequent to April 2, 1991, subject to
the following:
   (A)   Conducted On Nonpartisan Basis: All elections in the city for city
officers shall be conducted on a nonpartisan basis without political party
designation.
   (B)   Times For Elections: Elections for city officials shall be held at the
times fixed by law for holding the same.
   (C)   Party Designations Prohibited: No party name, party initial, party
circle, platform, principle, appellation or distinguishing mark of any kind
shall be printed upon any nominating papers or election ballot used with
respect to any election held under the provisions of this section. (Ord. 1304,
3-5-1991)
CHAPTER 5
MAYOR
SECTION:
1-5-1: Qualifications, Term
1-5-2: Oath, Bond
1-5-3: Enforcement, Duties
1-5-4: Vacancy
1-5-5: Mayor Pro Tem
1-5-6: Appointment Of City Officers
1-5-7: Supervise Conduct Of Officers
1-5-8: Removal Of Officers
1-5-9: Preside At Meetings
1-5-10: Veto
1-5-11: Sign Commissions, Contracts
1-5-12: Designate Another To Sign
1-5-13: Sell Real Estate
1-5-14: Examine Records
1-5-15: Release Prisoners
1-5-16: Call Out Inhabitants, Militia
1-5-17: Addresses To Council
1-5-18: Secretary To Mayor
1-5-19: Expenditure Of City Funds
1-5-1: QUALIFICATIONS, TERM:
The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city. He shall be a
qualified elector of the city and shall have resided within the city at least
one year next preceding his election or appointment. He shall hold the office
for four (4) years and until his successor is elected and qualified. (R.O.
1959, Ch. 1, Sec. 1)
1-5-2: OATH, BOND:
Before entering upon the duties of mayor, he, whether elected or appointed,
shall take and subscribe to the oath required of all officers of the city. The
mayor before entering upon the duties of his office shall execute a bond in the
penal sum of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00), with security to be approved
by the city council, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of
the office and the payment of all money received by him, as mayor according to
law and the provisions of this code. This bond shall be filed with the city
clerk. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 1, Sec. 2)
1-5-3: ENFORCEMENT, DUTIES:
The mayor shall devote as much of his time to the duties of his office as a
faithful and efficient discharge thereof may require; he shall perform all the
duties which are prescribed by law, including the provisions of this code, and
shall take care that the laws and provisions of this code are faithfully
executed. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 1, Sec. 3)
1-5-4: VACANCY:
The mayor may resign from his office. A vacancy occurs in the office of mayor
by reason of resignation, failure to elect or qualify, death, permanent
physical or mental disability, conviction of a disqualifying crime, abandonment
of office, or removal from office or by removal of his residence from the city.
If a vacancy occurs in the office of mayor and there remains an unexpired
portion of the term of at least one year, the vacancy shall be filled by a
special election which shall be held within six (6) months after the vacancy
occurs. The city council shall elect one of its members as acting mayor who
shall perform all duties and possess all the rights and powers of the mayor
until a successor has been elected and has qualified.
If the unexpired portion of the term is less than a year, the vacancy shall be
filled by the city council electing one of its members acting mayor who shall
perform all the duties and possess all the rights and powers of the mayor until
a mayor is elected at the next regular election and has qualified. When the
unexpired portion is less than a year there can be no special election. (R.O.
1959, Ch. 1, Sec. 4)
1-5-5: MAYOR PRO TEM:
If a temporary absence or disability of the mayor incapacitates him from the
performance of his duties but does not create a vacancy in the office, the city
council shall elect one of its members to act as mayor pro tem. The mayor pro
tem, during the time of this absence or disability, shall perform the duties
and possess all the rights and powers of mayor. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 1, Sec. 5)
1-5-6: APPOINTMENT OF CITY OFFICERS:
Except as otherwise provided by the statutes of the state of Illinois, the
mayor shall appoint, by and with the consent of the city council, all officers
of the city. Vacancies in all such offices may be filled in the same manner. If
such appointed officer ceases to perform the duties of or to hold this office
by reason of death, permanent mental or physical disability, conviction of a
disqualifying crime, or dismissal from or abandonment of office, the mayor may
appoint a temporary successor to the office. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 1, Sec. 6)
1-5-7: SUPERVISE CONDUCT OF OFFICERS:
The mayor shall supervise the conduct of all officers of the city, and see that
they faithfully and efficiently discharge the duties of their respective
offices; he shall inquire into all reasonable complaints made against them, and
cause all their neglects or violations of duty to be promptly corrected; and he
shall, in case he becomes satisfied that any officer wilfully neglects or
violates his duty, cause such officer to be prosecuted and punished. (R.O.
1959, Ch. 1, Sec. 7)
1-5-8: REMOVAL OF OFFICERS:
Except where otherwise provided by statute, the mayor may remove any officer
appointed by him, on any formal charge, whenever he is of the opinion that the
interests of the city demand removal, but he shall report the reasons for the
removal to the city council at a meeting to be held not less than five (5) nor
more than ten (10) days after the removal. If the mayor fails or refuses to
report to the city council the reasons for the removal, or if the city council
by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all its members authorized by law to be elected,
disapproves of the removal, the officer thereupon shall be restored to the
office from which he was removed. The vote shall be by yeas and nays, which
shall be entered upon the council's journal. Upon restoration, the officer
shall give a new bond and take a new oath of office. No officer shall be
removed a second time for the same offense. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 1, Sec. 8)
1-5-9: PRESIDE AT MEETINGS:
The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the city council. He shall not vote
on any ordinance, resolution or motion except: a) where the vote of the
aldermen has resulted in a tie; or b) where one-half (1/2) of the aldermen
elected have voted in favor of an ordinance, resolution or motion even though
there is no tie vote; or c) where a vote greater than a majority of the
corporate authorities is required by law to adopt an ordinance, resolution or
motion. In each instance specified, the mayor shall vote. Nothing in this
section shall deprive an acting mayor or mayor pro tem, from voting in his
capacity as acting mayor or mayor pro tem. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 1, Sec. 9)
1-5-10: VETO:
All resolutions and motions: a) which create any liability against the city, or
b) which provide for the expenditure or appropriation of its money, or c) to
sell any city or school property, and all ordinances, passed by the city
council shall be deposited with the city clerk. If the mayor approves of them
he shall sign them. Those of which he disapproves he shall return to the city
council, with his written objections, at the next regular meeting of the city
council occurring not less than five (5) days after their passage. The mayor
may disapprove of any one or more sums appropriated in any ordinance,
resolution or motion making an appropriation, and, if so, the remainder shall
be effective. However, the mayor may disapprove entirely of an ordinance,
resolution or motion making an appropriation. If the mayor fails to return any
ordinance or any specified resolution or motion with his written objections,
within the required time, it shall become effective despite the absence of his
signature. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 1, Sec. 10)
1-5-11: SIGN COMMISSIONS, CONTRACTS:
The mayor shall sign all commissions, licenses, permits and warrants granted,
issued or drawn by order of the city council, or authorized by the provisions
of this code; in all contracts where the city is a party, unless otherwise
provided, he shall sign the same on behalf of the city, and it shall be his
special duty to see that the other contracting party faithfully complies with
the contract; and in all suits wherein the city is a party it shall be the duty
of the mayor to advise with and assist the city attorney in prosecuting or
defending the same, as the case may be. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 1, Sec. 11)
1-5-12: DESIGNATE ANOTHER TO SIGN:
The mayor may designate another to affix the signature of the mayor to any
written instrument, which is required to be signed by the mayor. The mayor
shall send written notice of this designation to the city council, stating the
name of the person whom he has selected and what instrument the person will
have authority to sign. A written signature of the mayor executed by the person
so designated, with the signature of the person so designated underneath, shall
be attached to the notice. The notice, with the signatures attached, shall be
recorded in the journal of the city council and then filed with the city clerk.
When the signature of the mayor is placed on a written instrument at the
direction of the mayor in the specified manner, the instrument, in all
respects, shall be as binding on the city as if signed by the mayor in person.
(1959 Code § 1-12)
1-5-13: SELL REAL ESTATE:
The mayor and city clerk are hereby authorized and empowered to sell and convey
with the consent of the council any and all lots, tracts or parcels of real
estate to which a title is held by the city under sale or conveyance for city
taxes or assessments. In no case shall such sale or conveyance be made for less
consideration than the amount of the original purchase money with lawful
interest thereon. (1959 Code § 1-13)
1-5-14: EXAMINE RECORDS:
The mayor at all times may examine and inspect the books and records and papers
of any agent, employee or officer of the city. (1959 Code § 1-14)
1-5-15: RELEASE PRISONERS:
The mayor may release any person imprisoned for violation of any provision of
this code, and shall report the release, with the reasons therefor, to the city
council at its first session thereafter. (1959 Code § 1-15)
1-5-16: CALL OUT INHABITANTS, MILITIA:
When necessary, the mayor may call out every male inhabitant over the age of
eighteen (18) years to aid in enforcing laws and code provisions. Subject to
the authority of the governor as commander in chief of the militia, the mayor
may call out the militia to aid in suppressing riots and other disorderly
conduct, or to aid in carrying into effect any law or code provision. (1959
Code § 1-16)
1-5-17: ADDRESSES TO COUNCIL:
The mayor, from time to time, may, and annually shall, give the council
information relative to the affairs of the city, and may recommend for their
consideration such measures as he believes expedient. (1959 Code § 1-17)
1-5-18: SECRETARY TO MAYOR:
   (A)   Office Created: There is hereby created the office of secretary to the
mayor, who shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the consent of the city
council, for a term of one year. (1959 Code §
1-2-1)
   (B)   Office Hours And Duties: The secretary to the mayor shall maintain
office hours from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. until twelve o'clock (12:00) noon
and from one o'clock (1:00) P.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. from Monday
through Friday of each week.
In addition to performing such duties as the mayor from time to time may
require, the secretary shall do such stenographic and clerical work as the city
council, the city engineer or the city attorney may require in connection with
their official duties. (Ord. 204, 4-25-1967)
1-5-19: EXPENDITURE OF CITY FUNDS:
The following amount shall be the maximum amount of city funds which may be
expended for unbudgeted expenses by the mayor on official business without
prior council approval:
 
Mayor $3,000.00
 
The following amount shall be the maximum amount of city funds which may be
expended for unbudgeted emergency expenditures by the mayor on official
business for the city without prior council approval:
 
Mayor $10,000.00
 
(Ord. 2081, 5-1-2012)
CHAPTER 6
CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-6-1: Composition; Filling Vacancy
1-6-2: Alderman Qualifications
1-6-3:   Regular Meetings
1-6-4:   Special Meetings
1-6-5:   Meetings To Be Public
1-6-6:   Public Notice Of Meetings; Agenda
1-6-7:   Mayor Pro Tem; Temporary Chairman
1-6-8:   Appointment Of Standing, Advisory Committees
1-6-9:   General Duties Of Standing Committees
1-6-10:   Specific Duties Of Committees
1-6-11:   Reserved
1-6-12:   Quorum
1-6-13:   Compelling Attendance Of Members; Explusion
1-6-14:   Reserved
1-6-15:   Vote Required, Yeas And Nays; Consent Agenda
1-6-16:   Ordinances; Approval; Veto; Reconsideration; Passage Over Veto
1-6-17:   Reconsideration, Special Meetings
1-6-18: Attach Documents To Reports
1-6-19: Committee Reports Deferred
1-6-20: Municipal Year; Fiscal Year
1-6-21: Rules, Order Of Business
1-6-22: Department Heads To Attend Meetings
1-6-23: Public Comment Rules
1-6-1: COMPOSITION; FILLING VACANCY:
The city council shall consist of the mayor and aldermen. It shall sit with
open doors; it shall keep a journal of its proceedings; it shall be the judge
of the election and qualifications of its own members; and in case any vacancy
shall occur in the office of alderman by death, resignation, removal or any
other cause, such vacancy shall be filled pursuant to Illinois law. (R.O. 1959,
Ch. 2, Sec. 1; amd. Ord. 4339, 5-2-2023)
1-6-2: ALDERMAN QUALIFICATIONS:  
No person shall be eligible to the office of alderman:
   (A)   Unless he is a qualified elector of the municipality and has resided
therein at least one year next preceding his election or appointment; or
   (B)   Unless he resides within the ward for which he is elected; or
   (C)   If he is in arrears in the payment of any tax or other indebtedness
due to the city; or
   (D)   If he has been convicted in Illinois state courts or in courts of the
United States of malfeasance in office, bribery, or other infamous crime; or
   (E)   If such person is otherwise disqualified by Illinois law.
No alderman shall be eligible to any office, except that of acting mayor or
mayor pro tem, the salary of which is payable out of the city treasury, if at
the time of his appointment he is a member of the city council. (R.O. 1959, Ch.
2, Sec. 2; amd. Ord. 4339, 5-2-2023)
1-6-3: REGULAR MEETINGS:
Unless otherwise provided by proper notice, the regular meetings of the council
shall be held at the Historic Depot-Donald E. Edwards Way, 50 North 4th Avenue,
Canton, Illinois 61520 on the first and third Tuesday of each and every month
at six thirty o'clock (6:30) P.M. Adjourned meetings may be held for the
purpose of completing the unfinished business of the regular meeting at such
time or times as may be determined by the council. Pursuant to the Illinois
Open Meetings Act, no meeting required to be a public meeting shall be held on
a legal (public) holiday unless the regular meeting day falls on that holiday.
Should the regular meeting fall on a public holiday such regular meeting may,
at the discretion of the city council, be held on the following day at the
stated time. Additionally, should a regular meeting fall on an election day the
meeting shall, if required by state law, be held on the following day at the
stated time. (Ord. 1298, 11-20-1990; amd. Ord. 4339, 5-2-2023)
1-6-4: SPECIAL MEETINGS:
Special meetings of the council may be called by the mayor or any three (3)
aldermen, whenever in their discretion they may deem it necessary, in which
event such meeting shall be called in the following manner: The mayor or three
(3) aldermen, as the case may be, shall file in the city clerk's office a
statement in writing setting forth the object and purpose of such special
meeting and directing the clerk to give notice of the same to the public in
accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act. Further, upon the filing of
such statement, the city clerk shall cause to be served personally upon each
member of the council, or leave at his usual place of business, a notice of
such special meeting, setting forth the object and purpose thereof and the time
of holding the same. No business other than that mentioned in the call shall be
transacted at such special meeting. (Ord. 232, 11-21-1967; amd. Ord. 4339, 5-2-
2023)
1-6-5: MEETINGS TO BE PUBLIC:
All meetings of the council and committees, shall be public meetings, except
where otherwise provided by the Illinois Open Meetings Act. (Ord. 232, 11-21-
1967; amd. Ord. 4339, 5-2-2023)
1-6-6: PUBLIC NOTICE OF MEETINGS; AGENDA:  
The city shall give public notice of the schedule of regular meetings at the
beginning of each calendar or fiscal year and shall state the regular dates,
times, and places of such meetings.
An agenda for each regular meeting shall be posted at city hall and at the
Historic Depot - Donald E. Edwards Way, 50 North 4th Avenue, Canton, Illinois
61520, which is where the city's meetings are held, at least forty-eighty (48)
hours in advance of the holding of the meeting. The city shall also post on its
website the agenda of any regular meetings. Any agenda of a regular meeting
that is posted on the city 's website shall remain posted on the website until
the regular meeting is concluded. The requirement of a regular meeting agenda
shall not preclude the consideration of items not specifically set forth in the
agenda.
Public notice of any special meeting except a meeting held in the event of a
bona fide emergency, or of any rescheduled regular meeting, or of any
reconvened meeting, shall be given at least forty-eighty (48) hours before such
meeting, which notice shall also include the agenda for the special,
rescheduled, or reconvened meeting, but the validity of any action taken by the
city which is germane to a subject on the agenda shall not be affected by other
errors or omissions in the agenda. The requirement of public notice of
reconvened meetings does not apply to any case where the meeting was open to
the public and (1) it is to be reconvened within twenty-four (24) hours, or (2)
an announcement of the time and place of the reconvened meeting was made at the
original meeting and there is no change in the agenda. Notice of an emergency
meeting shall be given as soon as practicable, but in any event prior to the
holding of such meeting, to any news medium which has filed an annual request
for notice with the city clerk in accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings
Act.Public notice shall be given by posting a copy of the notice at city hall
and at the Historic Depot - Donald E. Edwards Way, 50 North 4th Avenue, Canton,
Illinois 61520, which is where the city 's meetings are held. In addition, the
city shall post notice on its website of all meetings of the council and the
standing committees. Any notice of an annual schedule of meetings shall remain
on the website until a new public notice of the schedule of regular meetings is
approved. Any notice of a regular meeting that is posted on the city's website
shall remain posted on the website until the regular meeting is concluded. The
city shall supply copies of the notice of its regular meetings, and of the
notice of any special, emergency, rescheduled or reconvened meeting, to any
news medium that has filed an annual request for such notice. Any such news
medium shall also be given the same notice of all special, emergency,
rescheduled or reconvened meetings in the same manner as is given to members of
the body provided such news medium has given the city clerk an address or
telephone number within the territorial jurisdiction of the city at which such
notice may be given. The failure of the city to post on its website notice of
any meeting or the agenda of any meeting shall not invalidate any meeting or
any actions taken at a meeting. Any agenda shall set forth the general subject
matter of any resolution or ordinance that will be the subject of final action
at the meeting. The city, in conducting a public meeting, shall ensure that at
least one copy of any requested notice and agenda for the meeting is
continuously available for public review during the entire forty-eighty (48)-
hour period preceding the meeting. Posting of the notice and agenda on the
city's website satisfies this requirement. If a notice or agenda is not
continuously available for the full forty-eighty (48)-hour period due to
actions outside of the control of the public body, then that lack of
availability does not invalidate any meeting or action taken at a meeting.
The council and the committees, as applicable, must, at the beginning of each
calendar or fiscal year, prepare and make available a schedule of all regular
meetings for such calendar or fiscal year, listing the times and places of such
meetings.
If a change is made in regular meeting dates, at least ten (10) days' notice of
such change shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation
in the city in which such body functions. Notice of such change shall also be
posted at city hall and at the Historic Depot - Donald E. Edwards Way, 50 North
4th Avenue, Canton, Illinois 61520, which is where the city's meetings are
held. Notice of such change shall also be supplied to those news media which
have filed an annual request for notice. (Ord. 232, 11-21-1967; amd. Ord. 4339,
5-2-2023)
1-6-7: MAYOR PRO TEM; TEMPORARY CHAIRMAN:  
If the mayor is temporarily absent because of an incapacity to perform official
duties, but the incapacity does not create a vacancy in the office, the
corporate authorities shall elect one of their members to act as mayor pro
tern. The mayor pro tern, during this absence or disability, shall perform the
duties and possess all the rights and powers of the mayor but shall not be
entitled to vote both as mayor pro tern and as alderman.
In the absence of the mayor, acting mayor, or mayor pro tern, the corporate
authorities may elect one of their members to act as a temporary chairman. The
temporary chairman shall have only the powers of a presiding officer and a
right to vote only in the capacity as alderman on any ordinance, resolution, or
motion. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 2, Sec. 5; amd. Ord. 4339, 5-2-2023)
1-6-8: APPOINTMENT OF STANDING, ADVISORY COMMITTEES:  
   (A)   The standing, advisory committees of the city council shall be
appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the aldermen. At the
first regular meeting of the council in May of each year, or as soon thereafter
as possible, the mayor will appoint the following standing committees of the
city council:
      1.   Public Safety and Legal Committee;
      2.   Regulatory and Policy Committee;
      3.   Community and Economic Development Committee;
      4.   Public Works Committee;
      5.   Finance Committee;
      6.   IT and Cybersecurity Committee;
      7.   Labor and Employment Committee; and
      8.   Property Committee.
   (B)   The mayor shall also appoint the chair of the foregoing committees.
   C)   The mayor, with the consent of the aldermen, may establish any other
standing, advisory committee as he deems appropriate. The mayor shall appoint
the chair of such additional advisory committee. The chair of the committee
shall be either the mayor or any other elected official. Any other committee
established hereunder may be comprised of any number of individuals the mayor
deems fit. Any individual appointed to a committee hereunder need not be an
elected official, so long as such individual meets the eligibility requirements
for an appointed official established by state law.
   (D)   For purposes of other references in this Code or for purposes of any
collective bargaining agreement, the following committee references shall refer
to the above standing committees as follows:
COMMITTEE ON FINANCE:                   The Finance Committee.
COMMITTEE ON STREETS AND GARBAGE:       The Public Works Committee.
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC WORKS, WATER AND    The Public Works Committee.
SEWER:
COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND ORDINANCE:       The Public Safety and Legal Committee.
COMMITTEE ON COMMUNITY AND INDUSTRIAL   The Community and Economic Development
DEVELOPMENT:                            Committee.
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SAFETY AND TRAFFIC: The Public Safety and Legal Committee.
COMMITTEE ON LAKE, BUILDINGS AND        The Property Committee.
GROUNDS:
COMMITTEE ON NEGOTIATION, GRIEVANCE AND The Labor and Employment Committee.
PERSONNEL:
 
(Ord. 885, 5-5-1981; amd. Ord. 4339, 5-2-2023)
1-6-9: GENERAL DUTIES OF STANDING COMMITTEES:
The standing committees shall meet on an ad hoc basis. Further, it shall be the
duty of the standing committees of the city council to keep a close watch of
the affairs of their respective departments of the city government. They shall
have general supervision over all works and things ordered to be made or done
by the city council, in their respective departments. Each committee shall
promptly and thoroughly investigate all matters which may be referred to it,
and do and perform all other duties, as the city council may from time to time
prescribe by resolution, motion, ordinance or otherwise. Each committee shall
keep minutes and records of all of its meetings, as required by the Illinois
Open Meetings Act. A written report and a copy of the minutes of each committee
meeting shall be made available to the city council at the council meeting
immediately following each committee meeting.
Not every matter falling within the scope of a committee needs to be discussed/
addressed at a committee meeting, and may be brought forward to the city
council at the outset. Any standing committees established hereunder this
Chapter shall be advisory in nature only, unless otherwise provided in this
Code or required by Illinois law. The standing committees may make
recommendations to the city council as the committee deems fit; however, the
city council has the ultimate final decision on a matter and may disregard the
committee's recommendations in their entirety. In addition to the above
enumerated general duties, the several committees above mentioned, and any
other committees established by the mayor, shall particularly be charged with
the duties prescribed in the following section. (Ord. 675, 9-19-1978; amd. Ord.
4339, 5-2-2023)
1-6-10: SPECIFIC DUTIES OF COMMITTEES:
Subject to the limitations established by Illinois law, the special duties of
the committees established hereunder shall be as prescribed by the mayor with
the advice and consent of the aldermen. (Ord. 885, 5-5-1981; amd. Ord. 4339, 5-
2-2023)
1-6-11: RESERVED: 
Reserved by Ord. 4339, 5-2-2023.
1-6-12: QUORUM:
A majority of the corporate authorities, which includes the aldermen and the
mayor, shall constitute a quorum to do business at a council meeting. A
majority of the aldermen, mayor, or other individuals assigned to a committee
shall constitute a quorum to do business at a committee meeting. A smaller
number, however, may adjourn from time to time and may compel the attendance of
absentees under penalties (including a fine for a failure to attend) prescribed
by the council herein. (Ord. 1283, 6-19-1990; amd. Ord. 4339, 5-2-2023)
1-6-13: COMPELLING ATTENDANCE OF MEMBERS; EXPULSION: 
In case of the want of a quorum at any time of the council or standing
committee, in case a majority of the members present desire, the mayor, or
presiding officer, shall direct the chief of police, or any police officer, to
go out and arrest and bring in any and all absent members who can be found in
the city, and are not unable through sickness to attend; and any member who
purposely absents himself from the city in order to avoid attending any meeting
of the council or standing committee, or being in the city, conceals himself
from such officer, or refuses to be brought in when found, shall be deemed
guilty of disorderly conduct, and be subject to a fine of twenty five dollars
($25.00).
With the concurrence of two-thirds (2/3) of the aldermen then holding office,
it may expel an aldermen from a meeting, but not a second time for the same
incident. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 2, Sec. 22; amd. Ord. 4339, 5-2-2023)
1-6-14: RESERVED:  
Reserved by Ord. 4339, 5-2-2023.
1-6-15: VOTE REQUIRED, YEAS AND NAYS; CONSENT AGENDA:  
The passage of all ordinances for whatever purpose, and of any resolution or
motion (i) to create any liability against the city or (ii) for the expenditure
or appropriation of its money shall require the concurrence of a majority of
all members then holding office on the city council, including the mayor,
unless otherwise expressly provided by other applicable law governing the
passage of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. Where the council consists of
an odd number of aldermen, however, the vote of the majority of the aldermen
shall be sufficient to pass an ordinance. The passage of an ordinance,
resolution, or motion to sell any school property shall require the concurrence
of three-fourths (3/4) of all aldermen then holding office. The yeas and nays
shall be taken upon the question of the passage of the designated ordinances,
resolutions, or motions and recorded in the journal of the city council. In
addition, the corporate authorities, which are the aldermen and mayor, at any
meeting may by unanimous consent take a single vote by yeas and nays on the
several questions of the passage of any two (2) or more of the designated
ordinances, orders, resolutions, or motions placed together for voting purposes
in a single group. The single vote shall be entered separately in the journal
under the designation "omnibus vote," and in that event the clerk may enter the
words "omnibus vote" or "consent agenda" in the journal in each case instead of
entering the names of the members of city council voting "yea" and those voting
"nay" on the passage of each of the designated ordinances, orders, resolutions,
and motions included in the omnibus group or consent agenda. The taking of a
single or omnibus vote and the entries of the words "omnibus vote" or "consent
agenda" in the journal shall be a sufficient compliance with the requirements
of this section to all intents and purposes and with like effect as if the vote
in each case had been taken separately by yeas and nays on the question of the
passage of each ordinance, order, resolution, and motion included in the
omnibus group and separately recorded in the journal. Likewise, the yeas and
nays shall be taken upon the question of the passage of any other resolution or
motion at the request of any aldermen and shall be recorded in the journal.
The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the city council. The mayor shall
not vote on any ordinance, resolution, or motion except the following: (i)
where the vote of the alderpersons has resulted in a tie; (ii) where one-half
of the alderpersons elected have voted in favor of an ordinance, resolution, or
motion even though there is no tie vote; or (iii) where a vote greater than a
majority of the corporate authorities is required by this Code or an ordinance
to adopt an ordinance, resolution, or motion. Nothing in this Section shall
deprive an acting mayor or mayor pro tern from voting in the capacity as
alderperson, but he or she shall not be entitled to another vote in the
capacity as acting mayor or mayor pro tem. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 2, Sec. 24; amd.
Ord. 4339, 5-2-2023)
1-6-16: ORDINANCES; APPROVAL; VETO; RECONSIDERATION; PASSAGE OVER VETO:  
All resolutions and motions (i) that create any liability against a city, (ii)
that provide for the expenditure or appropriation of its money, or (iii) to
sell any city or school property, and all ordinances, passed by the city
council shall be deposited with the city clerk. Except as provided in sections
1-6-5 , and
1-6-6 ,l if the mayor approves an ordinance or resolution, the mayor shall sign
it. Those ordinances, resolutions, and motions which the mayor disapproves
shall be returned to the city council, with the mayor's written objections, at
the next regular meeting of the city council occurring not less than five (5)
days after their passage. The mayor may disapprove of any one or more sums
appropriated in any ordinance, resolution, or motion making an appropriation,
and, if so, the remainder shall be effective. However, the mayor may disapprove
entirely of an ordinance, resolution, or motion making an appropriation. If the
mayor fails to return any ordinance or any specified resolution or motion with
his written objections within the designated time, it shall become effective
despite the absence of the mayor's signature.
Every resolution and motion (i) that create any liability against a city, (ii)
that provide for the expenditure or appropriation of its money, or (iii) to
sell any city or school property, and every ordinance, that is returned to the
city council by the mayor shall be reconsidered by the city council at the next
regular meeting following the regular meeting at which the city council
receives the mayor's written objection. If, after reconsideration, two-thirds
of all the aldermen then holding office on the city council agree at that
regular meeting to pass an ordinance, resolution, or motion, notwithstanding
the mayor's refusal to approve it, then it shall be effective. The vote on the
question of passage over the mayor's veto shall be by yeas and nays and shall
be recorded in the journal. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 2, Sec. 25; amd. Ord. 4339, 5-2-
2023)
1-6-17: RECONSIDERATION, SPECIAL MEETINGS:  
No vote of the city council shall be reconsidered or rescinded at a special
meeting unless there are present at the special meeting at least as many
aldermen as were present when the vote was taken. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 2, Sec. 26;
amd. Ord. 4339, 5-2-2023)
1-6-18: ATTACH DOCUMENTS TO REPORTS:
Every committee, in reporting upon any subject referred to it, shall attach to
their report all papers or documents in the possession of the committee,
relative to the matters so referred. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 2, Sec. 27; amd. Ord.
4339, 5-2-2023)
1-6-19: COMMITTEE REPORTS DEFERRED:
Upon the request of any two (2) aldermen present, any report of a committee of
the council shall be deferred for final action to the next regular meeting of
the council after the report is made. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 2, Sec. 28; amd. Ord.
4339, 5-2-2023)
1-6-20: MUNICIPAL YEAR; FISCAL YEAR:
The municipal year of the city shall each commence on the first Tuesday in May
in each year.
The fiscal year of the city shall each commence on the first day of May in each
year. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 2, Secs. 29 and 30; amd. Ord. 4339, 5-2-2023)
1-6-21: RULES, ORDER OF BUSINESS:
Pursuant to Illinois law, the city council shall determine its own rules of
proceeding and punish its members for disorderly conduct. The council shall
adopt separately by resolution or ordinance such rules of order and procedure,
conduct of business, and order of business as it may deem suitable, which said
rules shall not be repealed or changed except by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of
the council, and shall only be suspended by consent of two-thirds (2/3) of the
members present at any meeting. As applicable, the standing committees shall
abide by the council's rules of order and conduct of business.
To the extent not covered herein or by the council's rules, "Robert's Rules of
Order," as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and shall be the law
governing the deliberations of the council and the committees. (R.O. 1959, Ch.
2, Sec. 31; amd. Ord. 4339, 5-2-2023)
1-6-22: DEPARTMENT HEADS TO ATTEND MEETINGS:
The city attorney, director of public works, police chief, fire chief and
community development director shall attend all regular meetings of the council
unless excused by the mayor.
The city attorney, director of public works, police chief, fire chief,
community development director, or any other department head or city employee
shall attend all other meetings of the council or standing committees as
requested by the mayor or the committee chair, as applicable. (Ord. 722, 6-19-
1979; amd. Ord. 4339, 5-2-2023)
1-6-23: PUBLIC COMMENT RULES:
Pursuant to the city rule-making authority set forth in the Illinois Open
Meetings Act, the rules governing public comment at all City Council meetings
of the Mayor and City Council and for any and all boards, commissions, and/or
committees of the city shall be as follows:
   (A)   A public comment period not to exceed forty-five (45) minutes will be
held during every open meeting of the City Council and every open meeting of
City committees/commissions/boards on topics that are relevant/germane to the
applicable meeting agenda. The right to public comment does not apply to closed
meetings/executive sessions.
   (B)   Anyone desiring to address the City Council or a City committee/
commission/board must complete the public comment registration form available
in the City Clerk's office or on the City Clerk's website and return it to the
City Clerk or his/her designees as set forth on the form, at least forty-eight
(48) hours prior to the start of the meeting at which the person desires to
speak. However, for purposes of regular meetings, the public comment
registration form shall be delivered to the City Clerk no later than twelve
o’clock (12:00) p.m. on the Friday preceding the regular meeting of the City
Council that the person desires to speak.
   (C)   On the public comment registration form, the person must include their
name, the date of the meeting and the agenda item on which the person wishes to
speak. A person may only submit a public comment registration form on their own
behalf, or for a group on whose behalf the person has been designated by a
group to speak, in which case, the name of the group must be provided on the
public comment registration form.
   (D)   Public comment shall be permitted by the presiding officer only during
the designated public comment period specified on the agenda, which may be
amended according to law, unless otherwise permitted by the City Council and
presiding officer.
   (E)   The presiding officer shall recognize registered speakers in the order
in which they submitted their completed public comment registration form to the
City Clerk or his/her designee, except in situations where numerous persons
wish to speak on a single agenda item. A person who has not timely submitted a
completed public comment registration form to the City Clerk or his/her
designee shall not be permitted to speak at the meeting, except upon motion
approved by a majority of the City Council or City committee/commission/board.
   (F)   Public comment is limited to a total of five (5) minutes per
registered speaker. A registered speaker cannot give their allotted minutes to
another person.
   (G)   Public comments must be directed by registered speakers to the City
Council or City committee/commission/board as a whole, and not to an individual
member of the City Council or City committee/commission/board, or to City
employees or officials. The public comment period is not intended to require
members of the City Council or City committee/commission/board, or City
employees, to provide responses to registered speakers. Discussions between
registered speakers and members of the audience shall not be permitted.
   (H)   After a registered speaker has made their public comments, or their
allotted time for public comment has expired, they shall be seated with no
further debate, dialogue or comment.
   (I)   All comments must be civil and respectful in nature. Any registered
speaker who makes defamatory, obscene, discriminatory, threatening or abusive
comments, or who engages in threatening, abusive or disorderly behavior when
addressing the City Council or a City committee/commission/board may be deemed
out-of-order by the presiding officer, and the speaker's opportunity for public
comment at that meeting may be terminated.
   (J)   If numerous persons which to speak on a single agenda item, the
presiding officer may recognize a specific number of registered speakers to
make comments regarding the matter. Any registered person who is not able to
address the City Council or City committee/commission/board for this reason or
due to the expiration of the time allotted for the public comment period, will
be encouraged to attend a subsequent meeting to address the City Council or
City committee/commission/board, and/or to provide written comments. (Ord.
4187, 4-7-2020; amd. Ord. 4339, 5-2-2023)
CHAPTER 7
CITY OFFICERS
SECTION:
1-7-1: Qualifications For Officers
1-7-2: Elective Officers
1-7-3: Discontinuance Of Certain Offices
1-7-4: Commission, Certificate; Successor
1-7-5: Oath, Bond
1-7-6: Administering Oaths
1-7-7: Interest In Contracts
1-7-8: Misconduct Of Officers
1-7-9: Conservators Of Peace, Powers
1-7-10: Purchases By Officers
1-7-11: Certain Officers
1-7-12: Salaries
1-7-1: QUALIFICATIONS FOR OFFICERS:
In addition to the qualifications of any officer or employee, no person shall
be eligible to any office or employment for the city unless he is a qualified
elector of the city and has resided therein at least one year next preceding
his election or appointment; however, these requirements shall not apply to the
city engineer, or other officers who require technical training. But no person
shall be eligible to any office in the city who is a defaulter to the city.
(R.O. 1959, Ch. 27, Art. 1, Sec. 1)
1-7-2: ELECTIVE OFFICERS:
The mayor, aldermen, city clerk and city treasurer shall not hold any other
office in the city during his term of office, except that an alderman may be
eligible to the office of acting mayor or mayor pro tem. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 27,
Art. 1, Sec. 2)
1-7-3: DISCONTINUANCE OF CERTAIN OFFICES:
By ordinance or resolution, to take effect at the end of the current fiscal
year, the council, by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of all the aldermen elected, may
discontinue any office created by it, and devolve the duties of that office on
any other city officer. After such discontinuance, no officer filling any
office so discontinued shall have any claim against the city for salary alleged
to accrue after the date of the discontinuance. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 27, Art. 1,
Sec. 3)
1-7-4: COMMISSION, CERTIFICATE; SUCCESSOR:
Whenever a person has been appointed or elected to office, the mayor shall
issue a certificate of appointment or election, under the corporate seal to the
city clerk. All officers elected or appointed, except the clerk, aldermen and
mayor shall be commissioned by warrant, under the corporate seal, signed by the
clerk, and the mayor, acting mayor or mayor pro tem. Within five (5) days after
notification and request, any person who has been an officer of the city shall
deliver to his successor in office all property, books and effects in his
possession, belonging to the city or appertaining to the office he has held.
Upon his refusal to do so, he shall be liable for all the damages caused
thereby. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 27, Art. 1, Sec. 4)
1-7-5: OATH, BOND:
   (A)   That, as applicable, all persons elected or appointed to municipal
offices in the city shall, within the time fixed by law, take their respective
oath of office, subscribe their oath of office and subscribe any required bond
during the month of April following the proclamation of the official results of
the election and within ten (10) days after the Canton city clerk notifies such
persons of their election or appointment.
   (B)   That the taking of the oath, the subscribing of the oath and the
subscribing of any required bond shall, whenever reasonably expedient, be
accomplished at the regular Canton city council meeting next following the date
of the preceding municipal election and the proclamation of the results
thereof.
   (C)   That, in the event the taking of the oath, subscribing of the oath and
the subscribing of any required bond at the regular city council meeting is not
practical, the city clerk shall, during normal business hours, give the
prescribed oath of office and all newly elected or appointed municipal officers
shall take and subscribe the said oath on a date and time during normal
business hours to be fixed by the mayor. The giving of the oath by the city
clerk and the taking and subscribing of the oath by the newly elected or
appointed municipal officials shall be open to the public and to all media.
(Ord. 1057, 4-16-1985)
1-7-6: ADMINISTERING OATHS:
The mayor and the clerk shall have power to administer oaths and affirmations
upon all lawful occasions. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 2, Art. 1, Sec. 6)
1-7-7: INTEREST IN CONTRACTS:
No officer in the city shall be interested, directly or indirectly, in any
contract, work or business of the city, or in the sale of any article, whenever
the expense, price or consideration of the contract, work, business or sale is
paid either from the treasury or by any assessment levied by any statute or
ordinance.
No city officer shall be interested directly or indirectly, in the purchase of
any property which: a) belongs to the city, or b) is sold for taxes or
assessments, or c) is sold by virtue of legal process at the suit of the city.
(R.O. 1959, Ch. 27, Art. 1, Sec. 7)
1-7-8: MISCONDUCT OF OFFICERS:
Every officer of the city who is guilty of a palpable omission of duty, or who
is guilty of wilful and corrupt oppression, malconduct or misfeasance in the
discharge of the duties of his office shall be liable to indictment in any
court of competent jurisdiction and, on conviction, shall be fined not
exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The court in which such conviction
is had shall enter an order removing the convicted officer from office. (R.O.
1959, Ch. 27, Art. 1, Sec. 8)
1-7-9: CONSERVATORS OF PEACE, POWERS:
The mayor, aldermen, policemen and watchmen in the city shall be conservators
of the peace. All such specified persons shall have power: a) to arrest or
cause to be arrested, with or without process, all persons who break the peace,
or are found violating any provisions of this code or any criminal law of the
state; b) to commit arrested persons for examination; c) if necessary, to
detain arrested persons overnight or Sunday in a safe place, or until he can be
brought before the proper officer; and d) to exercise all other powers as
conservators of the peace that the council may prescribe.
All warrants for the violation of provisions of this code, or the state
criminal law, to whomsoever directed, may be served and executed within the
limits of the city by any policeman. For this purpose policemen have all the
common law and statutory powers of constables. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 27, Art. 1, Sec.
9)
1-7-10: PURCHASES BY OFFICERS:
   (A)   Requisitions Required: Prior to making any purchase, any officer shall
prepare a written requisition therefor upon forms to be supplied by the
committee on claims. Such requisition shall be properly dated; shall contain a
brief description of the article or material desired; the price or estimated
cost thereof; the name of the firm from whom the purchase is to be made and the
purpose and department for which said material or article is to be used. Any
purchase made contrary to this section shall not be allowed or approved by any
committee of the council; but shall be considered the individual act and
responsibility of the person making the same. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 27, Art. 2, Sec.
1)
   (B)   Approval By Committee Chairman And Mayor: Said written requisition
shall be presented to the chairman of the proper committee and to the mayor for
their approval and signature and unless said requisition be so approved and
signed by them said purchase shall not be made. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 27, Art. 2,
Sec. 2)
   (C)   Requisition Forms To Be Furnished: The requisition forms herein
provided for shall be kept in the possession of the city clerk who shall issue
them upon request of officers of the city; said requisitions shall be prepared
in triplicate. A copy thereof shall be kept by the clerk and the person making
such purchase. A copy shall be given to the firm from whom the purchase is to
be made and shall be attached to the statement or bill submitted for payment
and no bill or statements shall be approved or paid unless accompanied by such
copy. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 27, Art. 2, Sec. 3)
   (D)   Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall not extend or apply
to purchases specifically authorized to be made by the council. (R.O. 1959, Ch.
27, Art. 2, Sec. 4)
1-7-11: CERTAIN OFFICERS:
Provisions regarding certain city officers not otherwise provided for in this
title are enumerated in the following sections of this code:
 
Officer                      Code Section
                               
Cemetery superintendent       8-7-1
City engineer                  8-1-3
Superintendent of streets      8-1-4
Chief of police                6-1-2
Zoning enforcement officer     10-14-1
 
(1975 Code)
1-7-12: SALARIES:
The salaries paid to the elected and appointed officers of the city shall be
set from time to time by the mayor and council. (1975 Code)
CHAPTER 8
CITY PERSONNEL
SECTION:
1-8-1: Title
1-8-2: Definitions
1-8-3: Full Time Employees
1-8-4: Part Time And Temporary Employees
1-8-5: Temporary Employees (Rep. by Ord. 1018, 5-15-1984)
1-8-6: Department Heads
1-8-7: Appointive Positions
1-8-8: Vacation Pay
1-8-9: Holiday Pay
1-8-10: Nighttime Bonus
1-8-11: Sick Pay
1-8-12: Insurance
1-8-13: New Employees; Physical Examination
1-8-14: Cost Of Living Allowance
1-8-15: Other Benefits
1-8-16: Interpretation
1-8-17: Effective Date
1-8-18: Wages For Public Works Employees
1-8-19: Employee Evaluations
1-8-1: TITLE:
This chapter may be referred to as the EMPLOYMENT ORDINANCE of the City of
Canton, Illinois. (Ord. 584, 4-26-1977)
1-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words or phrases, as used herein, shall have the following
meanings:
APPOINTED POSITIONS, APPOINTED EMPLOYEE (Or Variations Thereof): Shall mean and
have reference to a person employed by the City who is appointed to his
position by the Mayor with concurrence of the City Council.
DEPARTMENT HEAD: Either the Superintendent of Public Works, the City Engineer,
the Fire Chief, the Police Chief, the Superintendent of the City Waterworks,
the Superintendent of the Wastewater Treatment Plant, the Superintendent of
Streets and Alleys, or the Plumbing Inspector, as the context requires and
shall also have reference to several or all of them when used in the plural, as
the context requires.
EMPLOYEE: A person, other than one who is appointed to a position with the
City, other than an elected official, and other than one who is a department
head, who does work for or renders services to the employer and who is paid
therefor at weekly intervals.
EMPLOYER: The City of Canton, Illinois.
FULL TIME APPOINTED EMPLOYEE: Shall mean and have reference to an appointed
employee who regularly works forty (40) hours per week.
FULL TIME EMPLOYEE: Shall mean and have reference to an employee of the
employer who regularly works a minimum of forty (40) hours per week in a
particular work category established by the employer and which has subsisted as
such a work category utilizing the services of an employee for a minimum of
forty (40) hours per week for each week of the preceding fiscal year of the
employer and wherein the need for continuous like services is anticipated in
the foreseeable future.
PART TIME EMPLOYEE: Shall mean and have reference to an employee of the
employer who regularly works a minimum of thirty four (34) hours (but not as
many as 40 hours) per week in a particular work category established by the
employer and which has subsisted as such a work category utilizing the services
of an employee for a minimum of thirty four (34) hours (but not as many as 40
hours) per week for each week of the preceding fiscal year of the employer and
wherein the need for continuous like services is anticipated in the foreseeable
future.
PROBATION PERIOD (Or Variations Thereof): Shall mean and have reference to that
six (6) month period of employment immediately following the initial employment
of any employee of the employer excepting of temporary employees or employees
who are members of either the fire or police department of the city; with
respect to any employee who is a member of either the fire or police department
of the city (and who is under the jurisdiction of the fire and police
commission of the city) they shall mean and have reference to that one year
period of employment immediately following the initial employment of such
employee as a member of either of these departments (as fireman or policeman,
as the case may be). Any applicable probation period shall have, as its
incident and shall be considered a period of test or trial for the employee in
his relations to his work and to this employer during which time such employee
may be discharged by the employer without stated reason or cause.
REGULAR PAY (Or Variations Thereof): The basic weekly salary plus all money
additives thereto which shall be applicable to any full time employee; or, if
the context requires, it shall mean the basic weekly salary of a department
head or the weekly pay provided for a particular appointive position.
SENIORITY (Or Variations Thereof): Shall have reference to the continuous
service of a full time employee within the department of his employment unless
otherwise specifically defined.
SERVICE (Or Variations Thereof): Shall have reference to the continuous service
of a full time employee, whether within the department of his current
employment or not, unless otherwise specifically defined.
TEMPORARY EMPLOYEE: An employee whose services in any work category established
by the employer are expected to be of short duration and wherein the need
therefor is casual or intermittent. (Ord. 584, 4-26-1977; amd. Ord. 692, 12-19-
1978)
1-8-3: FULL TIME EMPLOYEES:
   (A)   The following provisions are applicable to all full time employees: A
"hiring in" weekly salary, based on forty (40) hours actually worked, shall be
paid to each newly hired full time employee in the basic amount of two hundred
dollars ($200.00) per week. Merit increases may from time to time be
recommended for such a newly hired employee by his department head for
disposition by the city council, provided, however, such an employee shall be
paid the basic weekly salary, hereinafter provided, following two (2) years of
continuous service by him.
A basic weekly salary, based on forty (40) hours actually worked, shall be paid
to every other full time employee in the amount of two hundred forty dollars
ninety two cents ($240.92) per week. The sum of two dollars ($2.00) per week
shall be added to the basic weekly salary of each such employee commencing with
the first forty (40) hours worked by such an employee following completion of
any applicable period of probation for service within the department of his
employment. A further sum of two dollars ($2.00) per week shall be added to the
basic weekly salary of such an employee commencing with the first forty (40)
hours worked by such employee following completion of four (4) years' service
within the department.
   (B)   The following provisions shall be applicable to particularized full
time employees and in addition to the provisions of the preceding paragraph:
      1.   Police Department:
         (a)   Addition To Basic Weekly Salary: To the basic weekly salary of
each corporal shall be added and paid the further weekly sum of fourteen
dollars fifty three cents ($14.53). To the basic weekly salary of each police
sergeant shall be added and paid the further weekly sum of twenty four dollars
six cents ($24.06). To the basic weekly salary of each full time employee who
is a member of the police department and subject to the rules and regulations
of the fire and police commission of this city shall be added and paid the
further weekly sum of five dollars ($5.00).
         (b)   Clothing Allowance: Each police officer, including the police
chief and traffic control officer, shall be allowed and paid a clothing
allowance in the yearly amount of two hundred sixty dollars ($260.00). This
amount shall be paid in advance at the commencement of the fiscal year of the
city or as near thereto as practicable.
      2.   Fire Department:
         (a)   Addition To Basic Weekly Salary: To the basic weekly salary of
each firetruck driver (each of whom is to be the senior employee on any
particular shift) shall be added and paid the further weekly sum of four
dollars ($4.00). To the basic weekly salary of each assistant fire chief shall
be added and paid the further weekly sum of twenty four dollars six cents
($24.06). To the basic weekly salary of each full time employee who is a member
of the fire department and subject to the rules and regulations of the fire and
police commission of this city shall be added and paid the further weekly sum
of five dollars ($5.00). To the basic weekly salary of each lieutenant who is
regularly stationed at any fire substation of this city shall be added and paid
the further weekly sum of fourteen dollars fifty three cents ($14.53). To the
basic weekly salary of each firetruck driver (each of whom is to be the senior
employee of any particular shift) who is regularly stationed at any fire
substation of this city shall be added and paid the further weekly sum of four
dollars ($4.00).
         (b)   Clothing Allowance: Each fireman, including the fire chief,
shall be allowed and paid a clothing allowance in the yearly amount of one
hundred eighty dollars ($180.00). This amount shall be paid in advance at the
commencement of the fiscal year of the city or as near thereto as practicable.
      3.   Assistant To Department Heads: Department heads, excepting of the
fire and police departments and the plumbing inspector, may designate a full
time employee as an assistant. Such an assistant, in addition to his basic
weekly salary, shall receive and be paid an additional five dollars ($5.00) per
week; provided, however, in the event the department head is unavailable and
off duty for a continuous period of five (5) calendar days, such assistant,
upon certification by the department head, shall thereafter and during the
subsequent absence of the department head be paid the salary of the department
head and in lieu of the salary and money benefits he otherwise would have been
paid as hereinabove provided. (Ord. 584, 4-26-1977)
1-8-4: PART TIME AND TEMPORARY EMPLOYEES:
Part time and temporary employees shall initially be paid and receive an hourly
wage and such other benefits and emoluments as the city council or committee
may determine at the time such employee is hired. Such employee may thereafter
receive such raises in pay as the city council may determine. (Ord. 1018, 5-15-
1984)
1-8-5: TEMPORARY EMPLOYEES:
(Rep. by Ord. 1018, 5-15-1984)
1-8-6: DEPARTMENT HEADS:
The basic weekly salary to be paid to the superintendent of the wastewater
treatment plant shall be the sum of three hundred forty six dollars sixteen
cents ($346.16). The basic weekly salary to be paid to all other department
heads shall be the sum of three hundred twelve dollars eighty cents ($312.80).
This city recognizes, however, that department heads, by reason of managerial
responsibilities and duties which transcend those of other employees, may
sometimes be required not only to perform services over continuous periods of
time considerably in excess of forty (40) hours in any one week, but may
sometimes be required or expected to perform services on holidays, at odd
times, on days off, during vacation periods, or at various other and unexpected
times under emergency or unusual conditions. Accordingly, and within reason, it
shall be the policy of this city that such demands for services by department
heads shall be recognized by the corporate authorities of this city and that
reasonable adjustments and concessions therefor, both in money payments and as
otherwise may be fair and suitable in particularized instances, shall from time
to time be considered and made, provided, however, that any such adjustments
shall be in the sole discretion of the corporate authorities of this city and,
further, that nothing herein contained shall be construed as an inducement,
promise or obligation running from the employer to any department head.
In the interpretation of the paragraph immediately preceding, it is hereby
declared that the spirit and principles of all provisions of this city having
to do with vacation pay, holiday pay, nighttime bonus and sick pay, together
with the concept of reasonable and periodic time off from the demands of duty
and employment, applies to department heads.
Accordingly, in the implementation and application of the provisions of the two
(2) paragraphs hereto preceding, it shall be the duty of each department head
to make weekly reports of the circumstances of his employment (whether by him
deemed unusual or not) to the chairman of the appropriate committee of this
city, charged with immediate concern for and over the department of his
employment, who is hereby authorized and directed to make such immediate
adjustments of salary and conditions of employment as may be consonant with the
intention and spirit of said paragraphs; provided, however, all such
adjustments of salary shall be reported on a monthly basis for approval by the
corporate authorities. (Ord. 603, 8-16-1977)
   (A)   Expenditure Of City Funds: The following amount shall be the maximum
amount of city funds which may be expended for unbudgeted expenses by
department heads on official business for the city without prior council
approval:
 
Department heads $2,000.00
 
The following amount shall be the maximum amount of city funds which may be
expended for unbudgeted emergency expenditures by department heads on official
business for the city without prior council approval:
 
Department heads $5,000.00
 
(Ord. 2081, 5-1-2012)
1-8-7: APPOINTIVE POSITIONS:
   (A)   The following positions shall be filled by appointment of the mayor
with concurrence of the city council, and the weekly basic salary to be paid to
the appointee for each such position based on forty (40) hours actually worked,
shall be as follows:
Radio Operators, Radio Operator-File Clerk: Three (3) radio operators and one
radio operator-file clerk shall be appointed, each to be paid a basic weekly
salary, based on forty (40) hours actually worked, for two hundred twenty four
dollars fifty five cents ($224.55) per week. (Ord. 584, 4-26-1977)
Economic Development Director:
      1.   The duties of economic development director shall be set forth in a
job description which will be promulgated for the position.
      2.   The position shall be full time.
      3.   The annual salary shall be a competitive salary based upon the
candidate's qualifications, established by the mayor with the concurrence of
the city council of the city of Canton. (Ord. 1705, 9-18-2001)
   (B)   The following positions shall be filled by appointment of the mayor
with concurrence of the city council, and the annual salary to be paid to the
appointee for each such position (to be paid in 52 equal weekly installments)
shall be as indicated:
1 administrative assistant                             $32,250.00
1 assistant to the supervisor of community development 13,456.03
program
1 budget administrator, part time                      20,000.00 to $ (open)
1 building custodian                                   10,484.24
1 caretaker (comfort station and police department)    3,120.00
1 city attorney, part time                             9,891.44
1 city engineer and coordinator                        20,598.76
1 deputy city clerk, not to exceed                     4,500.00
1 maintenance supervisor                               15,544.88
1 public works director                                56,000.00
1 public works draftsman                               12,160.72
1 radio operator, part time                            1,788.80
1 secretary to the mayor                               10,400.00
1 supervisor of community development program          17,748.64
1 system maintenance superintendent                    43,764.00
1 traffic control officer                              12,676.04
1 water department cashier                             12,175.28
 
(Ord. 584, 4-26-1977; amd. Ord. 1546, 5-6-1997; Ord. 1696, 5-15-2001; Ord.
1699, 7-3-2001; Ord. 1743, 12-17-2002; Ord. 1745, 12-17-2002)
To the weekly salary of each of the three (3) radio operators (other than part
time radio operator), that of the radio operator-file clerk, and that of the
traffic control officer, shall be added and paid the further weekly sum of five
dollars ($5.00).
Each of the three (3) radio operators (other than part time radio operators)
and the radio operator-file clerk shall be allowed and paid a clothing
allowance in a yearly amount of one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00). This
amount shall be paid in advance at the commencement of the fiscal year of the
city or as near thereto as practicable.
To the weekly salary of each employee filling an appointive position who
regularly works forty (40) hours each week shall be added and paid the further
weekly sum of two dollars ($2.00) commencing with the first forty (40) hours
worked by such an employee following completion of his probation period. A
further sum of two dollars ($2.00) shall be added to the weekly salary and paid
to such an employee commencing with the first forty (40) hours worked following
completion of four (4) years of continuous service as such an employee. (Ord.
584, 4-26-1977)
1-8-8: VACATION PAY:
Each full time employee, official, officer, department head (including persons
filling a full time appointive position) of the city who qualifies therefor as
hereinafter provided, shall receive a vacation period, consisting of one or
more weeks, as hereinafter provided, with forty (40) hours' regular pay for
each such week and as may be applicable to any such person, provided, however,
that such person shall not perform his regular work or render his regular
services to and for the city during any such vacation period or part thereof.
The vacation period or periods, hereinafter set forth, shall accrue by way of
entitlement only after continuous service to the employer for the entire lesser
period in each instance named. Further, for the purpose of computing vacation
entitlement, continuous service with the employer (as distinguished from
service within a department) shall be counted. The vacation period hereby
provided for such service of not less than one nor more than three (3) calendar
years, shall be two (2) weeks; for not less than three (3) years, nor more than
ten (10) years, three (3) weeks; for not less than ten (10) years, nor more
than fifteen (15) years, four (4) weeks; and, for any period in excess of
fifteen (15) years, five (5) weeks. Vacation periods may not be accumulated and
must be used during the fiscal year of the city during which the entitlement
therefor arises unless otherwise expressly provided by the corporate
authorities at a regular meeting and upon request of the employee concerned.
"Part time employees", within the meaning of that term as defined herein, shall
be entitled to vacation periods and vacation pay on the same principles as
above set forth with respect to full time employees. (Ord. 584, 4-26-1977)
1-8-9: HOLIDAY PAY:
Each full time employee, official, officer, department head (including persons
filling a full time appointive position) of the city shall receive and be paid
a "holiday pay" consisting of, in each instance, eight (8) hours' regular pay
applicable to each such person, for each of the following seven (7) holidays:
New Year's Day; Memorial Day; Fourth of July; Labor Day; Veterans Day;
Thanksgiving Day; and Christmas Day; provided, however, that such employee,
official, officer, or appointed person shall be and remain employed by and with
the city both before and after the applicable holiday for which payment is
herein provided.
In the event any such person actually works an eight (8) hour period on any of
the holidays herein named as a part of his regular workweek, such person shall
receive and be paid a yet additional pay therefor consisting, in each instance,
of eight (8) hours' regular pay applicable to each such person.
The calendar day on which each such holiday falls and for which payment is to
be made, as herein provided, shall be as provided by law, or in the absence
thereof, by custom.
For the purpose of clarification, the intent of the foregoing is that each such
employee shall receive his regular pay for each named holiday if not worked;
triple if worked.
Department heads shall not work on any of the holidays named except in
emergency or necessitous circumstances which cannot be circumvented. (Ord. 584,
4-26-1977)
1-8-10: NIGHTTIME BONUS:
Each full time employee, official, officer, or department head of this city,
excepting of members of the fire department, who works a regular eight (8) hour
night shift as a part of his regular workweek, shall receive and be paid an
additional increase in his basic weekly salary in the amount of one-fifth (1/5)
of three percent (3%) thereof for such eight (8) hour night shift actually
worked. For the purpose of this section, the term "night shift" shall mean any
regular eight (8) hour period actually worked between the hours of three
o'clock (3:00) P.M. of any day and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. of the day
thereafter immediately succeeding. (Ord. 584, 4-26-1977)
1-8-11: SICK PAY:
Each full time employee, official, officer, department head (including persons
who work in full time appointive positions), shall be entitled to and shall be
paid, during the fiscal year of the employer, as sick pay. Time taken off for
personal reasons shall be construed to be within the meaning of and encompassed
by the term "sick pay". The maximum sick pay to be paid by the employer to any
employee on account of any fiscal year of the employer shall be: six (6) 8-hour
days of regular pay (i.e., 6/5 of the basic weekly salary, based on 40 hours
actually worked, plus additives in the case of full time employees; 6/5 of the
basic weekly salary of department heads; or 6/5 the weekly salary of full time
appointive persons [together with applicable additives]).
In the event this sick pay is not paid to the individual entitled during the
current fiscal year on account of actual illness or actual personal time off
for personal reasons, the same shall be paid at the commencement of the ensuing
fiscal year of the employer, or as near thereto as practicable.
An employee entitled to sick pay, as hereinabove provided, shall also be
entitled to two (2) additional sick days off with eight (8) hours of regular
pay therefor during the fiscal year of the city under the following conditions:
Subject to a right of election, as hereinafter set forth, these additional days
may be utilized only after the sick days to which such employee is entitled as
hereinabove set forth, have actually been used as time off during the fiscal
year; and, in the event the employee is called for emergency duty with the city
on any such day, he shall be paid for such emergency duty at his straight time
rate, notwithstanding any provision to the contrary any place set forth.
Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding sentence, any employee, who is
a member of the fire or police department and also subject to the jurisdiction
of the fire and police commission of this city, may, at his election, timely
made known in writing prior to the end of any fiscal year, accumulate one or
both such days to which he may have become entitled to during such fiscal year
and for each succeeding fiscal year thereafter ensuing until a maximum of
fifteen (15) of such days have been accumulated. These days, so accumulated,
may be used by such employee as time off days without pay therefor above or in
addition to his regular salary.
Computation of sick pay for any employee newly hired as a full time employee,
whether for the first time or after a break in service with the city, shall be
computed with reference to the fiscal year of the city. Thus, the sick pay
entitlement of such an employee shall consist of that percent of the maximum
sick pay (hereinabove provided) which his length of service in the fiscal year
of his hiring bears to the entire length of such fiscal year. Such a newly
hired employee shall not be entitled as a matter of right to extra time off as
a sick day.
The sick pay hereinabove provided shall be paid only after presentment to the
clerk and treasurer of this city of a voucher or certificate of verification
signed by the applicable department head and countersigned by the applicable
committee chairman manifesting the entitlement of the particular employee to
the sick pay claimed. A department head shall sign his own voucher and on his
own behalf and this, as to him, shall be sufficient when countersigned by the
applicable committee chairman. (Ord. 584, 4-26-1977)
1-8-12: INSURANCE:
The employer shall pay for and on behalf of its participating employees,
including department heads and elected and appointed officers and employees,
all applicable premiums under the group insurance program presently in force
between the employer and the existing group insurer while such persons are
employed by the employer.
The employer shall also pay all applicable premiums under the group insurance
program presently in force in amount and for participating employees and
department heads who are or may become retired, as follows:
   (A)   In the case of such employees and department heads who have become and
now are retired and who are entitled to monthly benefits under a pension plan
of the employer, and who have reached their respective ages of fifty five (55)
years or more, the employer shall pay the applicable premium for and on behalf
of such retired employee or department head insofar as the same does not exceed
forty dollars ($40.00) per month.
   (B)   In the case of such employees and department heads who have twenty
five (25) years of service and who, regardless of age, have become entitled to
a pension under the provisions of the police and firemen's pension fund, the
employer shall pay the entire amount of the applicable premium of such
insurance.
   (C)   In the case of such employees and department heads who have twenty
(20) years of service and who have reached their respective ages of fifty (50)
years and who have become entitled to a pension under the provisions of the
police and firemen's pension fund, the employer shall pay the entire amount of
the applicable premium of such insurance.
   (D)   In the case of such employees and department heads who hereafter
retire and are eligible to receive retirement benefits under the provisions of
the Illinois municipal employees' retirement provisions, the employer shall pay
the entire amount of the applicable premium of such insurance, provided,
however, in the event such employee or department head chooses to retire under
such conditions that his retirement benefits are reduced on account of the
early retirement provisions of the Illinois municipal employees' retirement
program, then, and in that event, the amount of insurance premium paid on his
behalf by the employer shall be likewise proportionately reduced and such
employee or department head, if he chooses to continue such insurance, must
then himself pay the difference in the premium amount, excepting however, the
employer shall pay the entire amount of the applicable premium of such
insurance on account of any employee or department head who has reached his age
of fifty five (55) years, has twenty (20) years of service, and who retires
eligible to receive retirement benefits under the provisions of the Illinois
municipal employees' retirement provisions.
The employer shall also pay a portion of the applicable insurance premium for
the dependents of participating employees not covered by a collective
bargaining agreement and department heads who are or may become retired, as
follows:
   (A)   In the case of such employees not covered by a collective bargaining
agreement or department heads who have twenty (20) years of service with the
city, the employer shall pay fifty percent (50%) of the applicable premium of
such insurance.
   (B)   In the case of such employees not covered by a collective bargaining
agreement or department heads who have twenty one (21) years of service with
the city, the employer shall pay fifty five percent (55%) of the applicable
premium of such insurance.
   (C)   In the case of such employees not covered by a collective bargaining
agreement or department heads who have twenty two (22) years of service with
the city, the employer shall pay sixty percent (60%) of the applicable premium
of such insurance.
   (D)   In the case of such employees not covered by a collective bargaining
agreement or department heads who have twenty three (23) years of service with
the city, the employer shall pay sixty five percent (65%) of the applicable
premium of such insurance.
   (E)   In the case of such employees not covered by a collective bargaining
agreement or department heads who have twenty four (24) years of service with
the city, the employer shall pay seventy percent (70%) of the applicable
premium of such insurance.
   (F)   In the case of such employees not covered by a collective bargaining
agreement or department heads who have twenty five (25) years of service with
the city, the employer shall pay seventy five percent (75%) of the applicable
premium of such insurance.
   (G)   In the case of such employees not covered by a collective bargaining
agreement or department heads who have twenty six (26) years of service with
the city, the employer shall pay eighty percent (80%) of the applicable premium
of such insurance.
   (H)   In the case of such employees not covered by a collective bargaining
agreement or department heads who have twenty seven (27) years of service with
the city, the employer shall pay eighty five percent (85%) of the applicable
premium of such insurance.
   (I)   In the case of such employees not covered by a collective bargaining
agreement or department heads who have twenty eight (28) years of service with
the city, the employer shall pay ninety percent (90%) of the applicable premium
of such insurance.
   (J)   In the case of such employees not covered by a collective bargaining
agreement or department heads who have twenty nine (29) years of service with
the city, the employer shall pay ninety five percent (95%) of the applicable
premium of such insurance.
   (K)   In the case of such employees not covered by a collective bargaining
agreement or department heads who have thirty (30) or more years of service
with the city, the employer shall pay one hundred percent (100%) of the
applicable premium of such insurance.
The employer shall not pay any portion of the applicable premium for the
dependents of participating employees not covered by a collective bargaining
agreement and department heads who are or may become retired if such employees
or department heads have less than twenty (20) years of service with the city.
(Ord. 692, 12-19-1978)
1-8-13: NEW EMPLOYEES; PHYSICAL EXAMINATION:
All persons seeking employment with the city, other than elected or appointive
personnel, not otherwise required to take a physical examination, who, by
reason of their anticipated employment, would be qualified to participate in
the insurance program of this city, shall, prior to and as a condition of
employment, at their own expense, take and pass such physical examination as
may from time to time be prescribed by the insurance carrier of this city or,
if none, as shall be prescribed by the corporate authorities of this city.
(Ord. 584, 4-26-1977)
1-8-14: COST OF LIVING ALLOWANCE:
Each employee of this city, excepting of elected officials and temporary
employees, shall receive and be paid a cost of living allowance computed on and
with respect to the weekly salary of each such employee and the same shall be
taken in account in the computation of vacation pay, holiday pay, sick pay, or
any specialty payment right, including overtime. The amount of the cost of
living allowance shall be determined and redetermined on the basis of the
consumer price index for urban wage earners and clerical workers (including
single workers) published by the bureau of labor statistics, United States
department of labor (referred to herein as "the index"). Continuance of the
cost of living allowance shall be contingent upon the availability of the index
in its present form. Determination and application of the cost of living
allowance shall be made in the following manner, at the following times, and
for application in the following way:
   (A)   Manner Of Determination: The cost of living allowance shall consist of
one cent ($0.01) per hour added to the regular average hourly wage of each
qualifying employee for each three-tenths of one percent (0.3%) rise in the
cost of living index which occurs over the status of the index as it now
exists.
   (B)   Time Of Determination: The cost of living allowance shall be
determined by the corporate authorities at the beginning of each quarter (or as
near thereto as practicable) of the fiscal year of the city.
   (C)   Time Of Payment Of Cost Of Living Allowance: The cost of living
allowance, as determined, shall be paid for at the quarters of the fiscal year
of the city, in each instance commencing as early in the applicable quarter as
practicable. (Ord. 584, 4-26-1977)
1-8-15: OTHER BENEFITS:
The employer recognizes that there are and may yet be other benefits which
ought to inure from the employer to the employee on account of peculiar
conditions or requirements of employment. Among these are:
   (A)   Basic Telephone Bills To Be Paid For Certain Employees: Certain
employees of this city, as a condition of employment, are required to have
installed and maintained, in their homes, a telephone. As to these, the
employer shall pay each such basic phone bill as the same may from time to time
exist.
The employees entitled to such payment on account of such bill shall be
identified in the minutes of a regular meeting of the corporate authorities as
early in the fiscal year as may be practicable.
   (B)   Minimum Pay: The policy of this city is that a minimum pay of two
hundred dollars ($200.00) per week of forty (40) hours worked shall be paid all
new employees excepting of part time and appointed employees (and, as to them,
their beginning salary shall be as from time to time determined by the
corporate authorities). (Ord. 584, 4-26-1977)
1-8-16: INTERPRETATION:
This chapter represents the legislative determination of the corporate
authorities of this city and is not contractual in its impact and the
interpretation hereof, in the event of ambiguities or questions of application,
accordingly, shall be in the sole discretion of such authorities. (Ord. 584, 4-
26-1977)
1-8-17: EFFECTIVE DATE:
The provisions hereby shall be and become effective May 1, 1977. (Ord. 584, 4-
26-1977)
1-8-18: WAGES FOR PUBLIC WORKS EMPLOYEES:
To the extent and as required by an act regulating wages of laborers, mechanics
and other workmen employed in any public works by the state, county, city or
any public body or any political subdivision or by anyone under contract for
public works, set forth in 820 Illinois Compiled Statutes 130/1 through 130/12,
the general prevailing rate of wages in this locality for laborers, mechanics
and other workmen engaged in the construction of public works coming under the
jurisdiction of this city is hereby ascertained to be the same as the
prevailing rate of wages for construction work in the Fulton County area as
determined by the department of labor of the state of Illinois as of July 1,
1976, a copy of that determination being attached hereto and incorporated
herein by reference. The definition of any terms appearing in this chapter
which are also used in the aforesaid act shall be the same as in said act.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply said general prevailing
rate of wages as herein ascertained to any work or employment except public
works construction of this City to the extent required by the aforesaid Act.
The City Clerk shall publicly post or keep available for inspection by any
interested party in the main office of this City this determination of such
prevailing rate of wage.
The City Clerk shall mail a copy of this determination to any employer, and to
any association of employers and to any person or association of employees who
have filed, or file, their names and addresses, requesting copies of any
determination stating the particular rates and the particular class of workmen
whose wages will be affected by such rates.
The City Clerk shall promptly file a certified copy of this chapter with both
the Secretary of State of the State of Illinois and with the Department of
Labor of the State of Illinois. (Ord. 554, 8-3-1976)
1-8-19: EMPLOYEE EVALUATIONS:
All full time City employees' job performance shall be evaluated, in writing,
at least once every calendar year in the following manner:
   (A)   Evaluation: It is the duty of the immediate supervisor of each full
time, nonelected City employee to evaluate such employee's job performance.
Such evaluation shall be accomplished in writing no later than the last day of
January of each calendar year and shall evaluate the employee's job performance
in the preceding calendar year. The written evaluation shall be accomplished on
standardized forms provided by the City.
   (B)   Endorsement: The next higher supervisory official above the immediate
supervisor shall evaluate the immediate supervisor's evaluation of each
employee under his direction and shall endorse his approval/disapproval of such
evaluation, citing his reasons therefor.
   (C)   Presentation: The completed evaluation and a copy thereof shall then
be presented to the employee by the immediate supervisor and the employee shall
then receipt on the original of such evaluation his receipt of a copy thereof.
The employee's endorsement on the original of receipt of a copy thereof shall
not be construed as the employee's approval of such evaluation.
   (D)   Response: In all instances where the average of the scores on any such
evaluation falls below the average range, the employee shall have fourteen (14)
calendar days from the date of the employee's receipt of a copy of such
evaluation to respond to such evaluation in writing, setting forth his response
to the evaluation. In the event that the fourteenth day falls on a day when the
City building is not open, the employee shall have until the end of the next
business day (when the City building is open) to present his response.
   (E)   Inclusion In Files: All evaluations, together with the employee's
response (if any), shall be permanently placed in the employee's personnel file
by the affected department heads.
   (F)   Supervisory Evaluations: Department heads shall accomplish annual
evaluations of all supervisory personnel under their supervision for subsequent
endorsement by the department head's immediate supervisor. The Mayor shall
accomplish evaluations of all department heads.
   (G)   Other Evaluations: Evaluations shall also be accomplished when any
full time employee is transferred to a new department or to a new supervisor
(either within or without the same department) and has worked in the
transferring department or for the transferring supervisor for ninety (90)
consecutive days or more.
   (H)   Responsibility: Department heads are hereby held accountable for the
timely performance of the foregoing requirements for their respective
departments; the Mayor is accountable for the timely performance of the
foregoing requirements for department heads. (Ord. 961, 1-18-1983)
CHAPTER 9
CITY CLERK
SECTION:
1-9-1: Oath, Bond
1-9-2: Office, Office Hours
1-9-3: Keep Minutes; Serve Notices
1-9-4: Corporate Seal, Documents
1-9-5: Record Ordinances
1-9-6: Publication Of Ordinances
1-9-7: Deliver Papers
1-9-8: Prepare Official Papers
1-9-9: Appoint Deputy
1-9-10: Postelection Notices
1-9-11: Notify Elected Person
1-9-12: General Supervision
1-9-13: Report Estimates
1-9-14: Records Of City Bonds
1-9-15: City Revenue
1-9-16: Removal Of Records, Papers From Office
1-9-17: Monthly Report To Council
1-9-18: Audit All Accounts
1-9-19: Claims Against City
1-9-20: List Of Warrants
1-9-21: Record Of Elections, Appointments
1-9-22: Records To Successor
1-9-23: Other Duties
1-9-24: Fees
1-9-25: Fees To City Treasurer
1-9-26: Register Of Licenses
1-9-27: Payroll
1-9-1: OATH, BOND:
The city clerk, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take the
oath prescribed for other city officers, and shall execute a bond to the city
in the penal sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) with such sureties as may
be approved by the city council, conditioned for the faithful performance of
the duties of his office, and the payment over of all monies that may be
received by him as city clerk to the proper officer or officers, according to
law and the provisions of this code; which bond shall be filed with the city
treasurer. (1959 Code § 3-1)
1-9-2: OFFICE, OFFICE HOURS:
The clerk shall keep his office at the city hall, or at such other place as the
council may direct and his office hours shall be from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
until twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and from one o'clock (1:00) P.M. to five
o'clock (5:00) P.M. from Monday through Friday of each week. (Ord. 11, 4-20-
1960)
1-9-3: KEEP MINUTES; SERVE NOTICES:
The clerk shall attend all meetings of the council and shall keep in a suitable
book, to be styled the "record of the city council", a full and faithful record
of its proceedings. He shall issue and cause to be served upon all aldermen,
notices of all special meetings of the council; also notices to members of the
different committees of that body, and to all other persons whose attendance
may be required before any such committee, when so directed by the chairman
thereof. (1959 Code § 3-3)
1-9-4: CORPORATE SEAL, DOCUMENTS:
The clerk shall be the keeper of the corporate seal, to be provided under the
direction of the council and all papers and documents belonging to the city;
and copies of all papers and documents duly filed in his office, and
transcripts from the records and files of his office, certified by him under
the corporate seal of the city, shall be evidence in all courts in like manner
as if the originals were produced. (1959 Code § 3-4)
1-9-5: RECORD ORDINANCES:
The clerk shall record and properly index in a book used exclusively for that
purpose, all ordinances passed by the council, and at the foot of the record of
each ordinance so recorded he shall make a memorandum of the date of the
passage and of the publication or posting of such ordinance, which record and
memorandum, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the
passage and legal publication of such ordinance for all purposes whatsoever.
(1959 Code § 3-5)
All ordinances which shall be passed after the adoption of the city shall be
numbered, consecutively by the city clerk beginning with number 1, before being
recorded or published, whether the same be a general or special ordinance.
(R.O. 1959, Ch. 28, Sec. 12)
1-9-6: PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES:
All ordinances imposing any fine, penalty, imprisonment or forfeiture, or
making any appropriation, shall: a) be printed in book or pamphlet form,
published by authority of the council, or b) be published at least once, within
ten (10) days after passage, in a newspaper published in the city. No such
ordinance shall take effect until ten (10) days after it is so published except
that an ordinance imposing a municipal retailers' occupation tax or effecting a
change in the rate thereof shall take effect on the first day of the month next
following the expiration of the ten (10) day publication period. However,
ordinances establishing rules and regulations for the construction of buildings
or any part thereof, or for the development or operation of camps accommodating
persons in house trailers, house cars, cabins or tents, where such rules and
regulations have been previously printed in book or pamphlet form, may by their
terms provide for the adoption of such rules and regulations or portions
thereof by reference thereto without further printing, or publication, if not
less than three (3) copies of such rules and regulations in book or pamphlet
form have been filed in the office of the clerk for use and examination by the
public at least thirty (30) days prior to the adoption thereof.
All other ordinances, resolutions and motions shall take effect upon their
passage unless they otherwise provide. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 3, Sec. 6)
1-9-7: DELIVER PAPERS:
Said clerk shall, without delay, upon the adjournment of each meeting of the
council, deliver to the several committees of that body, and to the officers of
the corporation, all petitions, communications, reports, resolutions, orders,
claims and other papers, referred to those committees or officers by the
council. He shall also, without delay, deliver to the mayor all ordinances or
resolutions in his charge, which may require to be approved or otherwise acted
upon by the mayor. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 3, Sec. 7)
1-9-8: PREPARE OFFICIAL PAPERS:
Said clerk shall prepare all commissions, licenses, permits and other official
documents required to be issued by him, under the laws and ordinances of the
city, and shall attest the same with the corporate seal; and he shall in like
manner attest all deeds for the sale of real estate owned and conveyed by the
city. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 3, Sec. 8)
1-9-9: APPOINT DEPUTY:
He may, when authorized by the council, appoint one deputy clerk, who shall
have the power and duty to execute all documents required by any law to be
executed by the clerk, and affix the seal of the clerk thereto wherever
required. In signing any document a deputy clerk shall sign the name of the
clerk followed with the word "by" and the deputy clerk's own name and the words
"deputy clerk". The powers and duties herein described shall be exercised only
in the absence of the clerk from the place where the clerk's office is
maintained, and only when either written direction has been given by the clerk
to such deputy to exercise such power, or the council has determined by
resolution that the clerk is temporarily or permanently incapacitated to
perform such function. When duly authorized as herein provided the signature
affixed by any such deputy in the manner herein prescribed on any document,
including, but not limited to, contracts, bonds, or other obligations of the
city, such document shall have the same effect as if the documents so executed
had been signed by the city clerk in person. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 3, Sec. 9)
1-9-10: POSTELECTION NOTICES:
The clerk shall procure the necessary poll books, tally sheets, blanks,
stationery and other necessary supplies for conducting city elections, and
superintend the posting and publishing of the specimen ballots and the cards of
instruction, and deliver the ballot boxes, poll books, blanks and supplies to
the judges of election. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 3, Sec. 10)
1-9-11: NOTIFY ELECTED PERSON:
It shall be the duty of the clerk, within five (5) days after the result of the
election is declared, or appointment is made, to notify all persons elected or
appointed to office, of their election or appointment, and unless such persons
shall respectively qualify within ten (10) days after such notice, the office
shall become vacant. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 3, Sec. 11)
1-9-12: GENERAL SUPERVISION:
The clerk shall exercise a general supervision over all the city officers of
the corporation charged in any manner with the receipt, collection or
disbursement of corporation revenues, and the collection and return of all such
revenues into the city treasury. He shall have charge, custody and control of
all deeds, leases, warrants, contracts, bonds, obligations, vouchers, books and
papers of every kind, the custody of which is not herein given to any other
officers. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 3, Sec. 12)
1-9-13: REPORT ESTIMATES:
On or before May 15 of each year, and before the annual appropriation ordinance
is prepared by the council, the clerk shall submit to the council a report of
his estimate, as nearly as may be, of the money necessary to defray the
expenses of the city during the current fiscal year. For the purpose of making
this report, he is authorized to require all officers to submit statements of
the condition and expenses of their respective offices and departments, with
any proposed municipal improvements and the probable expense thereof, all
unperformed contracts, and the amount of all unexpended appropriations of the
preceding year. In this report, the city clerk shall: a) classify the different
objects and purposes of expenditures, giving, as nearly as may be, the amount
required for each; b) show the aggregate income of the preceding fiscal year,
from all sources; c) show the amount of liabilities upon which interest is to
be paid; d) show the bonds and debts payable during the year, when due and when
payable; and e) give such other information to the council as he deems
necessary, so that the council may fully understand the demands upon the city
for the current fiscal year. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 3, Sec. 13)
1-9-14: RECORDS OF CITY BONDS:
The clerk shall keep in his office, in a book or books kept expressly for that
purpose, a correct list of all the outstanding bonds of the city, showing the
number and amount of each, for and to whom said bonds are issued; and when any
city bonds are purchased, or paid, or cancelled, said book or books shall show
the fact; and in his annual report said clerk shall describe particularly the
bonds sold during the year, and the terms of sale, with each and every item of
expense thereof. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 3, Sec. 14)
1-9-15: CITY REVENUE:
The clerk shall open and keep in a neat and methodical manner, a complete set
of books in which shall be kept a detailed account of the city revenue, and of
each separate fund, crediting the same with all receipts or appropriations, and
charging it with all warrants drawn thereon, and he shall charge each warrant
to the fund or appropriation against which it was drawn. He shall also keep an
accurate account of all debts due from or owing to the city, and shall keep a
correct list of all notes or obligations, given by or payable to the city, with
date thereof, the person to whom, or by whom payable, the rate of interest, the
time and manner in which the principal and interest are payable, and such other
particulars as may be necessary to the full understanding thereof. Said books
and all other contracts, bonds, deeds, warrants, vouchers, receipts and other
papers kept in said office, shall be subject to the examination of the mayor,
the members of the council or any committee thereof. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 3, Sec.
15)
1-9-16: REMOVAL OF RECORDS, PAPERS FROM OFFICE:
The clerk shall not allow any books, records or papers or other instruments of
writing to be taken out of his office, by any other person than himself, the
mayor, aldermen and the city attorney, or upon the order of a court of
competent jurisdiction, or the council. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 3, Sec. 16)
1-9-17: MONTHLY REPORT TO COUNCIL:
It shall be the duty of the clerk to make a report to the council at the first
regular meeting in each month, of the exact condition of each fund or
appropriation, setting forth the amount of each fund or appropriation, the
total amount of which has been used or expended thereof, and the balance, if
any, which is subject to be used or drawn upon; and whenever any appropriation
or fund is exhausted, the clerk shall without delay notify the council thereof,
and he shall not thereafter draw any warrant against such fund or appropriation
until the same shall be renewed. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 3, Sec. 17)
1-9-18: AUDIT ALL ACCOUNTS:
The clerk shall revise and audit all accounts or claims allowed by the council,
and all other accounts in which the corporation is concerned, either as debtor
or creditor, where provision for their adjustment is not otherwise made and
provided for by law or ordinance; and upon ascertaining the amount due to any
person or persons, he shall draw his warrant in due form upon the city
treasurer therefor. But if, upon the examination of any such claim or account,
he shall have reason to doubt its correctness, it shall be his duty to submit
the same to the committee on finance for its decision thereon, or else make
report thereof to the city council. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 3, Sec. 18)
1-9-19: CLAIMS AGAINST CITY:
All claims whatsoever against the city, except for salaries and wages of city
officers and workmen, shall be filed in the office of the clerk, on or before
the first day of the month in which said claim is presented. All claims not so
filed shall be laid over by the clerk until the provisions of this section have
been complied with. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 3, Sec. 19)
1-9-20: LIST OF WARRANTS:
Said clerk shall keep in a suitable book, an accurate list of all warrants
drawn upon the city treasurer, showing date, number and amount of each, and the
name of the person in whose favor drawn; and he shall take the receipt of every
person for the warrant drawn, upon the delivery thereof. All warrants drawn
upon the city treasurer shall be signed by the mayor and countersigned by the
clerk, and shall specify therein the particular fund or appropriation to which
the same is chargeable, and the person to whom payable; and no money shall be
paid otherwise than upon such warrants so drawn. The clerk shall preserve all
warrants returned to him. (1959 Code § 3-20)
1-9-21: RECORD OF ELECTIONS, APPOINTMENTS:
He shall keep a record of the election, or appointment and confirmation, of all
officers of the city, and said record shall be so ruled and headed that the
same shall exhibit the name of the officer elected or appointed, the date of
confirmation or election, the date of commission, and the date of deaths,
resignation, removal or expiration of term of office, with a column for
remarks. (1959 Code § 3-21)
1-9-22: RECORDS TO SUCCESSOR:
He shall carefully preserve in his office all books, records, papers, maps and
effects of every description belonging to the city or appertaining to said
office, and not in the actual use and possession of other city officers, and
upon expiration in any way of his official term, he shall, on demand, deliver
all such books, records, papers and effects to his successor in office. (1959
Code § 3-22)
1-9-23: OTHER DUTIES:
In addition to the foregoing duties, the clerk shall perform all such other and
further duties pertaining to his office as are or may be imposed upon him by
ordinance or resolution of the council. (1959 Code § 3-23)
1-9-24: FEES:
The clerk shall be allowed to charge and receive, for the following services,
fees, as follows:
   (A)   For certifying to the transfer of any license that is transferable,
fifty cents ($0.50).
   (B)   For making copies of ordinances and other matters of record, in his
office, when not required for public use, for each one hundred (100) words, ten
cents ($0.10); and for certificates of authentication thereof, under the
corporate seal, twenty five cents ($0.25).
   (C)   For official certificates, with or without corporate seal, when not
required for public use, twenty five cents ($0.25).
   (D)   For administering and attesting each oath, when not on account of the
city, twenty five cents ($0.25).
   (E)   For issuing each permit granted by the mayor or council, and required
to be issued by the clerk, fifty cents ($0.50). (1959 Code § 3-24)
1-9-25: FEES TO CITY TREASURER:
The clerk shall keep a full, true and correct account of all the fees and
emoluments of his office, collected or received by him, also of all monies or
revenues, of the city collected or received by him, and shall at least once a
week, pay the same over to the city treasurer, and take a receipt therefor. He
shall also make out and present to the council a semiannual report, on the
first Tuesday of May and November of each year, of all fees and emoluments of
his office, and of all revenues of the city received by him during the half
year ending at the time of such report. Said report shall be verified by
affidavit, and shall show the manner in which such fees, emoluments and
revenues accrued. (1959 Code § 3-25)
1-9-26: REGISTER OF LICENSES:
The clerk shall keep a register of all licenses issued, in consecutive numbers
commencing with number 1 at the commencement of each fiscal year, which
register shall show the date of the issue of each license; the name of the
person to whom issued, the nature of the business to be conducted under such
license, the date of expiration, the number of the city treasurer's receipt in
exchange for which the same was issued, and the amount of such receipt, all in
proper columns, and with appropriate indices for convenient inspection. He
shall notify in writing all parties holding licenses not less than ten (10)
days before the expiration of the same, of the date of expiration; and it is
made his special duty to attend to and see that all license revenue, to which
the city is entitled, is collected in a prompt and efficient manner. (1959 Code
§ 3-26)
1-9-27: PAYROLL:
Upon receipt of a written record of each employee's time at work, the city
clerk shall complete payroll for each employee certifying their weekly time,
amount of wages and accurate deductions. The city clerk shall routinely receive
training on any payroll system the city uses and shall at all times maintain
records detailing wages and accurate deductions. (Ord. 1201-A, 2-2-2010; amd.
Ord. 4297, 8-2-2022)
CHAPTER 10
CITY ATTORNEY
SECTION:
1-10-1: Appointment, Oath, Bond
1-10-2: Legal Adviser
1-10-3: Draw, Examine Papers
1-10-4: Prosecute, Defend Suits
1-10-5: Collect Judgments
1-10-6: Prosecute For Violation
1-10-7: Power To Dismiss Suits
1-10-8: Appeals
1-10-9: Annual Report
1-10-10: Successor
1-10-11: Employment Of Deputy
1-10-12: Assistant Counsel
1-10-1: APPOINTMENT, OATH, BOND:
The city attorney shall be appointed by the mayor by and with the advice and
consent of the council, on the first Tuesday in May of each year, or as soon
thereafter as practicable. He shall, before entering upon the duties of his
office, take the oath prescribed by law for city officers, and execute a bond
to the city in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), with such
sureties as the council shall approve, conditioned for the faithful performance
of the duties of said office. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 4, Sec. 1)
1-10-2: LEGAL ADVISER:
The city attorney shall be the legal adviser of the city; he shall, when
required, advise the city council or any city officer in all matters of law, in
which the interests of the corporation are involved. He shall, when required by
the mayor, council or any committee thereof, furnish written opinions upon any
subject submitted to him pertaining to the city or its interests. (R.O. 1959,
Ch. 4, Sec. 2)
1-10-3: DRAW, EXAMINE PAPERS:
The city attorney shall draw and examine such current ordinances, deeds,
leases, bonds, contracts, notices or such other instruments in writing, as may
be required of him by the mayor, council or any committee thereof, and he shall
examine and pass upon the legality of any and all papers submitted to him
pertaining to the city or its interests, when required by the mayor, council or
any committee thereof. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 4, Sec. 3)
1-10-4: PROSECUTE, DEFEND SUITS:
Said attorney shall prosecute or defend, in behalf of the city, in all cases in
which the interests of the city are involved; and the clerk shall furnish him
with certified copies of any ordinance, bond or other papers in his keeping,
necessary to be filed or used in any suit or proceeding. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 4,
Sec. 4)
1-10-5: COLLECT JUDGMENTS:
He shall cause executions to issue upon all judgments recovered in favor of the
city, and see to their prompt collection. He shall examine all fee bills of
officers of courts, and certify to the correctness of the same and the
liability of the city therefor. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 4, Sec. 5)
1-10-6: PROSECUTE FOR VIOLATION:
He is hereby charged with the prosecution of all actions for the violation of
the provisions of this code, and with the conducting of all proceedings in
courts or on appeal therefrom. He shall institute and prosecute an action in
every case where there has been a violation of the city code, when instructed
to do so by the mayor, the council or any committee thereof, the chief officer
of any department of the city government, or upon complaint of any other
person, when, in his judgment, the public interest shall require the same to be
prosecuted. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 4, Sec. 6)
1-10-7: POWER TO DISMISS SUITS:
He shall not be required to prosecute any suit or action arising under the
provisions of this code, when, upon investigation of the same, he shall become
satisfied that the complaint was instituted maliciously or vexatiously, and
without probable cause; and he shall be authorized to discontinue such suit or
proceeding upon such terms as may be just and equitable. He shall have the
power to adjust all pending litigation and to settle same upon the authority of
the mayor and council. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 4, Sec. 7)
1-10-8: APPEALS:
An appeal may be taken by the city attorney from the judgment of any court in
any case, when, in his opinion, the public interest shall require it; provided,
however, no appeal or writ of error shall be taken by said attorney in behalf
of the corporation to any higher court, unless the same be authorized by the
mayor or directed by the council. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 4, Sec. 8)
1-10-9: ANNUAL REPORT:
Said attorney shall, annually, on or before the first Tuesday in May of each
year, report in writing to the council all suits instituted and pending in the
courts of record, wherein the city is plaintiff or defendant. In said report he
shall state the names of the parties to the suit, the date of their
commencement, the nature thereof and the several steps taken by him to bring
the same to final issue; and he shall also give a list of all cases disposed of
in said courts of record during his term of office, and subsequent to his last
report, with such explanatory remarks as he may think proper to add thereto, to
the end that the council may be kept fully advised as to the legal affairs of
the city. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 4, Sec. 9)
1-10-10: SUCCESSOR:
Upon expiration of his term of office, or resignation or removal therefrom, he
shall forthwith turn over to his successor in office all deeds, leases, papers
or books in his hands belonging to the city, together with a statement in
writing showing what action, if any, has been taken in any action or actions
pending, wherein the city is a party, and giving such information as he may
possess with respect to evidence or witnesses in such action or actions. (R.O.
1959, Ch. 4, Sec. 10)
1-10-11: EMPLOYMENT OF DEPUTY:
In case of temporary absence or inability of the city attorney to attend to the
duties of his office, he may, with the approval of the mayor and committee on
legal and police, and at his own expense, appoint or employ some competent
attorney to act in his place. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 4, Sec. 11)
1-10-12: ASSISTANT COUNSEL:
The council may authorize the mayor to employ some competent attorney as
assistant counsel to the city attorney, whenever, in the judgment of the
council, any suit, legal proceeding, or other matter in which the city is
engaged shall be of sufficient importance to render such action advisable. Such
assistant counsel shall be selected by the mayor with the advice of the city
attorney, and shall act in conjunction with, but subordinate to the city
attorney in the handling of the particular matter or proceeding for which he
was employed, and shall receive such reasonable compensation for his services,
to be fixed at the time of his employment, as shall be approved by the city
council. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 4, Sec. 12)
CHAPTER 11
CITY TREASURER
SECTION:
1-11-1: Oath, Bond
1-11-2: Receive Money, Keep Accounts
1-11-3: Keep Register
1-11-4: Ex Officio Collector Of Special Taxes
1-11-5: Special Assessment Fund
1-11-6: Deposit Funds
1-11-7: Personal Use Of Funds
1-11-8: Report Delinquent Officers
1-11-9: Method Of Keeping Books
1-11-10: Monthly Statement To Council
1-11-11: Report; Annual Account
1-11-12: Budget, Appropriation And Levy
1-11-1: OATH, BOND:
The City Treasurer, before entering upon the duties of office, shall take the
oath prescribed for City officers and shall execute a bond to the City in an
amount of dollars that is not less than the greater of fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) or three (3) times the latest Federal census population or any
subsequent census figure used for Motor Fuel Tax purposes, conditioned for the
faithful performance of the duties of office and the payment of all money
received by the officer, according to law and the Municipal ordinances. The
Treasurer's bond shall be filed with, recorded and preserved by the Municipal
Clerk. (Ord. 4105, 5-1-2018)
1-11-2: RECEIVE MONEY, KEEP ACCOUNTS:
Said Treasurer shall receive all monies belonging to the City and shall keep a
separate account for each fund or appropriation and debits and credits
belonging thereto. The Treasurer shall give to every person paying money into
the City Treasury a receipt therefor, specifying the date of payment, and upon
what account paid, and shall file copies of such receipts with the Clerk at the
date of the Treasurer's monthly report. (Ord. 1374, 12-1-1992)
1-11-3: KEEP REGISTER:
The City Treasurer shall keep an accurate register of all warrants redeemed and
paid showing the number, date and amount of each, the fund from which paid, and
the name of the person to whom and when paid; and shall cancel all warrants as
soon as redeemed. (Ord. 1374, 12-1-1992)
1-11-4: EX OFFICIO COLLECTOR OF SPECIAL TAXES:
The City Treasurer shall, ex officio, be collector of the special taxes or
assessments assessed in the several paving districts that are now or shall
hereafter be created, for the grading and paving of the streets of the City, or
assessed for any other purposes for which special assessments or special taxes
may be assessed according to the law; and the certificate of the assessment
roll and the judgment thereon required by law to be certified by the County
Clerk, shall be certified to such City Treasurer, and the warrant issued for
the collection of said special taxes or assessments required by law, shall be
issued by the County Clerk to said City Treasurer for the collection of said
special tax or assessment. (Ord. 1374, 12-1-1992)
1-11-5: SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FUND:
All monies received by the City Treasurer on any special assessment or special
tax, shall be held by said Treasurer as a special fund, to be applied to the
payment of the improvement for which such special assessment or special tax was
made, and said money shall be used for no other purpose whatsoever, except to
reimburse the City for money for said improvement. (Ord. 1374, 12-1-1992)
1-11-6: DEPOSIT FUNDS:
The City Treasurer shall be required to keep all funds and money in his/her
custody belonging to the City in such places of deposit as may be designated by
ordinance, and when requested by the City Treasurer the Council shall designate
a bank or banks in which may be kept the funds and money of the City, in the
custody of the Treasurer. When a bank has been designated as a depository it
shall continue as such until ten (10) days have elapsed after a new depository
is designated and has qualified by furnishing the statements of resources and
liabilities as required by this section. When a new depository is designated,
the Council shall notify the sureties of the City Treasurer of that fact, in
writing, at least five (5) days before the transfer of funds. The Treasurer
shall be discharged from responsibility for all funds or money which he/she
deposits in a designated bank while the funds and money are so deposited. If
city funds or money are deposited in a designated bank, however, the amount of
such deposits shall not exceed seventy five percent (75%) of the bank's capital
stock and surplus, and the treasurer shall be responsible for funds or money
deposited in the bank in excess of this limitation.
No bank shall be qualified to receive city funds or money until it has
furnished the council with copies of the last two (2) sworn statements of
resources and liabilities which the bank is required to furnish to the auditor
of public accounts or to the comptroller of currency. Each bank designated as a
depository for such funds or money shall, while acting as such depository,
furnish the council with a copy of all statements of resources and liabilities
which it is required to furnish to the auditor of public accounts or to the
comptroller of currency. (Ord. 1374, 12-1-1992)
1-11-7: PERSONAL USE OF FUNDS:
All money belonging to the city shall be kept by the city treasurer. All money
belonging to the city, separate and distinct from the treasurer's personal
funds, he/she shall not use, either directly or indirectly, the city's money or
warrants in his/her custody for personal use and benefit or that of any other
person. Any violation of this section shall be cause for immediate removal from
office by the council, who may declare the office of city treasurer vacant. In
that case a successor shall be appointed to hold office for the remainder of
the unexpired term of the city treasurer so removed. (Ord. 1374, 12-1-1992)
1-11-8: REPORT DELINQUENT OFFICERS:
It shall be the duty of the treasurer to report to the clerk any officer
authorized to receive money for the use of the city who may fail to make a
return of the monies received at the time required by law, or by the provisions
of this code. (Ord. 1374, 12-1-1992)
1-11-9: METHOD OF KEEPING BOOKS:
The city treasurer shall keep the books and accounts in such manner as to show
with entire accuracy all monies received and disbursed by that office for the
city, stating from whom and what amount received, and to whom and on what
account paid out, and in such way that such books and accounts will exhibit at
all times the true financial condition of the city, and in such manner as may
be readily investigated and understood; and the same, together with all files
and papers of said office, shall be kept in the city building, and shall be at
all times open to examination by the mayor, the clerk, the committee on finance
or any member of the council. (Ord. 1374, 12-1-1992)
1-11-10: MONTHLY STATEMENT TO COUNCIL:
The city treasurer shall, at the first regular meeting in each month, render an
account, under oath, showing the state of the treasury at the date of such
account, and the balance of money in the treasury. A statement of all monies
received into the treasury and on what account shall also accompany such
accounts, together with all warrants redeemed and paid which said warrants,
with any and all vouchers held shall be delivered to the clerk and filed with
the treasurer's account in the clerk's office upon the day of such settlement.
He/she shall return all warrants paid and stamped and marked "paid". He/she
shall keep a register of all warrants, which shall describe each warrant,
showing its date, amount and number, the fund from which paid, the name of the
person to whom paid, and when paid. (Ord. 1374, 12-1-1992)
1-11-11: REPORT; ANNUAL ACCOUNT:
The city treasurer shall report to the council as often as it requires, a full
and detailed account of all receipts and expenditures of the city, as shown by
the books up to the time of the report. Within thirty (30) days following the
first Tuesday in May of each year, the city treasurer shall make out and file
with the clerk a full and detailed account of all city receipts and
expenditures and of all transactions as treasurer during the preceding fiscal
year, and shall show in that account the state of the treasury at the close of
the fiscal year, all in accordance with the state statutes made and provided.
The clerk shall publish the account at least once, within ten (10) days, in
some newspaper published in the city. (Ord. 1374, 12-1-1992)
1-11-12: BUDGET, APPROPRIATION AND LEVY:
If not appointed as the Budget Officer, it shall be the duty of this office to
assist the Budget Officer in preparing the City's budget for all city
departments and offices. In the implementation thereof, this office shall have
the further power and duty to assist in administering all necessary bookkeeping
procedures, assure compliance with the budget and recommend implementation of
cost cutting measures in all departments. It shall be the further duty of this
office to assist the Budget Officer in preparing the drafted budget herein
contemplated within sufficient and reasonable time prior to approval of the
budget by the City and to thereafter make the same available to the Mayor and
each member of the City Council, and with copy thereof to be filed with the
city clerk of this city. It shall further be the duties of this office to
ensure that applicable deadlines are being met for purposes of adopting the
annual budget. In the interest of the budget and control of the finances of the
City, it shall be the further duty of this office to timely prepare, or assist
the Budget Officer in preparing, the annual levy ordinance of the City for
presentment to and adoption by the corporate authorities of the City. (Ord.
3042, 12-17-2013; amd. Ord. 4244, 8-3-2021)
CHAPTER 12
WARDS AND BOUNDARIES
SECTION:
1-12-1: Established
1-12-1: ESTABLISHED:
The city boundaries together with the several election ward boundaries shall be
as set forth on the official map as supplied by the city engineer, said map to
be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. (1975 Code)
CHAPTER 13
CITY DEPOSITORIES
SECTION:
1-13-1: Depositories Designated
1-13-1: DEPOSITORIES DESIGNATED:
The following financial institutions are hereby designated as official
depositories of the city in which the treasurer is hereby directed to deposit
all monies and funds from all accounts unless otherwise authorized by the city
council:
   Ipava State Bank
Banks, while acting as depositories, shall furnish the corporate authorities of
the city with a copy of all statements of resources and liabilities, which is
required to be furnished to the auditor of public accounts or to the controller
of currency, as provided by law. (1975 Code; amd. Ord. 4278, 2-15-2022; Ord.
4502, 9-16-2025)
CHAPTER 14
CITY SCALES
(Rep. by Ord. 795, 5-20-1980)
CHAPTER 15
CORPORATE SEAL
SECTION:
1-15-1: Description
1-15-2: Custodian Of Seal
1-15-1: DESCRIPTION:
The seal, circular in form, and heretofore provided, with the inscription,
"City of Canton, Illinois", around the outer edge of said seal, and in the
interior and center of said circle, the words "Reorganized A.D. 1892", is
hereby declared to be the corporate seal of the city of Canton. Said seal shall
be used in cases where it shall be required by the laws of the United States,
the laws of the several respective states of the United States, and the
provisions of the city code, and in all cases in which, by the laws and customs
of nations, it is necessary to use a seal by a corporation. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 15,
Sec. 1)
1-15-2: CUSTODIAN OF SEAL:
The said seal shall be and remain in the custody of the city clerk, to be used
by said clerk and the mayor of the city, as is provided in section
1-15-1 of this chapter. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 15, Sec. 2)
CHAPTER 16
CITY ADMINISTRATOR
SECTION:
1-16-1: Office Created; Appointment; Term And Qualifications
1-16-2: Oath; Bond
1-16-3: Powers And Duties
1-16-4: Removal And Resignation
1-16-5: Compensation
1-16-6: Conflict Of Interest Prohibited
1-16-7: Assistants
1-16-1: OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT; TERM AND QUALIFICATIONS:
   (A)   There is hereby created the office of city administrator. The city
administrator shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of
the city council. The city administrator shall be chosen on the basis of
executive, administrative, and educational qualifications with special emphasis
on the actual experience in, or knowledge of, accepted practice with respect to
the office hereinafter set forth.
   (B)   The city administrator shall have the minimum of a four (4) year
college degree, with major coursework or experience in political science,
public administration, financial and personnel management and related fields.
Work experience shall include a minimum of three (3) years of progressively
responsible experience in local government. (Ord. 1986, 8-4-2009)
   (C)   To create a feeling of greater personal responsibility and to exhibit
to the citizenry a sense of concern for the welfare of the city, the city
administrator shall abide by the residency requirement as set forth in the
city's personnel policy during the tenure as city administrator. Neither the
mayor nor any member of the city council shall receive such appointment during
their term of office. (Ord. 4000, 5-6-2015)
1-16-2: OATH; BOND:
Any person filling and discharging the duties of the office hereby created
shall, before entering upon the duties of such office, take and subscribe the
oath prescribed by law for city officers and shall execute a bond to the city
in the penal sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) with surety to be
approved by the council, conditioned for faithful performance of the duties of
his office. (Ord. 1986, 8-4-2009)
1-16-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The city administrator shall be responsible to the mayor for the proper
administration of all affairs of the city. In discharging this responsibility
the city administrator shall, as directed by the mayor:
   (A)   Supervise and coordinate the administrative functions of all
departments, offices, and agencies of the city. The administrator will not
supervise the city clerk, city attorney or city treasurer, except in those
areas defined in state and local statute.
   (B)   Recommend appointments, and when necessary for the good of the city,
recommend suspension or removal of any city employee.
   (C)   Attend all city council and committee meetings and participate, as
required in all discussions.
   (D)   Provide for the enforcement of such laws and ordinances within the
city subject to the authority and direction of the police chief.
   (E)   Assist the mayor as the chief administrative officer of the city and
perform such duties as may be directed by the mayor.
   (F)   Coordinate activities between the departments to ensure efficient
utilization of resources and maximize interdepartmental coordination.
   (G)   Make such reports to the mayor and city council as may be required
from time to time concerning the operations of the city departments and
offices.
   (H)   Propose and recommend to the mayor such personnel rules and
regulations as may be useful for management of policies, handbooks, manuals and
collective bargaining agreements.
   (I)   Prepare such administrative reports and other reports of the
activities of the city as may be required at the conclusion of the fiscal year
and periodically throughout the year.
   (J)   Research and collect information and prepare applications for all
grants and loans from governmental or private entities for city programs,
operations and services.
   (K)   Participate to the extent requested in the collective bargaining
processes of the city and recommend to the mayor collective bargaining
agreements for consideration and possible final approval by the city council.
   (L)   Oversee the operations of the city administration department providing
assistance when needed.
   (M)   Investigate and respond to resident inquiries and complaints related
to the operations of the city.
   (N)   To participate in the development and implementation of economic
development programs for the city, including business retention, expansion and
recruitment. Serve as a liaison to Canton Main Street, Spoon River Partnership
For Economic Development, chamber of commerce and all allied organizations.
(Ord. 3021, 8-6-2013)
1-16-4: REMOVAL AND RESIGNATION:
The city administrator may be suspended or discharged by the mayor in
consultation with the council according to the terms of the employment
contract. The city administrator may also resign from the position upon giving
thirty (30) days' prior notice to the mayor. (Ord. 1986, 8-4-2009)
1-16-5: COMPENSATION:
The city administrator shall receive such compensation as the mayor and city
council shall fix from time to time. The mayor may with subsequent ratification
by the city council, enter into an employment contract which specifies in
writing the level of compensation of the city administrator, fringe benefits,
including the level of support for the city administrator's continuing
professional education, agreements for separation pay upon termination of
employment, other appropriate agreements describing the working relationship
between the city administrator and the elected officials and the mayor and
council's performance expectations for the city administrator. This agreement
may be reviewed and revised by mutual agreement of the parties at periodic
intervals. (Ord. 1986, 8-4-2009)
1-16-6: CONFLICT OF INTEREST PROHIBITED:
The city administrator shall not derive any personal benefit, directly or
indirectly from any contractual work or business of the city or from the sale
of any article from the city or from the purchase of property therefrom. (Ord.
1986, 8-4-2009)
1-16-7: ASSISTANTS:
The office hereby created shall be allowed such assistants and other clerks and
subordinate help as the necessities of the office may require, and the council
by ordinance or resolution shall from time to time authorize employment by such
office. (Ord. 1986, 8-4-2009)
CHAPTER 17
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
1-17-1: Created
1-17-2: Director
1-17-1: CREATED:
The office to be known as the department of community development, is herein
created and established for service to this city.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of this department to develop,
initiate, implement, administer, oversee and plan for both current and future
activities of the department, which in combination with other city departments,
shall strive, to the greatest extent possible, to improve and maintain the
economic, human and physical environment of the citizens of the city of Canton.
(Ord. 575, 2-1-1977)
1-17-2: DIRECTOR:
   (A)   The director shall be chief administrative officer of the department
of community development and shall have the responsibility, authority and power
to initiate, administer, execute and supervise all activities within this
department. Before entering upon the duties of his office, the director shall
take and subscribe the oath prescribed by law for city officers and shall
execute a bond to the city in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
with surety to be approved by the council, conditioned for faithful performance
of the duties of his office.
   (B)   The director shall formulate programs and recommendations of policy to
the council; execute the policies adopted by the council; coordinate the
activities of the department with related activities of other local, state and
federal agencies; supervise and review the work of the department staff; supply
information to interested persons and public agencies; prepare the department's
budget; represent the department before governing bodies, planning commissions,
committees, citizen organizations and state and federal governments; report
regularly to the council on the department's activities; remain continually
advised as to the nature and availability of both federal and state grant
programs and contracts, do research thereof and prepare, present and further
the execution of all programs and activities within the realm of the department
of community development responsibilities.
   (C)   The director shall have direct supervision, control and authority over
the day to day operation of the department of community development, and shall
execute and administer all present and future programs and activities affecting
the department.
   (D)   The director shall have the authority and responsibility of
employment, promotion, discharge and any other personnel matter affecting
department staff, contracts, consultants, etc., within the budget limitations
as prescribed during annual council budget reviews.
   (E)   The director shall have the authority and responsibility for the
utilization and/or purchase of all materials, supplies, publications, equipment
and services within the department budget guidelines.
   (F)   The director shall be compensated for all travel expenses incurred
while performing official duties of the department including all normal costs
for meals, lodging, mileage, parking, conferences, workshops, sessions and
meetings both in and out of the state of Illinois, as may be necessary for the
effective administration of the department. Other department staff shall be
similarly compensated when authorized in advance of occurrence by the director.
Said expenses shall be within the department budget guidelines and claimed with
receipts wherever possible.
   (G)   Nothing contained in any of the foregoing sections of this chapter
shall be permitted to be in conflict with any personnel policy or any other
policy established or practiced by this city. (Ord. 575, 2-1-1977)
   (H)   The director shall be appointed annually by the mayor by and with the
advice and consent of the council, on the first Tuesday in May of each year, or
as soon thereafter as practicable.
      1.   During the first twelve (12) months following the original
appointment, the director shall be in a probationary status and, during such
period, his employment with the city may be terminated by the mayor without the
necessity of ascribing a cause for such termination.
      2.   Following the first twelve (12) months of employment following the
original employment, the director shall be disciplined and/or discharged in
conformity with the city's personnel policy.
      3.   Nothing herein shall be construed to assure or guarantee to any
person appointment or reappointment as director. (Ord. 960, 1-18-1983)
CHAPTER 18
MUNICIPAL PURCHASES
SECTION:
1-18-1: Purchase Orders And Contracts; Competitive Bids
1-18-2: Purchase Orders And Contracts; Less Than Five Thousand Dollars
1-18-3: Exceptions
1-18-4: Waiver Of Requirements
1-18-5: Advertisement For Bids; Deposits
1-18-6: Bid Specifications
1-18-7: Opening Of Bids
1-18-8: Responsibility Of Bidders; Determination
1-18-9: Assignment Of Contracts
1-18-1: PURCHASE ORDERS AND CONTRACTS; COMPETITIVE BIDS:
Except as otherwise herein provided, all purchase orders, contracts, or
agreements of whatever nature, for the purchase, lease, or sale of personal
property, materials, equipment, or supplies, involving any work or public
improvement, to be paid in whole or in part by special assessment or special
taxation, in amounts in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), made by or
on behalf of the City, shall be let by free and open competitive bidding after
advertisement, to the lowest responsible bidder except those contracts that by
their nature are not adapted to competitive bidding (listed below). Except as
otherwise herein provided, all purchase orders, contracts, or agreements of
whatever nature, for the purchase, lease, or sale of personal property,
materials, equipment, or supplies, involving any work or public improvement,
that are not paid in whole or in part by special assessment or special
taxation, in amounts in excess of twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00),
made by or on behalf of the City, shall be let by free and open competitive
bidding after advertisement, to the lowest responsible bidder except those
contracts that by their nature are not adapted to competitive bidding (listed
below):
   (A)   Contracts for the services of individuals possessing a high degree of
professional skill when the ability or fitness of the individual plays an
important part; and
   (B)   Contracts for goods and services that are economically procurable from
only one source, such as for the purchase of magazines, books, periodicals,
pamphlets, and reports, and of utility services such as water, light, heat,
telephone, or telegraph; and
   (C)   Contracts for materials and work that have been awarded to the lowest
responsible bidder after due advertisement but that due to unforeseen revisions
not the fault of the contractor must be revised, causing expenditures not in
excess of ten percent (10%) of the contract price; and
   (D)   Contracts for the maintenance of, or provision of repair parts for,
equipment that are made with the manufacturer or authorized service agent of
that equipment when the provision of parts, maintenance, or servicing can best
be performed by the manufacturer or authorized service agent; and
   (E)   Purchases and contracts for the use, purchase, delivery, movement, or
installation of data processing equipment, software, or services and
telecommunications and interconnect equipment, software, and services; and
   (F)   Contracts for duplicating machines and supplies; and
   (G)   Purchases of equipment previously owned by some entity other than the
City itself; and
   (H)   Contracts for repair, maintenance, remodeling, renovation, or
construction, or a single project involving an expenditure not to exceed twenty
five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) and not involving a change or increase in
size, type, or extent of an existing facility; and
   (I)   Contracts for goods or services procured from another governmental
agency. (Ord. 4115, 9-4-2018)
1-18-2: PURCHASE ORDERS AND CONTRACTS; LESS THAN FIVE THOUSAND DOLLARS:
All purchase orders, contracts, or agreements, as defined above, which shall
involve amounts of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), or less, shall be let in
the manner prescribed above whenever practicable, except that such purchase
orders, contracts, or agreements may be let in the open market in a manner
calculated to ensure the best interests of the public, after solicitation of
bids by mail, telephone, or otherwise. (Ord. 1032, 7-17-1984)
1-18-3: EXCEPTIONS:
Contracts which by their nature are not adapted to award by competitive
bidding, contracts for supplies, materials, parts, or equipment which are
available from a single source, contracts for utility service, and contracts
let in the case of an emergency (so declared by the Corporate Authorities),
shall not be subject to the competitive bidding requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 1032, 7-17-1984)
1-18-4: WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS:
The Corporate Authorities of the City, in any given instance, by a two-thirds
(2/3) vote thereof, waive the competitive bidding requirements of this chapter
when such waiver clearly appears to be in the public interest. (Ord. 1032, 7-
17-1984)
1-18-5: ADVERTISEMENT FOR BIDS; DEPOSITS:
All proposals to award purchase orders, contracts, or agreements, to be paid in
whole or part by special assessment or special taxation, in excess of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and all proposals to award purchase orders,
contracts, or agreements, that will not be paid in whole or part by special
assessment or special taxation, in excess of twenty five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) shall be published at least once in a secular English language
newspaper (daily or weekly) of general circulation throughout the City with
such publication to be not less than ten (10) consecutive calendar days in
advance of the date announced for the receiving of bids. Advertisements for
bids shall describe the character of the proposed purchase order, contract, or
agreement in sufficient detail to enable the bidders thereon to know what their
obligations will be, either in the advertisement itself, or by reference to
detailed plans and specifications on file at the time of the publication of the
first announcement. Such advertisement shall also state the date, time, and
place assigned for the opening of bids, and no bids shall be received
subsequent to a time indicated in the announcement. The Canton City Council may
extend the time for the opening of such bids by publication as aforesaid to a
time not more than two (2) regular City Council meetings subsequent to the date
originally announced for the opening of bids. Bids may, as appropriate, be
required to be accompanied by a cashier's check or certified check, as a
deposit of good faith, in an amount not to exceed ten percent (10%) of the
total bid amount. (Ord. 4115, 9-4-2018)
1-18-6: BID SPECIFICATIONS:
All bid specifications shall state that the Canton City Council reserves the
right to alter or amend bid specifications without notice, to withdraw the bid
specifications, and to reject any and all bids without assignment of reason
therefor. Further, all bid specifications shall provide that, as a condition to
the making of any bid, the bidder and any person claiming through the bidder
irrevocably waives any claim for damages or out of pocket expenses caused by
the City's alteration or amendment of bid specifications, withdrawal of bid
specifications, or rejection of bids. (Ord. 1032, 7-17-1984)
1-18-7: OPENING OF BIDS:
All bids shall be opened publicly by an officer or employee of the City at a
date, time and place set by Canton City Council (or, by a committee thereof),
which such date, time, and place of the public opening shall be set forth in
the advertisement for bids. (Ord. 1032, 7-17-1984)
1-18-8: RESPONSIBILITY OF BIDDERS; DETERMINATION:
In determining the responsibility of bidders, the Canton City Council may take
into account other factors in addition to the bidder's financial
responsibility, such as past records of transactions with the bidder,
experience, adequacy of equipment, ability to complete performance within a
specified time limit, and other pertinent considerations. (Ord. 1032, 7-17-
1984)
1-18-9: ASSIGNMENT OF CONTRACTS:
No contract awarded to the lowest responsible bidder shall be assignable or
sublet by the successful bidder without the prior written consent of the Canton
City Council. In no event shall a contract or any part thereof be assigned or
sublet to a bidder who has been declared not to be a responsible bidder. (Ord.
1032, 7-17-1984)
CHAPTER 19
ETHICS
SECTION:
1-19-1: Definitions
1-19-2: State Regulations Adopted
1-19-3: Gifts
1-19-4: Political Activities
1-19-5: Penalties
1-19-6: Conflicting Provisions
1-19-7: Future Amendments
1-19-8: Provisions Deemed Unconstitutional
1-19-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the terms "officer" and "employee" shall be
defined as set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(c). (Ord. 1798,
5-18-2004)
1-19-2: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The regulations of section 5-15 1  and article 10 2  of the state officials and
employees ethics act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/1-1 et seq. (hereinafter
referred to as the "act" in this chapter) are hereby adopted by reference and
made applicable to the officers and employees of the city to the extent
required by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5. (Ord. 1798, 5-18-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 430/5-15.
2 2. 5 ILCS 430/10-10 – 10-40.
1-19-3: GIFTS:
   (A)   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or
accepted under the act by any officer or any employee of the city is hereby
prohibited.
   (B)   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an
officer or employee of the city under the act is hereby prohibited. (Ord. 1798,
5-18-2004)
1-19-4: POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
The participation in political activities prohibited under the act by any
officer or employee of the city is hereby prohibited. (Ord. 1798, 5-18-2004)
1-19-5: PENALTIES:
The penalties for violations of this chapter shall be the same as those
penalties set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/50-5 for similar
violations of the act. (Ord. 1798, 5-18-2004)
1-19-6: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
This chapter does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing
ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of city officers and
employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less
restrictive than this chapter, however, the provisions of this chapter shall
prevail in accordance with the provisions of 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/
70-5(a). (Ord. 1798, 5-18-2004)
1-19-7: FUTURE AMENDMENTS:
Any amendment to the act that becomes effective after the effective date hereof
shall be incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be applicable to
the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of gifts and to prohibited
political activities. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional
for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this chapter by
reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the city. (Ord.
1798, 5-18-2004)
1-19-8: PROVISIONS DEEMED UNCONSTITUTIONAL:
   (A)   If the Illinois supreme court declares the act unconstitutional in its
entirety, then this chapter shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois
supreme court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals
or rehearings. This chapter shall be deemed repealed without further action by
the corporate authorities of the city if the act is found unconstitutional by
the Illinois supreme court.
   (B)   If the Illinois supreme court declares part of the act
unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the act,
or does not address the remainder of the act, then the remainder of the act as
adopted by this chapter shall remain in full force and effect; however, that
part of this chapter relating to the part of the act found unconstitutional
shall be deemed repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of
the city. (Ord. 1798, 5-18-2004)
CHAPTER 20
ELECTRONIC ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS
SECTION:
1-20-1: Rules Statement
1-20-2: Prerequisites
1-20-3: Voting Procedures
1-20-4: Adequate Equipment Required
1-20-5: Minutes
1-20-6: Rights Of Remote Member
1-20-7: Committees, Boards And Commissions
1-20-1: RULES STATEMENT:
It is the decision of the city of Canton that any member of the city council
may attend any open or closed meeting of the city council via electronic means
(such as by telephone, video or internet connection) provided that such
attendance is in compliance with these rules and any applicable laws. (Ord.
1898, 3-6-2007)
1-20-2: PREREQUISITES:
A member of the city council may attend a meeting electronically if the member
meets the following conditions: a quorum is physically present throughout the
meeting; and, a majority of the members present votes to approve the electronic
attendance at the meeting.
   (A)   The member should notify the city clerk at least twenty four (24)
hours before the meeting, unless impractical, so that necessary communications
equipment can be arranged. Inability to make the necessary technical
arrangements will result in denial of a request for electronic attendance.
   (B)   The member must assert one of the following three (3) reasons why he
or she is unable to physically attend the meeting:
      1.   The member cannot attend because of personal illness or disability;
or
      2.   The member cannot attend because of employment purposes or the
business of the city of Canton; or
      3.   The member cannot attend because of a family or other emergency.
   (C)   The city clerk, after receiving the electronic attendance request,
shall inform the city council of the request for electronic attendance. (Ord.
1898, 3-6-2007)
1-20-3: VOTING PROCEDURES:
After a roll call establishing that a quorum is physically present, the
presiding officer shall call for a motion that a member may be permitted to
attend the meeting electronically after specifying the reason entitling the
absent member to attend electronically. The motion must be approved by a vote
of a majority of the members present. (Ord. 1898, 3-6-2007)
1-20-4: ADEQUATE EQUIPMENT REQUIRED:
The member participating electronically and other members of the city council
must be able to communicate effectively, and members of the audience must be
able to hear all communications at the meeting site. Before allowing electronic
attendance at any meeting, the city of Canton shall provide equipment adequate
to accomplish this objective at the meeting site. (Ord. 1898, 3-6-2007)
1-20-5: MINUTES:
Any member attending electronically shall be considered an off site attendee
and counted as present electronically for that meeting. The meeting minutes
shall also reflect and state specifically whether each member is physically
present or present by electronic means. (Ord. 1898, 3-6-2007)
1-20-6: RIGHTS OF REMOTE MEMBER:
A member permitted to attend electronically will be able to express his or her
comments during the meeting and participate in the same capacity as those
members physically present, subject to all general meeting guidelines and
procedures previously adopted and adhered to. The member attending
electronically shall be heard, considered, and counted as to any vote taken.
Accordingly, the name of any member attending electronically shall be called
during any vote taken, and his or her vote counted and recorded by the city
clerk and placed in the minutes for the corresponding meeting. A member
attending electronically may leave a meeting and return as in the case of any
member, provided the member attending electronically shall announce his or her
leaving and returning. (Ord. 1898, 3-6-2007)
1-20-7: COMMITTEES, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS:
These rules shall apply to all committees, boards and commissions established
by authority of the city of Canton. (Ord. 1898, 3-6-2007)
CHAPTER 21
IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM
SECTION:
1-21-1: Background
1-21-2: Purpose
1-21-3: Scope
1-21-4: Definitions
1-21-5: Identity Theft Prevention Elements
1-21-5-1: Identification Of Relevant Red Flags
1-21-5-2: Detection Of Red Flags
1-21-5-3: Prevention And Mitigation
1-21-6: Program Administration And Operation
1-21-6-1: Operational Responsibility
1-21-6-2: Training And Oversight
1-21-6-3: Annual Reporting
1-21-6-4: Service Provider Arrangements
1-21-7: Procedure For Opening New Utility Accounts
1-21-1: BACKGROUND:
New federal regulations under the fair and accurate credit transactions act of
2003 (commonly referred to as the "red flag rules") require financial
institutions and creditors to develop and implement written identity theft
prevention programs. The term "creditor" includes municipalities that provide
services, such as utilities, to customers and subsequently bill for those
services. Initially, the due date for implementation of "red flag rules" was
November 1, 2008. In October of 2008, the federal trade commission suspended
enforcement of the new rules until May 1, 2009, to give financial institutions
and creditors additional time in which to develop written identity theft
prevention programs.
The city of Canton has developed this identity theft prevention program
("program") pursuant to the federal trade commission's red flag rules ("rules")
which implements section 114 of the fair and accurate credit transactions act
of 2003 (16 CFR section 6812).
This program was developed with oversight and approval of the city council.
After considering the size and complexity of the city's operations and
accounting systems and of the nature and scope of the city's activities, the
city council determined that this program was appropriate for the city of
Canton, and therefore approved this program on April 8, 2009, as ordinance
1968. (Ord. 1968, 4-7-2009)
1-21-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this program is to protect customers of the city of Canton's
utility services from identity theft. The program is intended to help the city
establish reasonable policies and procedures to:
   (A)   Implement data security; and
   (B)   Identify risks that signify potentially fraudulent activity within new
or existing covered accounts; and
   (C)   Detect risks when they occur in covered accounts; and
   (D)   Respond to risks to determine if fraudulent activity has occurred and
mitigate the risk if fraud has been attempted or committed; and
   (E)   Update the program periodically, including reviewing the accounts that
are covered and the identified risks that are part of the program. (Ord. 1968,
4-7-2009)
1-21-3: SCOPE:
This program applies to the creation of, modification of, and access to the
identifying information of a holder of one or more of the utilities operated by
the city and all employees of the city. This program does not replace or repeal
any previously existing policies or programs addressing some or all of the
activities that are the subject of this program, but rather it is intended to
supplement any such existing policies and programs. (Ord. 1968, 4-7-2009)
1-21-4: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this program, the following terms have the meanings set forth
opposite their name, unless the context clearly requires that the term be given
a different meaning:
COVERED ACCOUNT: An account that the city offers or maintains, primarily for
personal, family or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit
multiple payments of transactions (16 CFR section 681.2(b)(3)(i)).
Specifically, a utility account for garbage, water or sewer is a "covered
account".
IDENTIFYING INFORMATION: Any name or number that may be used, alone or in
conjunction with any other information, to identify a specific person,
including any name, social security number, date of birth, official state or
government issued driver's license or identification number, alien registration
number, government passport number, employer or taxpayer identification number.
   (A)   Additional examples of "identifying information" are set forth in 16
CFR section 603.2(a).
IDENTITY THEFT: A fraud committed or attempted using the identifying
information of another person without authority (16 CFR sections 681.2(b)(8)
and 603.2(a)).
RED FLAG: A pattern, practice or specific activity that indicates the possible
existence of identity theft or fraud.
RED FLAG RULE OR RULE: The federal administrative regulations that implement
section 114 of the fair and accurate transactions act of 2003 (12 CFR sections
41.90 and 41.91).
Certain terms used but not otherwise defined herein shall have the meanings
given to them in the FTC's identity theft rules (16 CFR section 681) or the
fair credit reporting act of 1970 (15 USC section 1681 et seq.), as amended by
the fair and accurate credit transactions act of 2003 (public law 108-159).
(Ord. 1968, 4-7-2009)
1-21-5: IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION ELEMENTS:
1-21-5-1: IDENTIFICATION OF RELEVANT RED FLAGS:
The city has considered the guidelines and the illustrative examples of
possible red flags from the FTC's identity theft rules and has reviewed the
city's past history with instances of identity theft. The city hereby
determines that the following are relevant red flags for purposes of this
program given the size of the city and the limited nature and scope of utility
services that the city provides to its citizens:
   (A)   Alerts, notifications, or other warnings received from consumer
reporting agencies or service providers.
      1.   A fraud or active duty alert included with a consumer report.
      2.   A notice of credit freeze from a consumer reporting agency in
response to a request for a consumer report.
      3.   A notice of address discrepancy from a consumer reporting agency, as
defined in section 334.82(b) of the fair and accurate credit transactions act
of 2003.
   (B)   The presentation of suspicious documents.
      1.   Documents provided for ID appear to have been altered, forged or
inauthentic.
      2.   The photograph or physical description is not consistent with the
appearance of the applicant or customer presenting the identification.
      3.   Any other document with information that is not consistent with
existing customer information (such as a person's signature on a check appears
forged).
      4.   Any application for service that appears to have been altered,
forged or inauthentic.
   (C)   The presentation of suspicious personal identifying information.
      1.   Any identifying information that is presented that is inconsistent
with other information that the customer provides (such as inconsistent birth
dates).
      2.   Any identifying information that is presented that is inconsistent
with other sources of information (such as an address that does not match the
address on a credit report).
      3.   Any identifying information that is presented that is the same as
information shown on other applications that were found to be fraudulent.
      4.   Any identifying information that is presented that is consistent
with fraudulent activity (such as an invalid phone number or fictitious billing
address).
      5.   A social security number that is presented that is the same as one
given by another customer.
      6.   An address or phone number that is presented that is the same as
that of another person.
      7.   Any instance where a person fails to provide complete personal
identifying information on an application after being reminded to do so.
      8.   Any instance where a person's identifying information is not
consistent with the information that is on file for that customer.
   (D)   The unusual use of, or other suspicious activity related to, a covered
account.
      1.   A change of address for an account that is followed by a request to
change the account holder's name.
      2.   Any instance where payments stop on an otherwise consistently up to
date account.
      3.   Any instance where an account is used in a way that is inconsistent
with its prior use (such as very high activity).
      4.   Any instance where mail that was sent to the account holder is
repeatedly returned as undeliverable.
      5.   Any instance where the city is notified that a customer is not
receiving mail.
      6.   Any notice to the city that an account has unauthorized activity.
      7.   A breach of the city's computer system security.
      8.   Any unauthorized access to or use of customer account information.
   (E)   Alerts, notifications, or other warnings received from customers,
victims, law enforcement authorities or other persons.
      1.   The city identifies it as a red flag if the city receives notice
from a customer, an identity theft victim, law enforcement or other persons
that the city has opened or is maintaining a fraudulent account for a person
engaged in identity theft. (Ord. 1968, 4-7-2009)
1-21-5-2: DETECTION OF RED FLAGS:
   (A)   New Accounts: As part of this program, a procedure for opening new
utility accounts has been incorporated that will provide consistency in
detecting red flags (see section
1-21-7 of this chapter). In order to detect any of the red flags that are
associated with opening of a new account, city personnel must take the
following steps to obtain and verify the identity of the person opening the
account:
      1.   Require certain identifying information such as name, date of birth,
residential or business address, principal place of business for an entity, and
a driver's license or other state issued photo identification.
      2.   Verify the customer's identity (for instance, review a driver's
license or other state issued photo identification).
      3.   Review documentation showing the existence of a business entity.
      4.   Independently contact the customer.
   (B)   Existing Accounts: In order to detect any of the red flags that are
associated with the operation of an existing account, city personnel must take
the following steps to monitor transactions with an account:
      1.   Verify the identification of the customer if they request
information (in person, via telephone, via facsimile or via e-mail).
      2.   Verify the validity of any requests to change a billing address.
      3.   Verify any change in banking information that is given for billing
and/or payment purposes. (Ord. 1968, 4-7-2009)
1-21-5-3: PREVENTION AND MITIGATION:
   (A)   If city personnel detect any identified red flag, then, depending on
the degree of risk posed by that red flag, the personnel must take one or more
of the following steps:
      1.   Monitor a covered account for evidence of identity theft.
      2.   Contact the customer.
      3.   Change any passwords, security codes, or other security devices that
permit access to a covered account.
      4.   Reopen a covered account with a new account number.
      5.   Refuse to open a new covered account.
      6.   Close an existing covered account.
      7.   Notify the program administrator for a determination of the
appropriate steps to take.
      8.   Notify law enforcement.
      9.   Determine that no response is warranted under the particular
circumstances.
   (B)   In order to further prevent the likelihood of identity theft occurring
with respect to the city's accounts, the city must take the following steps
with respect to its internal operation procedures to protect customer
identifying information:
      1.   File cabinets, desk drawers, overhead cabinets, and any other
storage space containing documents with identifying information will be locked
when not in use.
      2.   Storage rooms containing documents with identifying information and
record retention areas will be locked at the end of each workday or when
unsupervised.
      3.   Desks, workstations, work areas, printers and fax machines, and
common shared work areas will be cleared of all documents containing
identifying information when not in use.
      4.   Whiteboards, dry erase boards, writing tablets, etc., in common
shared work areas will be erased, removed or shredded when not in use.
      5.   When documents containing identifying information are discarded,
they will be placed inside a locked shred bin or immediately shredded using a
cross cut or department of defense approved shredding device. Locked shred bins
shall be labeled "confidential paper shredding and recycling". City records,
however, may only be destroyed in accordance with the local records act 1 .
      6.   Internally, identifying information may be transmitted using city
approved e-mail. All identifying information must be encrypted or password
protected when stored in an electronic format.
      7.   Any identifying information sent externally must be encrypted and
password protected and only to approved recipients. Additionally, a statement
such as this should be included in the e-mail:
This message may contain confidential and/or proprietary information and is
intended for the person/entity to whom it was originally addressed. Any use by
others is strictly prohibited.
      8.   Ensure computer virus protection is up to date.
      9.   Require and keep only the kinds of customer information that are
necessary for the city's purposes. (Ord. 1968, 4-7-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. 50 ILCS 205.
1-21-6: PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION AND OPERATION:
1-21-6-1: OPERATIONAL RESPONSIBILITY:
The initial adoption and approval of the identity theft prevention program
shall be by ordinance of the city council. The city attorney is responsible for
the implementation and administration of the program. The program administrator
is responsible for the program administration, for ensuring appropriate
training of city staff on the program, for reviewing any staff reports
regarding the detection of red flags, and for determining which steps of
prevention and mitigation should be taken in particular circumstances and
considering periodic changes to the program. (Ord. 1968, 4-7-2009)
1-21-6-2: TRAINING AND OVERSIGHT:
All staff and third party service providers performing any activity in
connection with one or more covered accounts are to be provided appropriate
training and receive effective oversight to ensure that the activity is
conducted in accordance with policies and procedures designed to detect,
prevent and mitigate the risk of identity theft. The program administrator is
responsible for ensuring identity theft training for all employees and third
party service providers. Employees must receive annual training in all elements
of this policy. To ensure maximum effectiveness, employees may continue to
receive additional training as changes to the program are made. (Ord. 1968, 4-
7-2009)
1-21-6-3: ANNUAL REPORTING:
Development, implementation, administration and oversight of the program will
be the responsibility of the program administrator. The program administrator
shall report, at least annually, to the city council on compliance with this
program.
Issues to be addressed in the annual identity theft prevention report include:
   (A)   The cost effectiveness of the policies and procedures in addressing
the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of new covered
account and activity with respect to existing covered accounts.
   (B)   Staff training updates.
   (C)   Service provider arrangements.
   (D)   Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's
response.
   (E)   Recommendations for a program update, if warranted. (Ord. 1968, 4-7-
2009)
1-21-6-4: SERVICE PROVIDER ARRANGEMENTS:
If the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection
with one or more accounts, then the city shall take the following steps to
ensure that the service provider performs its activity in accordance with
reasonable policies and procedures designed to detect, prevent, and mitigate
identity theft:
   (A)   Require, by contract, that service providers have such policies and
procedures in place.
   (B)   Require, by contract, that service providers review the program and
report any red flags to the program administrator. (Ord. 1968, 4-7-2009)
1-21-7: PROCEDURE FOR OPENING NEW UTILITY ACCOUNTS:
   (A)   Opening New Accounts:
      1.   New utility accounts may be opened only in person.
   (B)   Information And Documentation Required For Customers:
      1.   Current driver's license or alternate government issued photo ID.
      2.   Second form of identification, such as a credit card.
      3.   New service address.
      4.   New service telephone.
      5.   Most recent previous address.
      6.   Signature on application.
      7.   Signed/valid permission document from landlord.
      8.   Deed or lease or other proof of ownership.
   (C)   Steps To Be Taken By The Customer Service Representative:
      1.   Check driver's license/alternate government ID and photocopy or
scan.
      2.   Compare signature on application with signature on driver's license
and second form of ID.
      3.   Determine if any red flags are present.
   (D)   Steps For Customer Service Representative To Follow If Validation Of
ID Fails:
      1.   Tactfully advise potential customer of the issue, if appropriate.
      2.   Do not open the account.
      3.   Refer customer to external source that is the source of the red flag
(i.e., driver's license date of birth does not match what was on application).
      4.   Escalation to supervisor if situation with customer is unresolved.
      5.   Contact program administrator to make final decision in her/his
discretion on whether to open new account. (Ord. 1968, 4-7-2009)
CHAPTER 22
INTERESTED PARTIES REGISTRY
SECTION:
1-22-1: Definitions
1-22-2: Establishment Of Registry
1-22-3: Maintenance Of Registry
1-22-4: Registration By Residents
1-22-5: Registration By Organizations
1-22-6: Determination Of Eligibility
1-22-7: Renewal And Termination
1-22-8: Amendment To Registration
1-22-9: Registries Available For Public Inspection
1-22-10: Notices To Be Sent To Interested Parties
1-22-11: Noninterference
1-22-12: Amendment Of Registration Rules
1-22-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in these registration rules, the following terms shall have the
definitions set forth below:
ACT: The tax increment allocation redevelopment act, 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-74.4-1 et seq., as amended from time to time.
CITY: The city of Canton, an Illinois municipal corporation.
CLERK: The city clerk.
INTERESTED PARTY(IES):
   (A)   Any organization(s) active within the city,
   (B)   Any resident(s) of the city, and
   (C)   Any other entity or person otherwise entitled under the act to
register in the interested parties registry who has registered in such registry
and whose registration has not been terminated in accordance with these
registration rules.
REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA: A redevelopment project area that: a) is intended
to qualify or that has previously or subsequently qualified as a "redevelopment
project area" under the act, and b) is subject to the "interested parties
registry" requirements of the act.
REGISTRATION FORM: The form appended to these registration rules, or such
revised form as may be approved by the department consistent with the
requirements of the act.
REGISTRY OR REGISTRIES: Each interested parties registry, and all such
registries, collectively, established by the city pursuant to section 11-74.4-
4.2 of the act for a redevelopment project area. (Ord. 2015, 8-17-2010)
1-22-2: ESTABLISHMENT OF REGISTRY:
The city shall establish a separate interested parties registry for each
redevelopment project area, whether existing as of the date of the adoption of
these rules or hereafter established. (Ord. 2015, 8-17-2010)
1-22-3: MAINTENANCE OF REGISTRY:
The registries shall be maintained by the clerk, which has a principal business
office located at city hall, Canton, Illinois. The city may transfer the
responsibility for maintaining the registries to such other department provided
that the city: a) gives prior written notice to all interested parties not less
than thirty (30) days prior to such transfer, and b) publishes notice of such
transfer in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. (Ord. 2015, 8-17-
2010)
1-22-4: REGISTRATION BY RESIDENTS:
An individual seeking to register as an interested party with respect to a
redevelopment project area must complete and submit a registration form to the
clerk. Such individual must also submit a copy of a current driver's license,
lease, utility bill, or such other evidence as may be acceptable to the clerk
to establish the individual's current residency. (Ord. 2015, 8-17-2010)
1-22-5: REGISTRATION BY ORGANIZATIONS:
An organization seeking to register as an interested party with respect to a
redevelopment project area must complete and submit a registration form to the
clerk. Such organization must also submit a copy of a one page statement
describing the organization's current operations in the city. (Ord. 2015, 8-17-
2010)
1-22-6: DETERMINATION OF ELIGIBILITY:
All individuals and organizations whose registration form and supporting
documentation complies with these registration rules shall be registered in the
applicable registry within ten (10) business days of the clerk's receipt of all
such documents. The clerk shall provide written notice to the registrant
confirming such registration. Upon registration, interested parties shall be
entitled to receive all notices and documents required to be delivered under
these rules or as otherwise required under the act with respect to the
applicable redevelopment project area. If the clerk determines that a
registrant's registration form and/or supporting documentation is incomplete or
does not comply with these rules, the clerk shall give written notice to the
registrant specifying the defect(s). The registrant shall be entitled to
correct any defects and resubmit a new registration form and supporting
documentation. (Ord. 2015, 8-17-2010)
1-22-7: RENEWAL AND TERMINATION:
An interested party's registration shall remain effective for a period of three
(3) years. At any time after such three (3) year period, the clerk may provide
written notice by regular mail to the interested party stating that such
registration shall terminate unless the interested party renews such
registration within thirty (30) days of the clerk's mailing of written notice.
To renew such registration, the interested party shall, within such thirty (30)
day period, complete and submit the same registration form and supporting
documentation then required of initial registrants in order to permit the clerk
to confirm such person's residency or such organization's operations in the
city. The registration of all individuals and organizations whose registration
form and supporting documentation is submitted in a timely manner and complies
with these regulation rules shall be reviewed for an additional, consecutive
three (3) year period. If the clerk determines that a registrant's renewal
registration form and/or supporting documentation is incomplete or does not
comply with these registration rules, the clerk shall give written notice to
the registrant at the address specified in the renewal registration form
submitted by such registrant, specifying the defect(s). The registrant shall be
entitled to correct any defects and resubmit a new registration form and
supporting documentation within thirty (30) days of receipt of the clerk's
notice. If all defects are not corrected within thirty (30) days or the
interested party's receipt of the clerk's notice, the interested party's
registration shall be terminated. Any interested party whose registration is
terminated shall be entitled to register again as if a first time registrant.
(Ord. 2015, 8-17-2010)
1-22-8: AMENDMENT TO REGISTRATION:
An interested party may amend its registration by giving written notice to the
clerk by certified mail of any of the following: a) a change in address for
notice purposes; b) in the case of organizations, a change in the name of the
contact person; and c) a termination of registration. Upon receipt of such
notice, the clerk shall revise the applicable registry accordingly. (Ord. 2015,
8-17-2010)
1-22-9: REGISTRIES AVAILABLE FOR PUBLIC INSPECTION:
Each registry shall be available for public inspection during normal city
business hours. The registry shall include the name, address and telephone
number of each interested person and, for organizations, the name and phone
number of a designated contact person. (Ord. 2015, 8-17-2010)
1-22-10: NOTICES TO BE SENT TO INTERESTED PARTIES:
Interested parties shall be sent the following notices and any other notices
required under the act with respect to the applicable redevelopment project
area:
   (A)   Pursuant to section 74.4-5(a) of the act, notice of the availability
of a proposed redevelopment plan and eligibility report, including how to
obtain this information; such notice shall be sent by mail within a reasonable
period of time after the adoption of the ordinance fixing the public hearing
for the proposed redevelopment plan;
   (B)   Pursuant to section 74.4-5(a) of the act, notice of changes to
proposed redevelopment plans that do not: 1) add additional parcels of property
to the proposed redevelopment project area, 2) substantially affect the general
land uses proposed in the redevelopment plan, 3) substantially change the
nature of or extend the life of the redevelopment project, or 4) increase the
number of low or very low income households to be displaced from the
redevelopment project area, provided that measured from the time of creation of
the redevelopment project area the total displacement of the households will
exceed ten (10); such notice shall be sent by mail not later than ten (10) days
following the city's adoption by ordinance of such changes;
   (C)   Pursuant to section 74.4-5(c) of the act, notice of amendments to
previously approved redevelopment plans that do not: 1) add additional parcels
of property to the redevelopment project area, 2) substantially affect the
general land uses in the redevelopment plan, 3) substantially change the nature
of the redevelopment project, 4) increase the total estimated redevelopment
project costs set out in the redevelopment plan by more than five percent (5%)
after adjustment for inflation from the date the plan was adopted, 5) add
additional redevelopment project costs to the itemized list of redevelopment
project costs set out in the redevelopment plan, or 6) increase the number of
low or very low income households to be displaced from the redevelopment
project area, provided that measured from the time of creation of the
redevelopment project area the total displacement of households will exceed ten
(10); such notice shall be sent by mail not later than ten (10) days following
the city's adoption by ordinance of any such amendment;
   (D)   Pursuant to section 74.4-5(d)(9) of the act, for redevelopment plans
or projects that would result in the displacement of residents from ten (10) or
more inhabited residential units or that contain seventy five (75) or more
inhabited residential units, notice of the availability of the certified audit
report described in section 74.4-5(d)(9), including how to obtain the certified
audit report; such notice shall be sent by mail within a reasonable period of
time after completion of the certified audit report;
   (E)   Pursuant to section 74.4-6(e) of the act, notice of the preliminary
public meeting required under the act for a proposed redevelopment project area
that will result in the displacement of ten (10) or more inhabited residential
units or which will contain seventy five (75) or more inhabited residential
units, such notice shall be sent by certified mail not less than fifteen (15)
days before the date of such preliminary public meeting. (Ord. 2015, 8-17-2010)
1-22-11: NONINTERFERENCE:
These registration rules shall not be used to prohibit or otherwise interfere
with the ability of eligible organizations and individuals to register for
receipt of information to which they are entitled under the act. (Ord. 2015, 8-
17-2010)
1-22-12: AMENDMENT OF REGISTRATION RULES:
These registration rules may be amended by the mayor and city council, subject
to and consistent with the requirements of the act. (Ord. 2015, 8-17-2010)
CHAPTER 23
IDENTITY PROTECTION POLICY
SECTION:
1-23-1: Purpose
1-23-2: Red Flag Rules
1-23-3: Policy Statement
1-23-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this policy is to establish steps that ensure the collection,
use, disclosure and protection of individuals' social security numbers in
compliance with the identity protection act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 179/
1 et seq. To protect against identity theft, this policy will define the ways
social security numbers can and cannot be used and will limit access to social
security numbers. (Ord. 3002, 11-6-2012)
1-23-2: RED FLAG RULES:
The fair and accurate credit transactions act of 2003 (FACT act) required
certain financial institutions and creditors with "covered accounts" to
prepare, adopt, and implement an identity theft prevention program to identify,
detect, respond to and mitigate patterns, practices or specific activities
which could indicate identity theft. The city of Canton ("city") maintains
utility accounts (water, sewer, garbage) that involve multiple payments or
transactions and these accounts are "covered accounts" within the meaning of
the FACT act. In order to comply with the obligations of the FACT act, the city
of Canton approved an identity theft prevention program via ordinance 1968 on
April 7, 2009. As adopted, the program only applied to utility accounts. This
identity protection policy is not intended to replace, but may supplement the
identity theft prevention program. (Ord. 3002, 11-6-2012)
1-23-3: POLICY STATEMENT:
This policy with regard to the collection, use, disclosure, and protection of
individuals' social security numbers is intended to comply with the identity
protection act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 179/1 et seq.
   (A)   Prohibited Activities:
      1.   No officer or employee of the city shall do any of the following:
         (a)   Intentionally communicate or otherwise intentionally make
available to the general public, in any manner, an individual's social security
number;
         (b)   Print an individual's social security number on any card
required for the individual to access products or services provided by the
city;
         (c)   Require an individual to transmit his or her social security
number over the internet, unless the connection is secure or the social
security number is encrypted;
         (d)   Print an individual's social security number on any materials
that are mailed to the individual, through the U.S. postal service, any private
mail service, and electronic mail or any similar method of delivery, unless
state or federal law requires the social security number to be on the document
to be mailed. Notwithstanding any provision in this subsection to the contrary,
social security numbers may be included in applications and forms sent by mail,
including, but not limited to, any material mailed in connection with
administration of the unemployment insurance act, any material mailed in
connection with any tax administered by the Illinois department of revenue, and
documents sent as part of an application or enrollment process or to establish,
amend or terminate an account, contract, or policy, or to confirm the accuracy
of the social security number. A social security number that may permissibly be
mailed under this subsection may not be printed, in whole or in part, on a
postcard or other mailer that does not require an envelope, or be visible on an
envelope without the envelope having been opened.
      2.   Except as otherwise provided in this policy, no officer or employee
of the city shall do any of the following:
         (a)   Collect, use, or disclose a social security number from an
individual unless:
            (1)   Required to do so under state or federal law, rules or
regulations, or the collection, use or disclosure of the social security number
is otherwise necessary for the performance of that officer's or employee's
duties and responsibilities;
            (2)   The need and purpose for the social security number is
documented before collection of the social security number; and
            (3)   The social security number collected is relevant to the
documented need and purpose.
         (b)   Require an individual to use his or her social security number
to access an internet website.
         (c)   Use the social security number of an individual for any purpose
other than the purpose for which it was collected.
      3.   The prohibitions in subsection (A)2 of this section, do not apply in
the following circumstances:
         (a)   The disclosure of social security numbers to agents, employees,
contractors, or subcontractors of the city, or disclosure to another
governmental entity or its agents, employees, contractors, or subcontractors,
if disclosure is necessary in order for the city to perform its duties and
responsibilities; and, if disclosing to a contractor or subcontractor, prior to
such disclosure, the officer or employee of the city must first receive from
the contractor or subcontractor a copy of the contractor's or subcontractor's
policy that sets forth how the requirements imposed under this policy of the
city, to protect an individual's social security number, will be achieved.
         (b)   The disclosure of social security numbers pursuant to a court
order, warrant, or subpoena.
         (c)   The collection, use, or disclosure of social security numbers in
order to ensure the safety of:
            (1)   City employees;
            (2)   Persons committed to correctional facilities, local jails,
and other law enforcement facilities or retention centers;
            (3)   Wards of the state; and
            (4)   All persons working in or visiting a city facility.
         (d)   The collection, use, or disclosure of social security numbers
for internal verification or administrative purposes.
         (e)   The collection or use of social security numbers to investigate
or prevent fraud, to conduct background checks, to collect a debt, to obtain a
credit report from a consumer reporting agency under the federal fair credit
reporting act, to undertake any permissible purpose that is enumerated under
the federal Gramm Leach Bliley act (financial services modernization act of
1999), or to locate a missing person, a lost relative, or a person who is due a
benefit, such as a pension benefit or an unclaimed property benefit.
      4.   Any previously adopted standards of the city, for the collection,
use, or disclosure of social security numbers, that are stricter than the
standards under this policy with respect to the protection of those social
security numbers, shall, in the event of any conflict with the provisions of
this policy, control.
   (B)   Public Inspection And Copying Of Documents: Notwithstanding any other
provision of this policy to the contrary, all officers and employees of the
city must comply with the provisions of any other state law with respect to
allowing the public inspection and copying of information or documents
containing all or any portion of any individual's social security number. All
officers and employees of the city must redact social security numbers from the
information or documents before allowing the public inspection or copying of
the information or documents, as such information is exempt from disclosure
under the freedom of information act, pursuant to 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes
140/7(1)(b) as "private information", as defined by 5 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 140/2(c-5).
   (C)   Applicability:
      1.   This policy does not apply to the collection, use, or disclosure of
a social security number as required by state or federal law, rule, or
regulation.
      2.   This policy does not apply to documents that are required to be open
to the public under any state or federal law, rule, or regulation, applicable
case law, supreme court rule, or the constitution of the state of Illinois.
   (D)   Compliance With Federal Law: If a federal law takes effect requiring
any federal agency to establish a national unique patient health identifier
program, the city's compliance with said program shall not be deemed a
violation of this policy or the act.
   (E)   Embedded Social Security Numbers: No officer or employee of the city
may encode or embed a social security number in or on a card or document,
including, but not limited to, using a bar code, chip, magnetic strip, RFID
technology or other technology, in place of removing the social security number
as required by this policy.
   (F)   Identity Protection Requirements:
      1.   All officers and employees of the city, identified as having access
to social security numbers in the course of performing their duties, shall
receive training in regard to protecting the confidentiality of social security
numbers. Said training shall include instructions on the proper handling of
information that contains social security numbers from the time of collection
through the destruction of the information.
      2.   Only officers and employees of the city who are required to use or
handle information or documents that contain social security numbers shall have
access to such information or documents.
      3.   Social security numbers requested from an individual shall be
provided in a manner that makes the social security number easily redacted if
required to be released as part of a public records request.
      4.   When collecting a social security number, or upon request by the
individual providing the social security number, a statement of the purpose or
purposes for which the city is collecting and using the social security number
shall be provided.
      5.   A written copy of this policy and any amendments thereto, shall be
filed with the city clerk immediately upon approval of this policy or any
amendments thereto.
      6.   The city attorney shall make sure that all officers and employees of
the city are aware of the existence of this policy, and shall make a copy of
this policy available to each officer and employee. If the city amends this
policy, then the city attorney shall advise all officers and employees of the
city of this existence of the amended policy, shall make a copy of the amended
policy available to each officer and employee of the city, and shall file a
copy of the amended policy with the city clerk.
      7.   The city shall make this policy available to any member of the
public, upon request.
   (G)   Violation: Any person who intentionally violates the prohibitions in
section 10 of the act (which are set forth in subsections (A)1 and (A)2 of this
chapter) shall, pursuant to the act, be guilty of a class B misdemeanor.
   (H)   Limitation: This policy does not supersede any more restrictive law,
rule, or regulation regarding the collection, use, or disclosure of social
security numbers. (Ord. 3002, 11-6-2012)
CHAPTER 24
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY
(Rep. by Ord. 4263, 11-16-2021, eff. 12-1-2021)
CHAPTER 25
BUDGET  OFFICER
SECTION:
1-25-1: Office Created, Appointment, Term, And Qualifications
1-25-2: Oath; Bond
1-25-3: Powers And Duties
1-25-4: Removal And Resignation
1-25-5: Compensation
1-25-6: Conflict Of Interest Prohibited
1-25-7: Assistants
1-25-1: OFFICE CREATED, APPOINTMENT, TERM, AND QUALIFICATIONS:
   (A)   There is hereby created an office of budget officer. The budget
officer shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city
council. The budget officer shall be chosen on the basis of executive,
administrative, and educational qualifications with special emphasis on the
actual experience in, or knowledge of, accepted practice with respect to the
office hereinafter set forth. The budget officer (and any assistants) shall
serve at the pleasure of the mayor.
   (B)   The budget officer shall have the same qualifications as the city
treasurer.
   (C)   The mayor may appoint the city treasurer as the budget officer, in
which case the duties of the budget officer hereunder shall be part of and in
addition to the duties of the city treasurer. (Ord. 3022, 8-6-2013; amd. Ord.
4238, 6-1-2021)
1-25-2: OATH; BOND:
Any person filling and discharging the duties of the budget officer shall,
before entering upon the duties of such office, take an oath and post a bond as
provided in 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-25. The amount of the bond shall be no less than
the amount of the bond posted by the city treasurer. (Ord. 3022, 8-6-2013; amd.
Ord. 4238, 6-1-2021)
1-25-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   (A)   The budget officer shall be responsible to the mayor for the proper
administration of all the budget affairs of the city. In discharging this
responsibility the budget officer shall conform to and follow the duties as
prescribed in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-2-9.1 through 5/8-2-9.10 as
amended from time to time including, but not limited to, the following:
      1.   Permit and encourage and establish the use of efficient planning,
budgeting, auditing, reporting, accounting, and other fiscal management
procedures in all municipal departments, commissions, and boards.
      2.   Compile an annual budget in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 8-2-9.3.
      3.   Examine all books and records of all municipal departments,
commissions, and boards which relate to monies received by the municipality,
municipal departments, commissions, and boards, and paid out by the
municipality, municipal departments, commissions, and boards, debts and
accounts receivable, amounts owed by or to the municipality, municipal
departments, commissions and boards.
      4.   Obtain such additional information from the municipality, municipal
departments, commissions, and boards as may be useful to the budget officer for
purposes of compiling a municipal budget, such information to be furnished by
the municipality, municipal departments, commissions, and boards in the form
required by the budget officer. Any department, commission or board which
refuses to make such information as is requested of it available to the budget
officer shall not be permitted to make expenditures under any subsequent budget
for the municipality until such municipal department, commission, or board
shall comply in full with the request of the budget officer.
      5.   Establish and maintain such procedures as to ensure that no
expenditures are made by the municipality, municipal departments, commissions,
or board except as authorized by the budget. (Ord. 3022, 8-6-2013; amd. Ord.
4238, 6-1-2021)
1-25-4: REMOVAL AND RESIGNATION:
The budget officer may be suspended or discharged by the mayor in consultation
with the city council in accordance with state statute and according to the
terms and conditions of the employment contract, if any. The budget officer may
also resign from the position upon giving thirty (30) days' prior written
notice to the mayor. (Ord. 3022, 8-6-2013; amd. Ord. 4238, 6-1-2021)
1-25-5: COMPENSATION:
   (A)   The budget officer may receive such compensation as the mayor and city
council shall fix from time to time.
   (B)   The mayor may, with subsequent ratification by the city council, enter
into an employment and/or services contract, which specifies in writing the
level of compensation of the budget officer, fringe benefits, including the
level of support for the budget officer’s continuing professional education,
agreements for separation pay upon termination of employment, other appropriate
agreements describing the working relationship between the budget officer and
the elected officials and the mayor and city council’s performance expectations
for the budget officer. This agreement may be reviewed and revised by mutual
agreement of the parties at periodic intervals.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event the city treasurer is
appointed as the budget officer, then the compensation of the city treasurer
shall be the sole compensation paid to the budget officer/city treasurer,
unless otherwise approved by resolution of the city council, as the duties of
the budget officer are therein intended to be the duties of the city treasurer.
Any additional compensation to the budget officer/city treasurer pursuant to
this subsection shall be solely for the office of budget officer, and may be
approved from time-to-time by the city council. (Ord. 3022, 8-6-2013; amd. Ord.
4238, 6-1-2021)
1-25-6: CONFLICT OF INTEREST PROHIBITED:
The budget officer shall not derive any personal benefit, directly or
indirectly, from any contractual work or business of the city or from the sale
of any article from the city or from the purchase of property therefrom. (Ord.
3022, 8-6-2013; amd. Ord. 4238, 6-1-2021)
1-25-7: ASSISTANTS:
The mayor and the budget officer shall be allowed to enter into hire or enter
into agreements for assistants, independent contractors, and/or other clerks
and subordinate help as the necessities of the office of budget officer may
require, as needed to assist the budget officer in performing his or her
duties, and as the city council by ordinance or resolution shall from time to
time authorize. (Ord. 3022, 8-6-2013; amd. Ord. 4238, 6-1-2021)
CHAPTER 26
DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY SERVICES
SECTION:
1-26-1: Created
1-26-2: Appointment, Oath, Bond
1-26-3: Duties And Responsibilities
1-26-4: Removal And Resignation
1-26-1: CREATED:
There is hereby created the office of community services director who shall
create a feeling of greater personal responsibility and exhibit to the
citizenry a sense of concern for the welfare of the city of Canton. (Ord. 3027,
10-15-2013)
1-26-2: APPOINTMENT, OATH, BOND:
The director of community services shall be appointed by the mayor with the
advice and consent of the city council. The director of community services
shall be chosen on the basis of executive, administrative, and educational
qualifications with special emphasis on the actual experience in, or knowledge
of, accepted practice with respect to the office hereinafter set forth.
Any person filling and discharging the duties of the office hereby created
shall, before entering upon the duties of such office, take and subscribe the
oath prescribed by law for director of community services and shall execute a
bond to the city in the penal sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) with
surety to be approved by the council, conditioned for faithful performance of
the duties of his/her office. (Ord. 3027, 10-15-2013)
1-26-3: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The director of community services shall be responsible to the mayor for the
overall management of a wide variety of programs and services designed to
address the diverse needs of the community and shall promote a spirit of
cooperation and partnership between the citizens and the city. In discharging
this responsibility the director of community services shall, as directed by
the mayor:
   (A)   Provide professional advice to the mayor.
   (B)   Supervise and coordinate the administrative functions of all
departments providing city services, including public works, water, wastewater,
police, and fire departments.
   (C)   Prepare a variety of studies, reports, and related information as may
be required from time to time concerning the operations of the city
departments.
   (D)   Provide leadership and direction in the planning and direction of
programs and projects to evaluate and study city operations.
   (E)   Recommend policies and procedures to improve efficiency and
effectiveness of city operations.
   (F)   Coordinate activities with other departments and agencies as needed.
   (G)   Direct and participate in short and long range planning in
coordination with city council and recommend goals for a unified program of
economic and community development.
   (H)   Advise and work with city council to develop strategies and initiate
projects for economic redevelopment in downtown and target neighborhoods.
   (I)   Work closely with the Spoon River Partnership For Economic
Development.
   (J)   Liaison with the city engineer and director of planning and zoning.
   (K)   Provide communication and reports regarding planning and zoning issues
to the mayor and city council.
   (L)   Participate in addressing vacant and dangerous buildings and
neighborhood blight.
   (M)   Work closely with the mayor, city council, and other city officials in
developing public information and community relations strategies.
   (N)   Manage the city's public information and community relations
activities by providing leadership and direction in the development of notices,
fliers, brochures, newsletters, media releases, news articles and other
informational materials about programs and services.
   (O)   Ensure the city's website is an essential communication channel by
coordinating the dissemination of information through the site.
   (P)   Communicate official plans, policies, and procedures to staff and the
general public by preparing and making presentations to staff, supervisors,
boards, commissions, civic groups, members of the media and the general public.
(Ord. 3027, 10-15-2013)
1-26-4: REMOVAL AND RESIGNATION:
The director of community services shall receive such compensation as the mayor
and city council shall fix from time to time. The mayor may, with subsequent
ratification by the city council, enter into an employment contract which
specifies in writing the level of compensation of the director of community
services, fringe benefits, including the level of support for the director of
community services' continuing professional education, agreements for
separation pay upon termination of employment, other appropriate agreements
describing the working relationship between the director of community services
and the elected officials and the mayor and city council's performance
expectations for the director of community services. This agreement may be
reviewed and revised by mutual agreement of the parties at periodic intervals.
(Ord. 3027, 10-15-2013)
CHAPTER 27
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-27-1: Purpose
1-27-2: General Penalties
1-27-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish general guidelines for penalties of
violations of this code when there are no penalties specified and to establish
a fine amount and settlement opportunity for certain violations of this code.
(Ord. 4033, 7-20-2016)
1-27-2: GENERAL PENALTIES:
   (A)   Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the City any act is
prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in
such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do
any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided
therefore, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance
shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and
not more than seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each
day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance shall
continue shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Settlement Procedures:
      1.   Fee Schedule: From time to time, the city council shall adopt a
violation fee schedule (or "Fee Schedule") that shall set forth pre-authorized
settlement amounts for certain violations of this code, as set forth therein,
that may be settled without the necessity of a court appearance. The pre-
authorized amounts may not be decreased by the Canton Police Department without
approval by the City Attorney. The Fee Schedule may also list certain
violations in which the Canton Police Department is not allowed to settle
without a court appearance. The Fee Schedule may also include additional fines
or fees for subsequent offenses.
      2.   Acceptance of Guilty Plea and Waiver of Trial with Full Payment of
Settlement Amount: If a pre-authorized fee is set forth for a particular
violation in the Fee Schedule, the Canton Police Department may accept an
executed Guilty Plea and Waiver of Trial (on a form provided prepared by the
City Attorney), along with payment of the settlement fee amount set forth in
the Fee Schedule. The alleged violator must execute a Guilty Plea and Waiver of
Trial and pay the full, allowed settlement fee amount listed in the Fee
Schedule within fourteen (14) days after the issuance of the citation. Payments
shall be made by cash, certified check, cashier's check or money order made
payable to the City of Canton. Payments for ordinance violations shall not be
made online without the expressed permission of the Canton Police Department.
No settlement may be accepted by the Canton Police Department without a fully
executed Guilty Plea and Waiver of Trial. If the Guilty Pleas and Waiver of
Trial, along with the full, allowed settlement fee is not paid within fourteen
(14) days after the issuance of the citation, the citation shall be filed with
the Circuit Court of Fulton County, Illinois for prosecution by the City
Attorney, except as otherwise permitted below. The Canton Police Department may
require the signature or acknowledgment of parent or legal guardian prior to
the execution of Guilty Plea and Waiver of Trial by a minor.
      3.   Denial of Settlement Amount, Guilty Plea, and Waiver of Trial: If
the Chief of Police determines that the violation(s) should be forwarded to the
City Attorney for prosecution rather than pre-court settlement, for whatever
purpose, he or she may refuse to accept the payment of the settlement amounts
set forth in the Fee Schedule, as well as the Guilty Plea and Waiver of Trial.
However, in the event the City Attorney authorizes any settlement by written
agreement or court order, the Canton Police Department shall accept the Guilty
Plea and Waiver of Trial, and the payment of any fines or fees, as approved by
the City Attorney.
      4.   City Attorney: The City Attorney shall have the authority to delay
filing with the court any citation charging a person with violation of this
code in order to allow that person an opportunity to settle the case prior to
his or her court appearance. The City Attorney, in his or her prosecutorial
discretion, is further authorized to dismiss any filed ordinance violation
case, vacate any judgment issued in an ordinance violation case, modify
ordinance violation charges brought against the violator, and/or settle any
ordinance violation case (before or after filing) for an amount or punishment
that varies from the amounts listed in the Fee Schedule, including but not
limited to, by requiring community service in addition to and/or in lieu of a
fee or fine.
   (C)   Minors: In addition to and/or in lieu of a monetary fine, any
violation of this code by a minor may be punished by performance of community
service as agreed upon by the City Attorney or otherwise ordered by a court of
law. In addition, for any violation involving a minor, the City Attorney may
offer to dismiss a matter upon successful completion of community service and/
or payment of a fine and court costs. Before, during or after a court
appearance, the City Attorney has the authority to settle any violation in an
amount or punishment that varies from the settlement amount in the Fee
Schedule, as determined appropriate in his or her discretion, including but not
limited to, by requiring community service in addition to and/or in lieu of a
fee or fine.
   (D)   City Attorney: The City Attorney is further authorized to file a
complaint, citation, ticket, or other charging document, as permitted by law,
with any appropriate court for any violation of this code. In such event, only
the City Attorney shall be authorized to approve any settlement related to the
case filed by the City Attorney. (Ord. 4033, 7-20-2016; amd. Ord. 4322, 2-7-
2023)
CHAPTER 28
SEXUAL HARASSMENT
SECTION:
1-28-1: Prohibition On Sexual Harassment
1-28-2: Definition Of Sexual Harassment
1-28-3: Procedure For Reporting An Allegation Of Sexual Harassment
1-28-4: Prohibition On Retaliation For Reporting Sexual Harassment Allegations
1-28-5: Consequences Of A Violation Of The Prohibition On Sexual Harassment
1-28-6: Consequences For Knowingly Making A False Report
1-28-7: Education/Training
1-28-8: Legal Rights Under Law
1-28-9: City Disclosures
1-28-1: PROHIBITION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
The City of Canton is committed to maintaining a work environment that
encourages and fosters appropriate conduct among colleagues and respect for
individual values and sensibilities. Accordingly, the City officers and
administration are committed to enforcing its Sexual Harassment Policy at all
levels within the work place and creating an environment free from
discrimination of any kind, including sexual harassment.
It is unlawful to harass a person because of that person's sex. The courts have
determined that sexual harassment is a form of discrimination under title VII
of the U.S. Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended in 1991. All persons have a
right to work in an environment free from sexual harassment. Sexual harassment
is unacceptable misconduct which affects individuals of all genders and sexual
orientations. It is a policy of the City of Canton to prohibit harassment of
any person by any Municipal official, Municipal agent, Municipal employee or
Municipal agency or office on the basis of sex or gender. All Municipal
officials, Municipal agents, Municipal employees and Municipal agencies or
offices are prohibited from sexually harassing any person, regardless of any
employment relationship or lack thereof. (Ord. 4092, 12-19-2017, eff. 12-19-
2017)
1-28-2: DEFINITION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
   (A)   This chapter adopts the definition of sexual harassment as stated in
the Illinois Human Rights Act. At the time of this chapter, "sexual harassment"
means any unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors or any
conduct of a sexual nature when:
      1.   Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a
term or condition of an individual's employment;
      2.   Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used
as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; or
      3.   Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering
with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or
offensive working environment.
      For purposes of this definition, the phrase "working environment" is not
limited to a physical location an employee is assigned to perform his or her
duties.
   (B)    Conduct which may constitute sexual harassment includes:
      1.   Verbal: Sexual innuendos, suggestive comments, insults, humor, and
jokes about sex, anatomy or gender-specific traits, sexual propositions,
threats, repeated requests for dates, or statements about other employees, even
outside of their presence, of a sexual nature.
      2.   Non-verbal: Suggestive or insulting sounds (whistling), leering,
obscene gestures, sexually suggestive bodily gestures, "catcalls", "smacking"
or "kissing" noises.
      3.   Visual: Posters, signs, pin-ups or slogans of a sexual nature,
viewing pornographic material or websites.
      4.   Physical: Touching, unwelcome hugging or kissing, pinching, brushing
the body, any coerced sexual act or actual assault.
      5.   Textual/electronic: "Sexting" (electronically sending messages with
sexual content, including pictures and video), the use of sexually explicit
language, harassment, cyber stalking and threats via all forms of electronic
communication (e-mail, text/picture/video messages, intranet/on-line postings,
blogs, instant messages and social network websites like Facebook and Twitter).
   The most severe and overt forms of sexual harassment are easier to
determine. On the other end of the spectrum, some sexual harassment is more
subtle and depends, to some extent, on individual perception and
interpretation. The courts will assess sexual harassment by a standard of what
would offend a “reasonable person.”
(Ord. 4092, 12-19-2017, eff. 12-19-2017; amd. Ord. 4179, 1-21-2020)
1-28-3: PROCEDURE FOR REPORTING AN ALLEGATION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
An employee who either observes sexual harassment or believes herself/himself
to be the object of sexual harassment should deal with the incident(s) as
directly and firmly as possible by clearly communicating her/his position to
the offending employee, and her/his immediate Supervisor. It is not necessary
for sexual harassment to be directed at the person making the report.
   (A)   Reporting: Any employee may report conduct which is believed to be
sexual harassment, including the following:
      1.   Electronic/Direct Communication: If there is sexual harassing
behavior in the workplace, the harassed employee should directly and clearly
express her/his objection that the conduct is unwelcome and request that the
offending behavior stop. The initial message may be verbal. If subsequent
messages are needed, they should be put in writing in a note or a memo.
      2.   Contact With Supervisory Personnel: At the same time direct
communication is undertaken, or in the event the employee feels threatened or
intimidated by the situation, the problem must be promptly reported to the
immediate Supervisor of the person making the report, a department head, a
Director of Human Resources, an Ethics Officer, the City Clerk, or the Mayor.
         (a)   The employee experiencing what he or she believes to be sexual
harassment must not assume that the employer is aware of the conduct. If there
are no witnesses and the victim fails to notify a Supervisor or other
responsible officer, the Municipality will not be presumed to have knowledge of
the harassment.
      3.   Resolution Outside Municipality: The purpose of this chapter is to
establish prompt, thorough and effective procedures for responding to every
report and incident so that problems can be identified and remedied by the
Municipality. However, all Municipal employees have the right to contact the
Illinois Department of Human Rights (IDHR) or the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC) for information regarding filing a formal complaint with
those entities. An IDHR complaint must be filed within one hundred eighty (180)
days of the alleged incident(s) unless it is a continuing offense. A complaint
with the EEOC must be filed within three hundred (300) days.
      4.   Allegations of Sexual Harassment made against an elected official of
the governmental unit by another elected official of the governmental unit: In
addition to the methods of reporting included above, an elected official may
request an independent review of a complaint of sexual harassment by another
elected official. The request shall be made to the Mayor or City Clerk. The
official receiving the request shall notify the City Attorney and shall take
immediate action in keeping with the procurement process of the municipality to
retain a qualified individual or entity for the independent review of the
allegations of sexual harassment in violation of this policy. The outcome of
the independent review shall be reported to the corporate authorities.
   (B)   Documentation: Documentation of any incident may be submitted with any
report (what was said or done, the date, the time and the place), including,
but not limited to, written records such as letters, notes, memos and telephone
messages.
   (C)   Allegations: All allegations, including anonymous reports, will be
accepted and investigated regardless of how the matter comes to the attention
of the Municipality. However, because of the serious implications of sexual
harassment charges and the difficulties associated with their investigation and
the questions of credibility involved, the claimant's willing cooperation is a
vital component of an effective inquiry and an appropriate outcome.
   (D)   Investigation Of Complaint: When a complaint has been reduced to
writing, the immediate Supervisor or the individual informed who works in a
Supervisor capacity, shall initiate an investigation of the suspected sexual
harassment within five (5) working days of notification. If necessary, the
immediate Supervisor shall designate another supervisory or management employee
of the opposite sex to assess him/her or the alternate individual in the
investigation. If the immediate Supervisor is subject of the investigation, the
investigation will include an interview with the employee who made the initial
report, the person(s) towards whom the suspected harassment was directed and
the individual(s) accused of the harassment.
   (E)   Report: The immediate Supervisor or designated person responsible for
investigating the complaint shall prepare a written report within ten (10)
working days from notification of the suspected harassment unless extenuating
circumstances prevent him/her from doing so. The report shall include a finding
that sexual harassment occurred. A copy of the report will be given to the
employee(s) to whom the suspected harassment was directed, and the employee(s)
suspected of the harassment.
   (F)   Records; Confidentiality: Employees who report incidents of sexual
harassment are encouraged to keep written notes in order to accurately record
the offensive conduct. Every effort shall be made to keep all matters related
to the investigation and various reports confidential, subject to the State of
Illinois Freedom of Information Act. In the event of a lawsuit, however, the
City advises that records it maintains and the complainant maintains may not be
considered privileged from disclosure. Written records will be maintained for
four (4) years from the date of resolution unless new circumstances dictate
that the file should be kept for a longer period of time.
   (G)   Appeals Process: If either party directly involved in a sexual
harassment investigation is dissatisfied with the outcome or resolution, that
individual has a right to appeal the decision. The dissatisfied party should
submit his/her written comments in a timely manner to the Mayor or Chairman of
the Negotiations, Grievance, and Personnel Committee. (Ord. 4092, 12-19-2017,
eff. 12-19-2017; amd. Ord. 4179, 1-21-2020; Ord. 4196, 6-16-2020)
1-28-4: PROHIBITION ON RETALIATION FOR REPORTING SEXUAL HARASSMENT ALLEGATIONS:
   (A)   No Municipal official, Municipal agent, Municipal employee or
Municipal agency or office shall take any retaliatory action against any
Municipal employee due to a Municipal employee's:
      1.   Disclosure or threatened disclosure of any violation of this
chapter,
      2.   The provision of information related to or testimony before any
public body conducting an investigation, hearing or inquiry into any violation
of this chapter, or
      3.   Assistance or participation in a proceeding to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   For the purposes of this chapter, retaliatory action means the
reprimand, discharge, suspension, demotion, denial of promotion or transfer, or
change in the terms or conditions of employment of any Municipal employee that
is taken in retaliation for a Municipal employee's involvement in protected
activity pursuant to this chapter.
   (C)   No individual making a report will be retaliated against even if a
report made in good faith is not substantiated. In addition, any witness will
be protected from retaliation.
   (D)   Similar to the prohibition against retaliation contained herein, the
State Officials and Employees Ethics Act 1  provides whistleblower protection
from retaliatory action such as reprimand, discharge, suspension, demotion, or
denial of promotion or transfer that occurs in retaliation for an employee who
does any of the following:
      1.   Discloses or threatens to disclose to a Supervisor or to a public
body an activity, policy, or practice of any officer, member, State agency, or
other State employee that the State employee reasonably believes is in
violation of a law, rule, or regulation,
      2.   Provides information to or testifies before any public body
conducting an investigation, hearing, or inquiry into any violation of a law,
rule, or regulation by any officer, member, State agency or other State
employee, or
      3.   Assists or participates in a proceeding to enforce the provisions of
the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act.
   (E)   Pursuant to the Whistleblower Act 2 , an employer may not retaliate
against an employee who discloses information in a court, an administrative
hearing, or before a legislative commission or committee, or in any other
proceeding, where the employee has reasonable cause to believe that the
information discloses a violation of a State or Federal law, rule, or
regulation. In addition, an employer may not retaliate against an employee for
disclosing information to a government or law enforcement agency, where the
employee has reasonable cause to believe that the information discloses a
violation of a State or Federal law, rule, or regulation 3 .
   (F)   According to the Illinois Human Rights Act 4 , it is a civil rights
violation for a person, or for two (2) or more people to conspire, to retaliate
against a person because he/she has opposed that which he/she reasonably and in
good faith believes to be sexual harassment in employment, because he/she has
made a charge, filed a complaint, testified, assisted, or participated in an
investigation, proceeding, or hearing under the Illinois Human Rights Act.
   (G)   An employee who is suddenly transferred to a lower paying job or
passed over for a promotion after filing a complaint with IDHR or EEOC, may
file a retaliation charge - due within one hundred eighty (180) days (IDHR) or
three hundred (300) days (EEOC) of the alleged retaliation. (Ord. 4092, 12-19-
2017, eff. 12-19-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 430/15-10.
2 2. 740 ILCS 174/15(a).
3 3. 740 ILCS 174/15(b).
4 4. 775 ILCS 5/6-101.
1-28-5: CONSEQUENCES OF A VIOLATION OF THE PROHIBITION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
In addition to any and all other discipline that may be applicable pursuant to
Municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/
or collective bargaining agreement, any person who violates this chapter or the
Prohibition on Sexual Harassment contained in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/
5-65, may be subject to a fine of up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per
offense, applicable discipline or discharge by the Municipality and any
applicable fines and penalties established pursuant to local ordinance, State
law or Federal law. Each violation may constitute a separate offense. Any
discipline imposed by the Municipality shall be separate and distinct from any
penalty imposed by an Ethics Commission and any fines or penalties imposed by a
court of law or a State or Federal agency.
Disciplinary action will be taken against any employee found to have engaged in
sexual harassment of any other employee. The extent of sanctions may depend in
part upon the length and conditions of employment of the particular employee
and the nature of the offense. The City has the right to apply any sanction or
combination of sanctions, up to and including discharge, to deal with
unreasonable conduct or discrimination.
Where a hostile work environment has been found to exist, the City will take
all reasonable steps to eliminate the conduct creating such an environment.
(Ord. 4092, 12-19-2017, eff. 12-19-2017)
1-28-6: CONSEQUENCES FOR KNOWINGLY MAKING A FALSE REPORT:
A false report is a report of sexual harassment made by an accuser using the
sexual harassment report to accomplish some end other than stopping sexual
harassment or retaliation for reporting sexual harassment. A false report is
not a report made in good faith which cannot be proven. Given the seriousness
of the consequences for the accused, a false or frivolous report is a severe
offense that can itself result in disciplinary action. Any person who
intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of
this chapter shall be subject to discipline or discharge pursuant to applicable
Municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/
or collective bargaining agreements.
In addition, any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a
violation of any provision of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act to
an Ethics Commission, an Inspector General, the State Police, a State's
Attorney, the Attorney General, or any other law enforcement official is guilty
of a Class A misdemeanor. An Ethics Commission may levy an administrative fine
of up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) against any person who intentionally
makes a false, frivolous or bad faith allegation. (Ord. 4092, 12-19-2017, eff.
12-19-2017)
1-28-7: EDUCATION/TRAINING:
   Education and training for employees at each level of the work force are
critical to the success of the city's policy against sexual harassment. The
sexual harassment policy of the city may be adopted by resolution and shall
substantially contain the terms and conditions of this chapter. The sexual
harassment policy will be sent to all current employees and said employees will
be asked to sign a receipt for and read the policy.
   As part of general orientation, each recently hired employee will be given a
copy of and requested to sign a receipt for and read the city's sexual
harassment policy so that they are on notice of the standards of behavior
expected.
   The City Clerk shall cause sexual harassment prevention training to be
provided to all city employees at least once per year. The sexual harassment
prevention training shall be consistent with and meet the standards of any
training required by Illinois law, including without limitation, the Illinois
Human Rights Act.
   All employees shall participate on city time, at least annually, in any
sexual harassment prevention training required by the city or other
discrimination and harassment prevention training as required by law. Employees
with supervisory authority over other employees, and all employees, and all
employees working in a managerial capacity, may receive further training on
duties of supervisory personnel. (Ord. 4092, 12-19-2017, eff. 12-19-2017; amd.
Ord. 4179, 1-21-2020)
1-28-8: LEGAL RIGHTS UNDER LAW:
Any employee who believes s/he has been subjected to sexual harassment has the
right to file a complaint with the Illinois Department of Human Rights, 100
West Randolph Street, Chicago, Illinois 60601; 312-814-6245 and/or the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, 500 West Madison, Suite 2800, Chicago,
Illinois 60661; 312-353-2713. The Illinois Human Rights Act provides that
complaints of harassment must be filed within one hundred eighty (180) days of
the alleged incident. A complaint with the EEOC must be filed within three
hundred (300) days of the alleged incident. It is also a violation of section
6-101 of the Illinois Human Rights Act to retaliate against an employee for
opposing or complaining about conduct believed to be a violation of the Act.
(Ord. 4092, 12-19-2017, eff. 12-19-2017)
1-28-9: CITY DISCLOSURES:
   (A)   As required by the Illinois Human Rights Act and in the event the city
had any adverse judgments or administrative rulings (as defined in 775 ILCS 5/
2-108) during the preceding year, then beginning July 1, 2020, and by each July
1 thereafter, the City Clerk, on behalf of the City of Canton, shall disclose
annually to the Illinois Department of Human Rights the following information:
      1.   The total number of adverse judgments or administrative rulings
during the preceding year;
      2.   Whether any equitable relief was ordered against the employer in any
adverse judgment or administrative ruling described in paragraph 1.;
      3.   How many adverse judgments or administrative rulings described in
paragraph 1. are in each of the following categories:
         (a)   Sexual harassment;
         (b)   Discrimination or harassment on the basis of sex;
         (c)   Discrimination or harassment on the basis of race, color, or
national origin;
         (d)   Discrimination or harassment on the basis of religion;
         (e)   Discrimination or harassment on the basis of age;
         (f)   Discrimination or harassment on the basis of disability;
         (g)   Discrimination or harassment on the basis of military status or
unfavorable discharge from military status;
         (h)   Discrimination or harassment on the basis of sexual orientation
or gender identity; and
         (i)   Discrimination or harassment on the basis of any other
characteristic protected under the Illinois Human Rights Act.
   (B)   In the event the Illinois Department of Human Rights requests the city
to submit the total number of Settlements entered into during the preceding
five (5) years, or less at the direction of the Illinois Department of Human
Rights, pursuant to 775 ILCS 5/2-108(C), then the City Clerk shall cause the
necessary settlement information to be provided to the Illinois Department of
Human Rights pursuant to the Illinois Human Rights Act.
   (C)   Neither the City Clerk nor the city shall disclose the name of a
victim of an act of alleged sexual harassment or unlawful discrimination in any
disclosures required by 775 ILCS 5/2-108. (Ord. 4179, 1-21-2020)
CHAPTER 29
LOCAL STATE OF EMERGENCY
SECTION:
1-29-1: Definitions
1-29-2: Declaration Of Local State Of Emergency
1-29-3: Curfew Authorized
1-29-4: Orders Authorized
1-29-5: Duration
1-29-6: Notice
1-29-7: Violations
1-29-8: Effect On Other Ordinances
1-29-9: Local, State And Federal Assistance
1-29-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
EMERGENCY:
   (1)   A “Disaster” as defined in the Illinois Emergency Management Agency
Act (20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq., as hereinafter amended);
   (2)   A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual force
or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate power to
execute by three or more persons acting together without authority of law; or
   (3)   Any natural disaster, epidemic or pandemic, or manmade calamity,
including outbreak of disease, virus, flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado,
earthquake or explosion, or imminent threat of any of those events within the
corporate limits of the city, resulting in or threatening the death or injury
of persons or the destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary
measures must be taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
CURFEW: A prohibition against any person walking, running, loitering, standing
or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or vacant premises
within the corporate limits of the city except officials of any governmental
unit and persons officially designated to duty with reference to said civil
emergency. (Ord. 4182, 3-16-2020)
1-29-2: DECLARATION OF LOCAL STATE OF EMERGENCY:
Whenever an emergency, as defined in Section
1-29-1 of this Chapter exists, the Mayor is authorized to declare the existence
of a Local State of Emergency by means of a written “Declaration of Local State
of Emergency” of the Mayor, under oath, setting forth the facts which
constitute the emergency, describing the nature of the emergency and declaring
that a Local State of Emergency exists in accordance with the definitions set
forth in this Chapter. This Declaration of Local State of Emergency must be
filed with the municipal clerk as soon as practicable after issuance. The
issuance of a Declaration of Local State of Emergency hereunder shall be
considered a “Local Disaster Declaration” as set forth in the Illinois
Emergency Services Act (20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.) and/or a declaration of a state
of emergency under Section 11-1-6 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/11-
1-6), as applicable under said statutory provisions. (Ord. 4182, 3-16-2020)
1-29-3: CURFEW AUTHORIZED:
After the Declaration of a Local State of Emergency by the Mayor, he or she
may, by executive order, order a general curfew applicable to such geographical
areas of the city or to the city as a whole, as he or she deems reasonable and
advisable, and applicable during such hours of the day or night as he or she
deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare. (Ord. 4182,
3-16-2020)
1-29-4: ORDERS AUTHORIZED:
After the Declaration of a Local State of Emergency by the Mayor, the Mayor may
also, in the interest of public safety and welfare, and to address the issues
caused threatened by the emergency, may take any or all of the following
actions by executive order during the state of emergency:
   (A)   Order all actions reasonably necessary to respond to the emergency or
as are imminently necessary for the protection of life and property;
   (B)   Approve previously appropriated expenditures of the City of Canton for
the purpose of continuing the operations of the municipality;
   (C)   In the event the local state of emergency extends beyond the current
fiscal year and a new budget has not been approved, the Mayor may approve new
spending by the City of Canton during the existence of the Local State of
Emergency.
   (D)   Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor by any
wholesaler or retailer and/or order the closing of all retail liquor stores,
including taverns and private clubs or portions thereof wherein the consumption
of intoxicating liquor and beer is permitted;
   (E)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, or giving away
gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container
other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle and/or order the
discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or giving away of
explosives or explosive agents, firearms or ammunition of any character
whatsoever;
   (F)   Order the control, restriction and regulation within the city by
rationing, issuing quotas, fixing or freezing prices, allocating the use, sale
or distribution of food, fuel, clothing and other commodities, materials, goods
or services or the necessities of life;
   (G)   Order city employees or agents, on behalf of the city, to take
possession of any real or personal property of any person, or to acquire full
title or such lesser interest as may be necessary to deal with a disaster or
emergency, and to take possession of and for a limited time, occupy and use any
real estate to accomplish alleviation of the disaster, or the effects thereof.
In the event any real or personal property is utilized by the city, the city
shall be liable to the owner thereof for the reasonable value of the use or for
just compensation as the case may be;
   (H)   Order restrictions on ingress or egress to parts of the City to limit
the occupancy of any premises;
   (I)   To make provision for the availability and use of temporary emergency
housing;
   (J)   Temporarily suspend, limit, cancel, convene, reschedule, postpone,
continue, or relocate all meetings of the City Council, and any city committee,
commission, board, authority, or other city body as deemed appropriate by the
Mayor;
   (K)   Require closing of business establishments;
   (L)   Prohibit the sale or distribution within the city of any products
which could be employed in a manner which would constitute a danger to public
safety;
   (M)   Temporarily close any and all streets, alleys, sidewalks, bike paths,
public parks or public ways;
   (N)   Temporarily suspend or modify, for not more than sixty (60) days, any
regulation or ordinance of the city, including, but not limited to, those
regarding health, safety, and zoning. This period may be extended upon approval
of the City Council;
   (O)   Suspend or limit the use of the water resources or other
infrastructure;
   (P)   Control, restrict, allocate, or regulate the use, sale, production, or
distribution of food, water, fuel, clothing, and/or other commodities,
materials, goods, services and resources;
   (Q)   Direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the population from
any stricken or threatened areas within the city if the mayor deems this action
is necessary for the preservation of life, property, or other disaster or
emergency mitigation, response or recovery and to prescribe routes, modes of
transportation and destination in connection with an evacuation;
   (R)   Establish and control routes of transportation, ingress or egress;
   (S)   Control ingress and egress from any designated disaster or emergency
area or home, building or structures located therein;
   (T)   Approve the transfer of personnel or functions of city departments and
agencies for the purpose of performing or facilitating emergency or disaster
services;
   (U)   Accept services, gifts, grants, loans, equipment, supplies, and/or
materials whether from private, nonprofit, or governmental sources;
   (V)   Require the continuation, termination, disconnection, or suspension of
natural gas, electrical power, water, sewer, communication or other public
utilities or infrastructure;
   (W)   Close or cancel the use of any municipally owned or operated building
or other public facility;
   (X)   Approve, and/or direct the City Attorney or Chairman of the Committee
on Negotiation, Grievance and Personnel to adjust, any personnel policies
related to leave time, other benefits or terms and conditions of employment as
are reasonably related to providing sufficient staffing during the term of the
emergency;
   (Y)   Approve, and/or direct the City Attorney or Chairman of the Committee
on Negotiation, grievance and personnel to enter into, such temporary
agreements, including memoranda of understanding, with the city's bargaining
units in order to promote the provision of city services and the health and
safety of the public and employees during the local state of emergency;
   (Z)   Declare, issue, enforce, modify and terminate orders for quarantine
and isolation of persons or animals posing a threat to the public, not
conflicting with the directions of the Illinois Department of Public Health or
Fulton County Health Department, to the extent permitted by law;
   (AA)   Exercise such powers and functions in light of the exigencies of
emergency or disaster including the waiving of compliance with any time
consuming procedures and formalities, including notices, as may be prescribed
by law;
   (BB)   Issue any and all such other orders or undertake such other functions
and activities as the Mayor reasonably believes is required to protect the
health, safety, and welfare of persons or property within the city, including
city employees and personnel, or to otherwise preserve the public peace or
abate, clean up, or mitigate the effects of any emergency or disaster.
   (CC)   Temporarily modify or supplement any ordinances pertaining to public
comment, including, without limitation, Section
1-6-23 of the City Code, in order to provide for appropriate means of Public
Comment during open meetings of the City Council or any city committees/
commissions/boards, provided such modifications or supplementations are in
accordance with Illinois law, regulations, and executive orders. (Ord. 4182, 3-
16-2020; Ord. 4187, 4-7-2020)
1-29-5: DURATION:
The Declaration of Local State of Emergency authorized in this chapter shall be
effective for a period of up to twenty-one (21) days or until the adjournment
of the next regular or special meeting of the City Council, whichever comes
first, unless sooner terminated by a proclamation of the Mayor, or, his or her
interim emergency successor, indicating that the emergency no longer exists.
The Mayor or his or her interim emergency successor, shall have the power to
re-proclaim the existence of an emergency at the end of each twenty-one (21)
day period, or after the adjournment of the next regular or special meeting of
the City Council, during the time said emergency exists. (Ord. 4182, 3-16-2020)
1-29-6: NOTICE:
Upon issuing the written Declaration of Local State of Emergency authorized in
this chapter, the City Clerk shall notify the news media situated within the
city, and shall cause at least four copies of the Declaration of Local State of
Emergency declaring the existence of the emergency and any information
pertaining to a curfew to be posted at the following places within the city: on
the city's website, the Canton City Hall, the police and fire stations, and
somewhere in the area of any curfew (if applicable), such as a public roadway,
public building, or terrace. (Ord. 4182, 3-16-2020)
1-29-7: VIOLATIONS:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or executive orders issued
pursuant hereto shall be guilty of an offense against the city and shall be
punished by a fine of no less than two hundred and fifty and no/100 dollars
($250.00) and no more than seven hundred fifty and no/100 dollars ($750.00).
(Ord. 4182, 3-16-2020)
1-29-8: EFFECT ON OTHER ORDINANCES:
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed to impair the powers
contained in this Code, giving powers to the police and fire departments, but
shall be construed together with existing ordinances now in effect for the
safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. (Ord. 4182, 3-16-2020)
1-29-9: LOCAL, STATE AND FEDERAL ASSISTANCE:
After the Declaration of Local State of Emergency, the Mayor may in the
interest of public safety and welfare take all necessary actions to seek or
otherwise approve any local, state, or federal assistance, as well as any
necessary applications therefor. (Ord. 4182, 3-16-2020)
CHAPTER 30
BUDGET OFFICER AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ADMINISTRATOR
SECTION:
1-30-1:    Office Created, Appointment, Term, And Qualifications
1-30-2: Oath, Bond
1-30-3:    Powers And Duties
1-30-4:    Removal And Resignation
1-30-5:    Compensation; Employment Agreement
1-30-6:    Conflict Of Interest Prohibited
1-30-7:    Assistants
1-30-1: OFFICE CREATED, APPOINTMENT, TERM, AND QUALIFICATIONS:
   (A)   There is hereby created an office of Budget Officer and Economic
Development Administrator. For purposes of this Chapter, the term
"Administrator" shall mean the Budget Officer and Economic Development
Administrator.
   (B)   The Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the city council. The Administrator shall be chosen on the basis of
executive, administrative, and educational qualifications with special emphasis
on the actual experience in, or knowledge of, accepted practice with respect to
the office hereinafter set forth and/or as set forth within any approved job
description for the Administrator. The Administrator shall serve at the
pleasure of the Mayor.
   (C)   The Administrator shall hold the position of budget officer as that
position is described and used in 65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.1 through 65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.10.
(Ord. 4481, 7-1-2025)
1-30-2: OATH; BOND:
Any person filling and discharging the duties of Administrator shall, before
entering upon the duties of such office, take an oath and post a bond as
provided in 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-25. The amount of the bond shall be no less than
the amount of the bond posted by the City Treasurer. (Ord. 4481, 7-1-2025)
1-30-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   (A)   The Administrator shall be responsible to the Mayor for the proper
administration of all the budget affairs of the City. In discharging this
responsibility, the Administrator shall conform to and follow the duties as
prescribed in 65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.1 through 5/8-2-9.10, as amended from time-to-
time, including, but not limited to, the following:
      1.   Permit and encourage and establish the use of efficient planning,
budgeting, auditing, reporting, accounting, and other fiscal management
procedures in all municipal departments, commissions, and boards.
      2.   Compile an annual budget in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.3.
      3.   Examine all books and records of all municipal departments,
commissions, and boards which relate to monies received by the municipality,
municipal departments, commissions, and boards, and paid out by the
municipality, municipal departments, commissions, and boards, debts and
accounts receivable, amounts owed by or to the municipality, municipal
departments, commissions and boards.
      4.   Obtain such additional information from the municipality, municipal
departments, commissions, and boards as may be useful to the budget officer for
purposes of compiling a municipal budget, such information to be furnished by
the municipality, municipal departments, commissions, and boards in the form
required by the budget officer. Any department, commission or board which
refuses to make such information as is requested of it available to the budget
officer shall not be permitted to make expenditures under any subsequent budget
for the municipality until such municipal department, commission, or board
shall comply in full with the request of the budget officer.
      5.   Establish and maintain such procedures as to ensure that no
expenditures are made by the municipality, municipal departments, commissions,
or board except as authorized by the budget.
   (B)   The Administrator shall be responsible to the Mayor for the proper
administration of economic development and community development programs
implemented by the City, including but not limited to the administration of
tax-increment financing (TIF) districts and business development districts
(BDD), by promoting the incentive programs, TIF Districts or BDDs as a tool to
drive economic development in the city, project evaluation and making
recommendations to the City Council for approval of funded projects, financial
tracking, compliance reporting and administration of redevelopment agreements,
and compliance of projects with applicable law.
   (C)   The Administrator shall attend all regular City Council meetings, and
special City Council meetings or committee meetings (if needed), and be
prepared to discuss the financial impact and considerations of all items being
discussed on the relevant agenda.
   (D)   The Administrator shall perform any other duties as directed by the
Mayor from time-to-time. The Mayor and/or City Council may also approve
additional job duties and powers of the Administrator, however, that the
Administrator shall remain obligated to perform the other duties set forth in
this Section. (Ord. 4481, 7-1-2025)
1-30-4: REMOVAL AND RESIGNATION:
The Budget Officer may be suspended without pay or discharged by the mayor in
consultation with the city council in accordance with state statute and
according to the terms and conditions of the employment contract, if any. The
Mayor may impose any other discipline he or she feels is appropriate without
consultation with the city council. The Budget Officer may also resign from the
position upon giving thirty (30) days' prior written notice to the mayor. (Ord.
4481, 7-1-2025)
1-30-5: COMPENSATION; EMPLOYMENT AGREEMENT:
   (A)   The Administrator may receive such compensation as the mayor and city
council shall fix from time to time.
   (B)   The Mayor may, with subsequent ratification by the City Council, enter
into an employment and/or services contract, which specifies in writing the
level of compensation of the Administrator, fringe benefits, including the
level of support for the Administrator's continuing professional education,
agreements for separation pay upon termination of employment (if any), other
appropriate agreements describing the working relationship between the
Administrator and the elected officials and the Mayor and City Council's
performance expectations for the Administrator. This agreement may be reviewed
and revised by mutual agreement of the parties at periodic intervals. (Ord.
4481, 7-1-2025)
1-30-6: CONFLICT OF INTEREST PROHIBITED:
The Administrator shall not derive any personal benefit, directly or
indirectly, from any contractual work or business of the city or from the sale
of any article from the city or from the purchase of property therefrom. (Ord.
4481, 7-1-2025)
1-30-7: ASSISTANTS:
The Mayor shall be allowed to enter into hire or enter into agreements for
assistants, independent contractors, and/or other clerks and subordinate help
as the necessities of the office of Administrator may require, as needed to
assist the Administrator in performing his or her duties, and as the City
Council by ordinance or resolution shall from time to time authorize. (Ord.
4481, 7-1-2025)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
SECTION:
2-1-1: Appointment, Terms Of Office
2-1-2: Qualifications, Oath, Bond, Removal
2-1-3: Fire And Police Departments, Appointment Of Members, Certificates Of
Appointments
2-1-4: Rules, Publications
2-1-5: Examination Of Applicants, Disqualifications, Removal
2-1-6: Fingerprints To Be Furnished
2-1-7: Veteran's Preference
2-1-8: Original Appointments, Preferences, Limitations
2-1-9: Promotional Preferences
2-1-10: Promotional Examinations
2-1-11: Preference, Time For Allowance
2-1-12: Notice Of Examination
2-1-13: Register Of Eligibles
2-1-14: Promotions, Merit, Seniority
2-1-15: Temporary Appointments
2-1-16: Removal Or Discharge, Investigation Of Charges, Retirement
2-1-17: Fire Or Police Departments, Reduction Of Force, Reinstatement
2-1-18: Annual Report, Budget Request
2-1-19: Secretary Of Board, Duties, Seal Of Board
2-1-20: Rooms And Funds For Operation Of Board
2-1-21: Disability Or Military Leave, Grant By Board
2-1-22: Return To Active Duty
2-1-23: Application Of Provisions
2-1-24: Governing Provisions
2-1-1: APPOINTMENT, TERMS OF OFFICE:
The mayor, with the consent of the city council, shall appoint a board of fire
and police commissioners. This board shall consist of three (3) members whose
terms of office shall be three (3) years and until their respective successors
are appointed and have qualified. No such appointment, however, shall be made
by the mayor within thirty (30) days before the expiration of his term of
office. (Ord. 826, 7-1-1980)
2-1-2: QUALIFICATIONS, OATH, BOND, REMOVAL:
The members of the board shall be considered officers of the city and shall
file an oath and a fidelity bond in such amount as may be required from time to
time by the city council of the city.
No person holding a lucrative office under the United States, the state of
Illinois or any political subdivision thereof, or a municipality including the
city, shall be a member of the board of fire and police commissioners or the
secretary thereof. The acceptance of any such lucrative office by a member of
the board shall be treated as a resignation of his office as a member of the
board or the secretary thereof. No person shall be appointed a member of the
board of fire and police commissioners who is related, either by blood or
marriage up to the degree of first cousin, to any elected official of the city.
No more than two (2) members of the board shall belong to the same political
party existing in the city at the time of such appointments. If only one or no
political party exists in the city at the time of such appointments, then state
or national political party affiliations shall be considered in making
appointments. Party affiliation shall be determined by affidavit of the person
appointed as a member of the board.
Members shall not be subject to removal, except for cause, upon written
charges, and after an opportunity to be heard within thirty (30) days in his or
their own defense, before a regular meeting of the city council of the city. A
majority vote of the city council shall be required to remove any such member
from office. (Ord. 826, 7-1-1980)
2-1-3: FIRE AND POLICE DEPARTMENTS, APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS, CERTIFICATES OF
APPOINTMENTS:
The board of fire and police commissioners shall appoint all officers and
members of the fire and police departments, except for the chief of police and
the chief of the fire department. The chief of police and the chief of the fire
department shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the consent and
approval of the city council. The chief of police and the chief of the fire
department may be appointed by the mayor from applicants either within or
outside of the police and fire departments, regardless of occupation or place
of residence. All other appointments to each department other than that of the
lowest rank, however, shall be from the rank next below that to which the
appointment is made.
The sole authority to issue certificates of appointment shall be vested in the
board of fire and police commissioners and all certificates of appointments
issued to any officer or member of the fire or police department of the city
shall be signed by the chairman and secretary respectively of the board of fire
and police commissioners, upon appointment of such officer or member of the
fire and police departments of the city by action of the board of fire and
police commissioners.
The term "policemen" as used in this chapter does not include auxiliary
policemen as provided for in this code 1 . (Ord. 826, 7-1-1980)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 6, chapter 9 of this code.
2-1-4: RULES, PUBLICATIONS:
The board shall make rules: a) to carry out the purpose of this chapter, and b)
for appointments and removals in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. The board, from time to time, may make changes in these rules.
All these rules and changes therein shall be printed immediately for
distribution. The board shall give notice: a) of the places where the printed
rules may be obtained, and b) of the date, not less than ten (10) days
subsequent to the time of publication, when the rules or changes therein shall
go into operation. This notice shall be published in one or more newspapers
published in the city.
These rules of the board shall apply only to the conduct of examinations for
original appointments, for promotions, and to the conduct of hearings on
charges brought against a member of the police or fire department. No such rule
shall be made by the board to govern the operation of the police or fire
department or the conduct of its members unless the city council of the city
specifically authorizes the board of fire and police commissioners to make such
rules; however, the city council may also rescind such authorization. (Ord.
826, 7-1-1980)
2-1-5: EXAMINATION OF APPLICANTS, DISQUALIFICATIONS, REMOVAL:
A fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) shall be charged to each applicant for a
position in either the fire or the police department of the city. The fee is
nonrefundable and is due upon return of the application to the city.
Applications returned without the fee shall not be considered. (Ord. 1771, 9-
16-2003)
All applicants for a position in either the fire or police department of the
city shall be no less than twenty one (21) years and no more than thirty five
(35) years of age at the time of their application, shall be subject to an
examination which shall be public, competitive, and shall be subject to
reasonable limitations as to residence, health, habits and moral character. No
person with a record of misdemeanor convictions except those under sections 11-
6, 11-7, 11-9, 11-14, 11-15, 11-17, 11-18, 11-19, 12-2, 12-5, 12-6, 14-4, 16-1,
21.1-2, 24-3.1, 24-5, 25-1, 28-3, 31-1, 31-4, 31-6, 31-7, 32-1, 32-2, 32-3, 32-
4, 32-8 and subsections 1, 6 and 8 of section 24-1 of the criminal code of 1961
1 , or arrested for any cause but not convicted thereon shall be disqualified
from taking the examination to qualify for a position in the fire department on
grounds of habits or moral character. The foregoing age limitation does not
apply to any person previously employed as a policeman or fireman in a
regularly constituted police or fire department of any municipality or a fire
protection district. The examination shall be practical in character and relate
to those matters which will fairly test the capacity of the persons examined to
discharge the duties of the positions to which they seek appointment. No person
shall be appointed to the police or fire department if he does not possess a
high school diploma or an equivalent high school education. The examinations
shall include tests of physical qualifications and health. No person shall be
appointed to the police or fire department if he has suffered the amputation of
any limb unless the applicant's duties will be only clerical or as a radio
operator. No applicant shall be examined concerning his political or religious
opinions or affiliations. The examination shall be conducted by the board of
fire and police commissioners of the city as herein provided. (Ord. 1796, 5-4-
2004)
No person who is classified by his local selective service draft board as a
conscientious objector, or who has ever been so classified, may be appointed to
the police department. (Ord. 826, 7-1-1980)
No person shall be appointed to the police or fire department unless he or she
is a person of good character and not a habitual drunkard, gambler, or a person
who has been convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude. No
person, however, shall be disqualified from appointment to the fire department
because of his or her record of misdemeanor convictions except those under
sections 11-6, 11-7, 11-9, 11-14, 11-15, 11-17, 11-18, 11-19, 12-2, 12-5, 12-6,
14-4, 16-1, 21.1-2, 24-3.1, 24-5, 25-1, 28-3, 31-1, 31-4, 31-6, 31-7, 32-1, 32-
2, 32-3, 32-4, 32-8 and subsections 1, 6 and 8 of section 24-1 of the criminal
code of 1961, or arrested for any cause without conviction on that cause. Any
such person who is in the department may be removed on charges brought and
after a trial as hereinafter provided.
A false statement knowingly made by a person in an application for examination,
connivance or any false statement made in any certificate which may accompany
such application or complicity in any fraud touching the same, shall be
regarded as good cause for exclusion from the examination. (Language taken from
chapter II, section 2 of the rules and regulations of the board of fire and
police commissioners, Canton, Illinois.) (Ord. 1796, 5-4-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. 720 ILCS.
2-1-6: FINGERPRINTS TO BE FURNISHED:
A classifiable set of the fingerprints of every person who is now employed, or
who hereafter becomes employed, as a full time member of the fire or police
department of the city, whether with or without compensation, shall be
furnished to the Illinois department of law enforcement and to the federal
bureau of investigation by the board of fire and police commissioners. (Ord.
826, 7-1-1980)
2-1-7: VETERAN'S PREFERENCE:
Persons who were engaged in the military or naval service of the United States
for a period of at least one year and who were honorably discharged therefrom,
or who are now or may hereafter be on inactive or reserve duty in such military
or naval service (not including, however, in the case of offices, positions and
places of employment in the police department, persons who were convicted by
court martial of disobedience of orders, where such disobedience consisted in
the refusal to perform military service on the ground of religious or
conscientious objections against war) shall be preferred for appointments to
offices, positions and places of employment in the fire and police departments
of the city. (Ord. 826, 7-1-1980)
2-1-8: ORIGINAL APPOINTMENTS, PREFERENCES, LIMITATIONS:
The board of fire and police commissioners shall give preference for original
appointment to persons designated in section
2-1-7 of this chapter whose names appear on any register of eligibles resulting
from an examination for original entrance in the classified service of the fire
and police departments of the city by adding to the final grade average which
they receive or will receive as the result of any examination held for original
entrance, five (5) points. The numerical result thus attained shall be applied
by the board of fire and police commissioners in determining the position of
such persons on any eligibility list which has been created as the result of
any examination for original entrance for purposes of preference in
certification and appointment from such eligibility list. The board shall
strike off the names of candidates for original appointment after such names
have been on the list for more than two (2) years. (Ord. 826, 7-1-1980)
2-1-9: PROMOTIONAL PREFERENCES:
Every member of the classified service of the fire or police department of the
city coming under the provisions of this chapter who was engaged in a military
or naval service of the United States at any time for a period of one year and
who was honorably discharged therefrom, who is now or who may hereafter be on
inactive or reserve duty in such military or naval service, not including,
however, persons who were convicted by court martial of disobedience of orders
where such disobedience consisted in the refusal to perform military service on
the ground of alleged religious or conscientious objections against war, and
whose name appears on existing promotional eligibility registers or any
promotional eligibility register that may hereafter be created as provided for
by this chapter shall be preferred for promotional appointments of the fire or
police department of the city. (Ord. 826, 7-1-1980)
2-1-10: PROMOTIONAL EXAMINATIONS:
The board of fire and police commissioners shall give preference for
promotional appointment to persons designated in section
2-1-9 of this chapter whose names appear on promotional eligibility registers
by adding to the final grade average which they will receive as a result of any
promotional examination seven-tenths (7/10) of one point for each six (6)
months or fraction thereof of military or naval service not exceeding thirty
(30) months. The numerical result thus attained shall be applied by the board
of fire and police commissioners in determining the position of such persons on
any eligibility list as the result of any promotional examination held for
purposes of preference in certification and appointment from such eligibility
list.
No person shall receive the preference for a promotional appointment granted by
this chapter after he has received one promotion from an eligibility list on
which he was allowed such preference. (Ord. 826, 7-1-1980)
2-1-11: PREFERENCE, TIME FOR ALLOWANCE:
No person entitled to preference or credit for military or naval service shall
be required to claim military credit for service in the armed forces before any
examination held under the provisions of this chapter but such preference shall
be given after the posting or publication of the eligibility list or register
at the request of such person before any certification or appointments are made
from the eligibility register, upon the furnishing of evidence of an honorable
discharge from and proof of such service. (Ord. 826, 7-1-1980)
2-1-12: NOTICE OF EXAMINATION:
Notice of the time and place of every examination shall be given by the board
by a publication at least two (2) weeks preceding the examination in one or
more newspapers published in the city, except on promotional examinations,
notice may be waived in writing by all members of the fire or police
department, for which the promotional examination is to be given. (Ord. 826, 7-
1-1980)
2-1-13: REGISTER OF ELIGIBLES:
The board of fire and police commissioners shall prepare and keep a register of
persons whose general average standing, upon examination, is not less than the
minimum fixed by the rules of the board, and who are otherwise eligible. These
persons shall take rank upon the register as candidates in the order of their
relative excellence as determined by examination, without reference to priority
of time of examination.
Within sixty (60) days after each examination, an eligibility list shall be
posted by the board which shall show the final grades of the candidates without
reference to priority of time of examination and subject to claim for military
credit. Candidates who are eligible for military credit shall make a claim in
writing within ten (10) days after the posting of the eligibility list or such
claim shall be deemed waived. Appointment shall be subject to a final physical
examination.
If a person is placed on an eligibility list and becomes over age before he is
appointed to a police or fire department, he remains eligible for appointment
until the list is abolished pursuant to authorized procedures. Otherwise no
person who has attained the age of thirty six (36) years shall be inducted as a
member of a police department and no person who has attained the age of thirty
five (35) years shall be inducted into the fire department, except as otherwise
provided in this chapter. (Ord. 826, 7-1-1980)
2-1-14: PROMOTIONS, MERIT, SENIORITY:
The board, by its rules, shall provide for promotion in the fire and police
departments on the basis of ascertained merit and seniority in service and
examination, and shall provide in all cases, where it is practicable, that
vacancies shall be filled by promotion. All examinations for promotion shall be
competitive among such members of the next lower rank as desire to submit
themselves to examination. All promotions shall be made from the three (3)
having the highest rating, and where there are less than three (3) names on the
promotional eligible register as originally posted, or remaining thereon after
appointments have been made therefrom, appointments to fill existing vacancies
shall be made from those names or name remaining on the promotional register.
The method of examination and the rules governing examinations for promotion
shall be the same as provided for applicants for original appointment, except
that original appointments only shall be on probation, as provided by the
rules. The board shall strike off the names of candidates for promotional
appointment after they have remained thereon for more than three (3) years,
provided there is no vacancy existing which can be filled from promotional
register. (Ord. 826, 7-1-1980)
2-1-15: TEMPORARY APPOINTMENTS:
In order to prevent a stoppage of public business, to meet extraordinary
exigencies, or to prevent material impairment of either the police or fire
department, the board may make temporary appointments, to remain in force until
regular appointments may be made under the provisions of this chapter, but
never to exceed sixty (60) days. No temporary appointment of any one person
shall be made more than twice in any calendar year. (Ord. 826, 7-1-1980)
2-1-16: REMOVAL OR DISCHARGE, INVESTIGATION OF CHARGES, RETIREMENT:
Except as hereinafter provided, no officer or member of the fire or police
department of the city shall be removed or discharged except for cause, upon
written charges, and after an opportunity to be heard in his own defense. The
chief of the fire department and the chief of the police department may be
removed or discharged by the mayor. In such case, the mayor shall file with the
city council the reasons for such removal or discharge, which removal or
discharge shall not become effective unless confirmed by a majority vote of the
city council, after the chiefs have had an opportunity to be heard in their own
defense. The board of fire and police commissioners shall conduct a fair and
impartial hearing of the charges, to be commenced within thirty (30) days of
the filing thereof, which hearing may be continued from time to time. In case
an officer or member is found guilty, the board may discharge him, or may
suspend him not exceeding thirty (30) days without pay. The board may suspend
any officer or member pending the hearing with or without pay, but not to
exceed thirty (30) days. If the board of fire and police commissioners
determines that the charges are not sustained, the officer or member shall be
reimbursed for all wages withheld, if any. In the conduct of this hearing, each
member of the board shall have power to administer oaths and affirmations and
the board shall have power to secure by its subpoena both the attendance and
testimony of witnesses and the production of books and papers relevant to the
hearing.
The age for retirement of policemen or firemen in the service of the city is
sixty five (65) years. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent
the chief of the fire department or the chief of the police department from
suspending without pay, a member of his department for a period of not more
than five (5) days, but he shall notify the board in writing of such
suspension. Any policeman or fireman so suspended may appeal to the board of
fire and police commissioners for a review of the suspension within twenty four
(24) hours after such suspension, and upon such appeal, the board may sustain
the action of the chief of the department, may reverse it with instructions
that the man receive his pay for the period involved, or may suspend the
officer for an additional period of not more than thirty (30) days or discharge
him, depending upon the facts presented. (Ord. 826, 7-1-1980)
2-1-17: FIRE OR POLICE DEPARTMENTS, REDUCTION OF FORCE, REINSTATEMENT:
When the force of the fire department or of the police department is reduced
and positions displaced or abolished, seniority shall prevail and the officers
and members so reduced in rank or removed from the service of the fire
department or of the police department shall be considered furloughed without
pay.
If any positions which have been vacated because of reduction in forces or
displacement and abolition of positions, are reinstated, such members and
officers of the fire department or of the police department as are furloughed
from the said positions shall be notified by the board by registered mail of
such reinstatement of positions and shall have prior right to such positions if
otherwise qualified, and in all cases seniority shall prevail. Written
application for such reinstated position must be made by the furloughed person
within thirty (30) days after notification as above provided and such person
may be required to submit to examination by physicians of both the board of
fire and police commissioners and the appropriate pension board to determine
his physical fitness. (Ord. 826, 7-1-1980)
2-1-18: ANNUAL REPORT, BUDGET REQUEST:
Annually, on the first Tuesday in May, the board of fire and police
commissioners shall submit to the mayor a report of its activities and of the
rules in force and the practical effect thereof. In this report, the board may
make suggestions which the board believes would result in greater efficiency in
the fire or police department. The board shall also submit an annual budget
request to the city council prior to the end of each fiscal year. The mayor
shall transmit the report to the city council. (Ord. 826, 7-1-1980)
2-1-19: SECRETARY OF BOARD, DUTIES, SEAL OF BOARD:
The board may employ a secretary, or may designate one of its own members to
act as secretary. The secretary: a) shall keep minutes of the board's
proceedings, b) shall be the custodian of all records pertaining to the
business of the board, c) shall keep a record of all examinations held, d)
shall perform all other duties the board prescribes, and e) shall be custodian
of the seal of the board, if one is adopted, and the board is hereby authorized
to adopt an official seal and to prescribe the form thereof by resolution of
the board. (Ord. 826, 7-1-1980)
2-1-20: ROOMS AND FUNDS FOR OPERATION OF BOARD:
The corporate authorities shall provide suitable rooms for the board of fire
and police commissioners, and shall allow reasonable use of the city building
for holding examinations by the board and shall further provide adequate funds
in the annual appropriation ordinance for the operation of the board. (Ord.
826, 7-1-1980)
2-1-21: DISABILITY OR MILITARY LEAVE, GRANT BY BOARD:
A person holding a position in a fire or police department who is injured while
in the performance of his duties and because of such injury is temporarily
unable to continue to perform his duties or who enters the military or naval
service of the United States because of a war in which the United States is a
party belligerent or as required by any act of congress shall, upon written
application to the board, be granted a disability or military leave, as the
case may be. (Ord. 826, 7-1-1980)
2-1-22: RETURN TO ACTIVE DUTY:
A person who has been on disability or military leave granted by the board and
who wishes to return to active duty in his certified position shall be credited
with seniority for the period of such leave and, if otherwise qualified, shall
be reinstated to his certified position at the rank or grade held at the start
of the leave, not more than sixty (60) days after his written request for
reinstatement is filed with the board. Such request shall be filed not more
than thirty (30) days after termination of the disability or military or naval
service. (Ord. 826, 7-1-1980)
2-1-23: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply only to full time firemen and full
time policemen of the city and not to any other personnel of any kind or
description. (Ord. 826, 7-1-1980)
2-1-24: GOVERNING PROVISIONS:
This chapter is subject to the provisions of the "Illinois police training
act", approved August 18, 1965, and the provisions of the "Illinois fire
protection training act" 1 , certified November 9, 1971. (Ord. 826, 7-1-1980)
 
Notes
1 1. 770 ILCS 70/1.
CHAPTER 2
RECORDING SECRETARY
SECTION:
2-2-1: Appointment; Compensation
2-2-2: Duties
2-2-3: Not A Commission, Committee Or Board Member
2-2-1: APPOINTMENT; COMPENSATION:
The recording secretary shall be appointed, and an award of comp time or
overtime benefits may be established and approved by the mayor with consent of
the city council at the first meeting in May beginning the fiscal year. (Ord.
1800, 5-18-2004)
2-2-2: DUTIES:
The recording secretary shall:
   (A)   Keep minutes of the meetings of the various commissions, committees or
boards.
   (B)   Receive and retain the administrative paperwork of the commission,
committee or board. (Ord. 1800, 5-18-2004)
2-2-3: NOT A COMMISSION, COMMITTEE OR BOARD MEMBER:
The recording secretary shall not be deemed a member of the commission,
committee or board and shall not have the rights, duties and responsibilities
of any member of the commission, committee or board. (Ord. 1800, 5-18-2004)
CHAPTER 3
PLANNING COMMISSION 1
(Rep. by Ord. 567, 11-1976)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  10-17-6 of this code.
CHAPTER 4
BOARD OF HEALTH
SECTION:
2-4-1: Board Established; Members
2-4-2: President Of Board
2-4-3: Meetings
2-4-4: Duties
2-4-5: Reports, Recommendations
2-4-6: Powers
2-4-7: Penalty
2-4-1: BOARD ESTABLISHED; MEMBERS:
There is hereby established a department of the municipal government of the
city to be known as the board of health, which shall consist of a health
commissioner, who shall be a practicing physician in good standing in his
profession, a police officer who shall be designated sanitary policeman, and
one competent citizen who shall be president of the board; said members of the
board of health shall be appointed by the mayor by and with the advice and
consent of the council, and shall hold office for the term of one year and
until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. (Ord. 48, 10-17-1961)
2-4-2: PRESIDENT OF BOARD:
The president of the board shall preside at all meetings, which shall be held
in the city building, and the city clerk shall be ex officio secretary of said
board. The health commissioner shall be executive officer of the board of
health, and he shall have power to exercise the powers of said board when not
in session. (Ord. 48, 10-17-1961)
2-4-3: MEETINGS:
Said board of health shall meet once each month in the city building of Canton,
at such a date as they shall fix, and at such other times as shall be necessary
to properly carry on the duties of their office. (Ord. 48, 10-17-1961)
2-4-4: DUTIES:
The board of health shall enforce all provisions of this code regarding the
protection of the public health; and shall make inspections of foodstuff and of
the premises used for storing or selling of provisions as may be provided by
ordinance. (Ord. 48, 10-17-1961)
2-4-5: REPORTS, RECOMMENDATIONS:
The president of the board of health shall make reports to the council as from
time to time shall be necessary; and he shall also make recommendations for
rulings, orders or ordinances respecting the public health whenever he is
requested to do so, or whenever he deems it advisable or necessary. (Ord. 48,
10-17-1961)
2-4-6: POWERS:
The board of health shall have powers and perform the duties assigned to it by
statute or ordinance and make all rules and regulations for the protection of
the health of the city and to guard against the spread of contagious diseases
and to prevent by necessary rules any induction of diseases, contagious or
otherwise, within the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 48, 10-17-1961)
2-4-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating or refusing to obey any order of the board of health or
destroying or mutilating or concealing any notice posted by or under the
authority of the board of health shall be fined not less than one dollar
($1.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 48, 10-17-1961)
CHAPTER 5
CANTON BETTERMENT COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-5-1: Creation
2-5-2: Composition
2-5-3: Purposes
2-5-4: Duties
2-5-5: Powers
2-5-6: Internal Organization
2-5-7: Expectancy
2-5-1: CREATION:
A commission of this city is hereby created and established which shall be
known as the "Canton betterment commission". The composition, purposes, duties,
powers, internal organization and expectancy of this commission are as
hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 282, 10-21-1969)
2-5-2: COMPOSITION:
The Canton betterment commission shall be composed of not more than twelve (12)
adult members of the city who shall serve without pay, eight (8) of whom shall
be appointed two (2) each from and for each ward and four (4) of whom shall be
appointed from and within the city at large. Insofar as practicable,
appointments to and composition of the Canton betterment commission shall
comprise an equal number of men and women. The manner of appointment and terms
of office shall be as hereinafter set forth.
   (A)   Manner Of Appointment And Terms Of Office: Members of the commission
shall be nominated and appointed by the mayor from each ward after consultation
with and the approval of the two (2) aldermen of each respective ward and
subject to the approval and confirmation of the city council. Members of the
commission shall be nominated and appointed by the mayor from and within the
city at large subject to the approval and confirmation of the city council. All
persons hereafter appointed to the commission shall serve for a term of four
(4) years computed from the first Tuesday in the month of May which has or will
occur closest to the time of appointment. No person may serve for more than
four (4) consecutive terms and membership to the commission shall be
automatically forfeited by any member who, for personal reasons other than
illness, shall have been absent from three (3) consecutive meetings of the
commission. (Ord. 723, 6-19-1979)
   (B)   Initial Appointee: This term has reference to those members of the
commission first appointed thereto in implementation hereof. The terms of
office of such members shall be as follows: The term of office for one such
member from each ward shall be from the time of his appointment to the first
Tuesday of May, 1972; the term of office for the other such member from each
ward shall be from the time of his appointment to the first Tuesday of May,
1973. The term of office for each initial appointee shall be designated by the
mayor and approved and confirmed by the council at the time of appointment to
membership to the commission. (Ord. 282, 10-21-1969)
2-5-3: PURPOSES:
The purpose of the Canton betterment commission is to further the enhancement
and betterment of the city and contiguous area in the premises set forth and
suggestive in the recitals hereto. (Ord. 282, 10-21-1969)
2-5-4: DUTIES:
The Canton betterment commission shall meet not less than once each month, with
the exception of the month of July and August, of each year in implementation
of the purposes of its creation. All meetings shall be public, shall have a
stated purpose, shall be held after public notice as to time and place and
pursuant to such other reasonable rules as the commission itself shall make.
Meetings of any subcommittees of the commission may be at convenience and
without condition; provided, however, that subsequent report of its acts,
doings, recommendations and suggestions in the premises of its creation to the
mayor and city council not less than twice annually and at a regular meeting of
the council in the months of November and May of each year. In furtherance of
the generality of its purpose the commission shall: (Ord. 282, 10-21-1969; amd.
Ord. 443, 10-16-1973)
   (A)   At all times concern itself with the beautification and cleanliness of
the city, both with respect to private as well as public property.
   (B)   At all times concern itself with and accept reasonable assignments in
the premises of its creation from the mayor and council.
   (C)   At all times engage in some affirmative program of its own initiative
in furtherance in the premises of its creation.
   (D)   At all times stand ready to meet with individual citizens, groups of
citizens, and recognized organizations in and of the city for the purpose of
implementing the premises of its creation. (Ord. 282, 10-21-1969)
2-5-5: POWERS:
The Canton betterment commission shall have no legal powers or force with which
to implement the premises of its creation. The Canton betterment commission
shall rely for such implementation only on power of persuasion, reason,
constructive programs and goals, and kindly and helpful concern for fellow
citizens of the city, both individually and collectively. (Ord. 282, 10-21-
1969)
2-5-6: INTERNAL ORGANIZATION:
The said commission at its organizational meeting and prior to the transaction
of any other business, shall elect a chairman and a secretary from among its
membership, each of whom shall serve for a two (2) year term and who may not
succeed themselves; thereafter, a chairman and secretary shall be elected for
one year terms and may not succeed themselves. Each secretary shall keep
minutes of each meeting of the Canton betterment commission in a book provided
for that sole purpose so that a continuous and complete record thereof is kept
and the minutes so kept shall be made available to any citizen of the city.
In addition to the foregoing, but not inconsistent therewith, the Canton
betterment commission shall provide, in writing filed with the clerk, for other
matters concerning its internal organization and with respect to its officers,
their nomination and election; the composition of any of its standing
committees, its rules of order; its meetings (but not inconsistent herewith);
and for such other matters of like nature. (Ord. 282, 10-21-1969)
2-5-7: EXPECTANCY:
The mayor and council of the city, representatives of all of the citizens of
the city, and in their interests, have reposed faith and confidence in the
Canton betterment commission and in the individual members thereof in the
premises hereof. (Ord. 282, 10-21-1969)
CHAPTER 6
YOUTH GUIDANCE COUNCIL
SECTION:
2-6-1: Council Created; Members
2-6-2: Purpose
2-6-3: Appointments To Board
2-6-4: Terms Of Members
2-6-5: Duties Of Board
2-6-6: Ex Officio Members
2-6-7: Annual Report
2-6-1: COUNCIL CREATED; MEMBERS:
There shall be created the Canton youth guidance council consisting of ten (10)
board members who are residents of the city of Canton, Fulton County, Illinois,
and who over the years have shown a special, vital and public spirited interest
in youth leadership and youth problems. (Ord. 439, 10-2-1973)
2-6-2: PURPOSE:
The over purpose of said council shall be to encourage the continuing
betterment of opportunities for the wholesome development of the youth in the
city of Canton. (Ord. 439, 10-2-1973)
2-6-3: APPOINTMENTS TO BOARD:
The board members of said council shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to
approval by the city council of the city of Canton. In making appointments to
fill vacancies the mayor shall first consider recommendations made by the
Canton youth guidance council. Initial appointments of board members shall be
made by the mayor subject to approval of the council and shall be made
forthwith following the passage of this chapter. In the month of March each
year hereafter succeeding the board of the Canton youth council shall make its
recommendations for appointments to fill any vacancies about to occur by reason
of the expiration of terms, and all appointments so made shall become effective
on the first Tuesday in May next following such appointments. Vacancies which
may occur by reason of death or resignation may be filled by appointment of the
mayor after recommendation by the board of the Canton youth guidance council,
but said recommendations to fill such vacancies shall be made at least one
month prior to said appointment to fill such vacancies. (Ord. 439, 10-2-1973)
2-6-4: TERMS OF MEMBERS:
The terms of the members of the board of Canton youth guidance council shall be
for three (3) years except for the terms of the initial appointees which shall
be assigned so that the terms of four (4) members shall commence from the time
of their appointment and end on the first Tuesday of May, 1977; and, so that
the terms of three (3) members shall commence from the time of their
appointment and end on the first Tuesday of May, 1976; and so that the terms of
three (3) members shall commence from the time of their appointment and end on
the first Tuesday of May, 1975. (Ord. 439, 10-2-1973)
2-6-5: DUTIES OF BOARD:
The board of the Canton youth guidance council shall:
   (A)   Assist in coordinating and integrating governmental and private plans
and services affecting the welfare of children and youth in the city of Canton.
   (B)   Assist in coordinating and integrating all plans and services for
protecting children from exposure to harmful influences and conditions
conductive to delinquency.
   (C)   Make or cause to be made studies and surveys related to juvenile
behavior or in the interest of youth guidance.
   (D)   Request and obtain such cooperation, assistance and data from city
departments and agencies as may be reasonably necessary to carry out its work.
   (E)   Recommend plans and methods for the improvement of opportunities for
the wholesome development of youth in the city of Canton.
   (F)   Create subcommittees, composed of members or nonmembers of said
council, to aid and assist in the work of the council.
   (G)   Create a special subcommittee consisting of persons qualified by
experience and training to provide guidance and counsel to children referred to
it by the police department, the family court, the schools or any social
agency. (Ord. 439, 10-2-1973)
2-6-6: EX OFFICIO MEMBERS:
The mayor and chief of police of the city of Canton shall be ex officio members
of the board of the Canton youth guidance council. (Ord. 439, 10-2-1973)
2-6-7: ANNUAL REPORT:
In March of each year, the Canton youth guidance council shall prepare and
submit to the mayor and city council of the city of Canton a summary report of
its operations, studies, meetings held and attendance of members during the
preceding fiscal year, along with a statement of projected plans for the
subsequent fiscal year. The council shall keep a written record of its
proceedings which shall be available for public inspection. (Ord. 439, 10-2-
1973)
CHAPTER 7
SENIOR CITIZENS' COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-7-1: Creation
2-7-2: Composition; Appointment Of Members; Salary; Terms
2-7-3: Purpose; Function
2-7-4: Budget
2-7-1: CREATION:
There is hereby created a commission which shall be known as the "senior
citizens' commission of Canton, Illinois". (Ord. 442, 10-16-1973)
2-7-2: COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS; SALARY; TERMS:
The Canton senior citizens' commission created by section
2-7-1 of this chapter shall consist of fifteen (15) persons appointed by the
mayor to serve without salary for four (4) year terms, except that of such
members first appointed, six (6) shall hold office for one year; three (3) for
two (2) years; three (3) for three (3) years; and three (3) for four (4) years;
and until their respective successors are duly appointed and qualified.
Commission members shall be broadly representative of the community and shall
be individuals who, by background, experience, training, profession, and/or
age, shall have special interest and knowledge in the affairs and needs of
persons sixty (60) years or older.
The chairman of the commission shall be elected from and by the commission
members for a term of one calendar year. The commission shall have the power to
establish bylaws and rules in conformity with the authority granted herein or
by statute, including the authority to elect or appoint such other officers as
the commission deems necessary; but the chairman of the commission or any such
officer appointed or elected by the commission, may be removed at any time by a
majority of votes of the duly appointed members of the commission. (Ord. 442,
10-16-1973)
2-7-3: PURPOSE; FUNCTION:
The purpose of the senior citizens' commission of Canton shall be to coordinate
the activities of public and private groups involving the affairs of persons
sixty (60) years of age or older to the end that there shall be: a) adequate
community and individual activities stimulating and maintaining the interests
of senior citizens; b) adequate public and private services maintaining and
improving the health and welfare of senior citizens; and c) adequate
dissemination of information concerning the interests, problems and affairs of
senior citizens.
It shall also be the purpose of the senior citizens' commission of Canton to
advise the city council of the city of Canton as to how senior citizens could
assist and promote good works in the community. (Ord. 442, 10-16-1973)
2-7-4: BUDGET:
The commission shall operate under such budget, if any, as may from time to
time be established by the annual appropriation ordinance of the city of Canton
but any expenditures therefrom, including employee salaries, shall be made only
upon approval of the mayor and accordance with ordinance and statutory
requirements. (Ord. 442, 10-16-1973)
CHAPTER 8
CONSERVATION BOARD
SECTION:
2-8-1: Board Created
2-8-2: Urban Community Development Act, Imposed And Granted
2-8-1: BOARD CREATED:
The city shall create a "conservation board", to operate within the boundaries
of this city, pursuant to the provision of the urban community conservation act
1  of the state of Illinois and that the members thereof shall hereafter be
named by formal resolution of this city after determination of them made in
conformity with law and the provisions of said act. (Ord. 543, 5-4-1976)
 
Notes
1 1. 315 ILCS 25/1.
2-8-2: URBAN COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ACT, IMPOSED AND GRANTED:
Said conservation board, as by said resolution determined, shall proceed in the
premises of said act and in exercise of the duties and powers thereby imposed
and granted. (Ord. 543, 5-4-1976)
CHAPTER 9
HISTORICAL PRESERVATION COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-9-1: Title
2-9-2: Purpose And Scope
2-9-3: Definitions
2-9-4: Creation And Composition Of Historical Commission
2-9-5: Powers And Duties Of The Commission
2-9-6: Duties Concerning Historic Preservation Districts
2-9-7: Landmark Designation
2-9-8: Historic Preservation District Designation
2-9-9: Procedures And Guidelines For Actions Of The Historic Commission
2-9-10: Enforcement And Penalties For Violation
2-9-11: Relation To Other Ordinances
2-9-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known, referred to and cited as the HISTORIC PRESERVATION
ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF CANTON. (Ord. 1192, 5-3-1988)
2-9-2: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a mechanism whereby landmarks and
districts in the city identified as having historical and/or architectural
significance may be identified and enjoyed in a suitable harmonious environment
through voluntary compliance; and, to promote the educational, cultural,
economic and general welfare of the community by:
   (A)   Protecting, enhancing and perpetuating the distinctive historical and/
or architectural characteristics of Canton, which represents elements of the
city's cultural, social, economic, political and architectural history;
   (B)   Fostering civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the
past as represented in Canton landmarks and historic districts;
   (C)   Stabilizing and improving property values of Canton's landmarks and
historic districts;
   (D)   Protecting and enhancing the city's attractiveness to tourists and
visitors and the support of business and industry thereby provided. (Ord. 1192,
5-3-1988)
2-9-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words, phrases and terms shall be
construed as set out in this section.
ALTERATION: Any act or process which changes one or more of the exterior
architectural features of a building or structure designated for voluntary
preservation.
ARCHITECTURAL SIGNIFICANCE:
   (A)   The building(s) or structure(s) is the work of or associated with a
nationally or locally noted architect, builder or architectural firm.
   (B)   The building(s) or structure(s) is an example of a particular style
(whether local or typical) in terms of detail, material, workmanship, and with
no negligible alteration to the original structure.
   (C)   The building(s) or structure(s) is one of the few remaining examples
of a particular style, use or an example which does not clearly represent a
major style and has undergone little or no alteration since its construction.
   (D)   The building(s) or structure(s) is one of a contiguous grouping of
such which have a sense of cohesiveness expressed through a similarity of
characteristics of a style, period or method of construction and accenting the
architectural significance of the area.
   (E)   The detail, material and workmanship can be valued in of themselves as
reflective of or similar to those of the majority of the other visual elements
in the area.
BUILDING: A structure created to shelter any form of human activity such as a
house, barn, church, hotel or similar structure. Building may refer to a
historically related complex such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS: A certificate from the commission approving
plans for alterations, construction, removal or demolition of an improvement(s)
within its jurisdiction as defined by the ordinance.
COMMISSION: Canton historical preservation and development commission.
COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Canton, Illinois.
DEMOLITION: Any act or process which destroys in part or in whole a building,
structure or object.
DESIGN CRITERIA: A standard of appropriate activity that will preserve the
historical and architectural character of the building, structure, object or
area.
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL APPEARANCE: Includes the architectural character,
general composition and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or
structure, including the kind and texture of the building material and the type
and character of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs and appurtenant
elements visible from public streets and thoroughfares.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION DISTRICT: Any area which:
   (A)   Contains improvements which:
      1.   Have a significant historical and/or architectural character; and
      2.   Constitute a distinct section of the city; and
   (B)   Has been designated a historic preservation district in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter.
HISTORICAL SIGNIFICANCE: (A) The building(s) has a strong association with the
life or activities of a person or persons who have significantly contributed to
or participated in the historic events of the nation, state or community.
   (B)   The building(s) and/or structure(s) is associated with an organization
or group (whether formal or informal) from which they have significantly
contributed to or participated in the historic events of the nation, state or
community.
   (C)   The building(s) or structures(s) or object(s) is associated with an
antiquated use due to technological or social changes in the nation, state or
community such as, but not limited to, a blacksmith shop, covered bridge and
hitching post.
   (D)   The object(s) is a monument to or a cemetery of historic personages.
IMPROVEMENT: Any building, structure, object, parking facility, fence, gate,
wall, work of art or other object constituting a physical betterment of real
property, or part of such betterment.
LANDMARK: Any improvement which has special character or special historical
and/or architectural interest or value as part of the development, heritage or
cultural characteristics of the city, state or the nation which has been
designated as a landmark in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
OBJECT: A material thing of functional, architectural, cultural, historical or
scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a
specific setting or environment.
STRUCTURE: A work made up of interdependent and interrelated parts in a
definite pattern of organization. Constructed by man, it is often an
engineering project large in scale. (Ord. 1192, 5-3-1988)
2-9-4: CREATION AND COMPOSITION OF HISTORICAL COMMISSION:
   (A)   Creation, Appointment: There is hereby created a historical
preservation commission which shall consist of twelve (12) voting members and
any number of advisory members, all of whom shall be residents of the city or
own real estate therein. The mayor shall appoint, subject to council approval,
the members of the historic commission for terms of two (2) years. Members may
serve for more than one term.
   (B)   Organization: The commission shall elect from its membership a
chairperson and a vice chairperson who shall serve for terms of one year and
who shall be eligible for reelection. The chairperson shall preside over
meetings. In the absence of the chairperson, the vice chairperson shall perform
the duties of the chairperson.
   (C)   Quorum: A quorum shall consist of a majority of the voting membership.
All recommendations to the city council shall be made by a majority vote of
those members present at any meeting where a quorum exists.
   (D)   Meetings: Meetings shall be held at regularly scheduled times in the
city or at the call of the chairperson. Proceedings of each meeting shall be
recorded by the secretary of the commission who shall be appointed by the
chairperson of the commission with the approval of the commission. (Ord. 1192,
5-3-1988)
2-9-5: POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION:
   (A)   The commission shall have three (3) categories of duties and powers:
the first dealing with general activities involving landmark and historic
preservation district identification; the second dealing specifically with
landmarks; and the third dealing with historic preservation districts.
   (B)   Landmarks and historical preservation district identification.
   (C)   Standards and criteria for identification of landmarks and historic
preservation districts shall be derived from the characteristics of historical
significance and/or architectural significance in the building, structure,
object and/or area.
   (D)   The commission shall conduct within the corporate limits of the city
and the immediate surrounding area, a survey from which all buildings and
structures shall be classified and designated on a historical and architectural
building map to be reviewed and approved by the city council and made part of a
series of official maps. Such buildings and structures shall be divided into
three (3) categories, the first two (2) of which are not mutually exclusive:
      1.   Historically significant;
      2.   Architecturally significant;
      3.   Noncompatible (a building(s), structure(s) or object(s) which has no
historical and architectural significance).
   (E)   The office of the city clerk will be the depository for all maps and
reports created by and for the historic commission. This historic preservation
material shall be available to the public.
   (F)   The commission shall work for the continuing education of the city
with respect to the historical and architectural heritage of the city and the
landmarks and historic preservation districts designated under the provisions
of this chapter. It shall keep current and publish a register of landmarks and
historic preservation districts.
   (G)   Concerning landmarks:
      1.   The commission shall keep a register of all buildings, structures
and objects within the corporate limits and immediate surrounding area of the
city which have been designated a landmark as set forth by procedures in this
chapter. This register will include the information required for each landmark
designation and appropriate maps.
      2.   The commission shall hold public hearings and make subsequent
recommendations to the city council on applications for improvements to be
designated as landmarks within the corporate limits of the city. Designation is
subject to the guidelines and procedures set forth by this chapter.
      3.   The commission shall hold public hearings and make recommendations
to the city council on all matters relating to certificates of appropriateness
concerning landmarks under its jurisdiction subject to the standards set forth
in this chapter.
      4.   The commission shall act as a resource consultant for owners of
designated landmarks. The commission will keep a file of architects,
historians, preservationists and restorationists concerned with historic
preservation. (Ord. 1192, 5-3-1988)
2-9-6: DUTIES CONCERNING HISTORIC PRESERVATION DISTRICTS:
   (A)   The commission shall hold public hearings and make subsequent
recommendations to the city council on petitions for areas within the corporate
limits of the city to be designated as historic preservation districts, subject
to the guidelines and procedures set forth by this chapter.
   (B)   The commission shall keep a register of all areas within the corporate
limits of the city which have been designated as historic preservation
districts as set forth by the guidelines and procedures in this chapter. This
register will include all information and reports required for district
designation.
   (C)   The commission, together with the city engineer and the petition,
shall establish a design criteria for said district as a guide to evaluate
applications for certificates of appropriateness. These criteria may vary
depending on the character of each historic preservation district.
   (D)   The commission, when dealing with certificates of appropriateness in
historic preservation districts, shall:
      1.   Review all applications for certificates of appropriateness
according to the design criteria for that district; then
      2.   Hold public hearings; then
      3.   Make recommendations to the city council on all matters relating to
the applications for certificates of appropriateness subject to the guidelines
and procedures set forth in this chapter.
   (E)   The commission shall assist citizens interested in historic
preservation districts by:
      1.   Maintaining a file of available architects, historians,
preservationists and restorationists;
      2.   Assisting in the preparation of applications for state and/or
federal historic preservation grants;
      3.   Providing information concerning the designation procedure of local
historic preservation districts;
      4.   Assisting in the preparation of information necessary for
designation;
      5.   Assisting in preparation for certificates of appropriateness. Any
assistance is subject to the guidelines and procedures set forth by this
chapter. (Ord. 1192, 5-3-1988)
2-9-7: LANDMARK DESIGNATION:
There are hereby created criteria and procedures for the designation of
landmark(s) within the corporate limits of the city. Designation of a landmark
is subject to the guidelines and procedures as set forth in this chapter.
   (A)   Criteria For Landmark Designation: The following criteria shall be
utilized by the historic commission in determining the designation of
landmarks:
      1.   Historical significance; or
      2.   Architectural significance; and
      3.   Economic and functional potentials (the economic and functional
potentials of the improvement are to be considered); and
      4.   Other qualities and characteristics (such other qualities and
characteristics as in the judgment of the commission shall be considered for
the designation of a landmark).
   (B)   Procedures For Designation Of Landmarks:
      1.   Application: Any person, group of persons or association may request
a historic landmark designation for any improvement within the corporate limits
of the city which may have historic or architectural significance as set forth
in subsection
2-9-5(C) of this chapter. The secretary of the commission shall supply, upon
request, the application forms. Completed forms shall be submitted to the
secretary of the commission.
      2.   Notification; Consent: The commission shall thereafter notify the
owner of such real property of the proposed designation. In the event that said
owner shall refuse or decline to give his or her written consent to the
proposed designation, the commission shall require a petition be submitted with
a minimum of twenty five (25) signatures of real property owners or residents
of the city.
      3.   Public Hearing: Upon receipt of said application or petition, the
secretary of the commission shall schedule a public hearing, to be held within
thirty (30) days from the receipt of said application or petition, on the
question of proposed designation, setting forth a date, time and place and
causing written notice to be given to the owner or any person having legal or
equitable interest in said property being proposed for designation (not
including people with a leasehold interest). The commission shall cause a legal
notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city
setting forth the nature of the hearing, the property involved and the date,
time and place of the scheduled meeting. Notice by publication shall be not
more than thirty (30) nor less than ten (10) days prior to the scheduled
hearing.
      4.   Review And Evaluation: During the public hearing, the commission
shall review and evaluate the application or petition according to the criteria
established in subsection (A) of this section.
      5.   Preparation Of Recommendation: Following the public hearing, the
secretary of the commission shall prepare the commission's evaluation,
recommendation and all available information for submission to the city
council.
      6.   Submission Of Recommendation: At the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the city council following the public hearing, the chairperson of
the commission shall submit in writing the commission's evaluation,
recommendation and all available information to the city clerk.
      7.   Decision; Reapplication: A simple majority vote by the corporate
authorities is necessary for the approval of a landmark designation. If the
corporate authorities approve the application or petition for designation, a
notice will be sent to the property owner and recorded with the county recorder
of deeds. If the corporate authorities deny the petition or application, no
petitioner or applicant can file for ninety (90) days to the secretary of the
commission as to the same property.
   (C)   Consideration Period: The consideration period on proposed landmark(s)
shall commence at the time of submission of the application to secretary of the
commission and continue until the final decision of the corporate authorities.
(Ord. 1192, 5-3-1988)
2-9-8: HISTORIC PRESERVATION DISTRICT DESIGNATION:
There are hereby created criteria and procedures for the designation of
historic preservation district(s) within the corporate limits of the city.
Designation of a historic district is subject to the procedures and guidelines
as set forth in this chapter.
   (A)   Criteria For Historic Preservation Designation: The following criteria
shall be utilized by the commission in determining the designation of historic
preservation districts:
      1.   Historical significance;
      2.   Architectural significance; and
      3.   Boundaries (clear and distinct demarcations which give the area an
identifiable beginning and ending); and
      4.   Unity (some architectural or land use characteristics that are
repeated throughout the area in a manner that distinguishes that area from the
rest of the city); and
      5.   Economic and functional potentials (the economic and functional
potentials of the area are to be considered); and
      6.   Other qualities and characteristics (such other qualities and
characteristics as in the judgment of the commission shall be considered for
the designation of a historic preservation district).
   (B)   Procedure For Designation Of A Historic Preservation District:
      1.   Petition For Designation: Any person, group of persons or
association may request the designation of a historic preservation district by
submitting to the secretary of the commission a petition for designation. This
petition must include the following:
         (a)   The signatures of the owners of not less than sixty six and two-
thirds percent (662/3%) of all tracts located within the boundaries of the
proposed district in favor of designation;
         (b)   A map delineating the proposed boundaries;
         (c)   A visual presentation of the significant improvements contained
in the area proposed for designation;
         (d)   A written statement of significance setting forth the character
of the area and reasons the proposed area should be designated a historic
preservation district.
      2.   Notification; Procedure: Upon the receipt of this petition, the
secretary of the historic commission shall:
         (a)   Notify the commission of the need for a preliminary conference
prior to a public hearing. The preliminary conference shall be held at the next
regular meeting of the commission; and
         (b)   Notify the park district, planning and zoning commission and the
department of public works of the city to separately review the area under
consideration, in a manner they see fit, to assess any current proposals for
that area by their respective departments. The reviews shall be sent to the
commission prior to the public hearing under subsection (B)4 of this section;
and
         (c)   Notify the building official to post a sign or signs on the
premises for which a petition for a historic preservation district is requested
not less than ten (10) days before the public hearing called, giving notice of
the proposed designation and the time, date and place of the hearing thereof.
      3.   Preliminary Conference: At a preliminary conference prior to the
public hearing, the petitioner(s) and a committee of members of the commission
appointed by the chairperson of the commission shall work together to prepare
the following information for the public hearing:
         (a)   All information requested for the original petition in
subsection (B)1 of this section.
         (b)   Maps and photographs of structures, sites or improvements within
the designated area including information as to age, condition and use of each.
         (c)   Design criteria established for said district which will provide
a guide for evaluating applications for certificates of appropriateness within
the district. These criteria will vary depending on the character of each
historic preservation district.
         (d)   Legal description of the district.
      4.   Public Hearing: Upon the completion of the preliminary conference,
the secretary of the commission shall schedule a public hearing to be held
within thirty (30) days from the completion of the preliminary conference, on
the question of proposed designation, setting forth a date, time and place and
causing written notice to be given to the owners or any person(s) having a
legal or equitable interest in said property being proposed for designation
(not including people having a leasehold interest). The commission shall cause
a legal notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the
city setting forth the nature of the hearing, the property involved and the
date, time and place of the scheduled meeting. All notices hereunder shall be
mailed or published not more than thirty (30) nor less than ten (10) days prior
to the public hearing.
      5.   Review And Evaluation: During the public hearing the commission
shall review and evaluate all departmental reviews and the information in this
subsection (B) according to the criteria established in subsection (A) of this
section.
      6.   Preparation Of Recommendation: Following the public hearing, the
secretary of the commission shall prepare the commission's evaluation,
recommendation and all available information for submission to the city
council.
      7.   Submission Of Recommendation: At the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the city council following the public hearing, the chairperson of
the commission shall submit in writing the commission's evaluation,
recommendation and all available information to the city clerk.
      8.   Decision; Reapplication: The corporate authorities may approve all
or part of the area requested for designation, make boundary revisions or deny
the petition. A simple majority vote by the corporate authorities is necessary
for approval of designation. If the corporate authorities approve the petition
for designation, a notice will be sent to all property owners in the district,
and recorded with the county recorder of deeds. If the corporate authorities
deny the petition, no petitioner or applicant can file for ninety (90) days to
the secretary of the commission as to the same area.
      9.   Consideration Period: The consideration period on proposed historic
preservation districts(s) shall commence at the submission of the petition to
the secretary of the commission and continue until the city council decision.
(Ord. 1192, 5-3-1988)
2-9-9: PROCEDURES AND GUIDELINES FOR ACTIONS OF THE HISTORIC COMMISSION:
   (A)   Certificate Of Appropriateness: A certificate of appropriateness,
issued by the commission, shall be required before a landmark or any
improvement within a historic preservation district, visible from a public way,
is:
      1.   Changed or modified;
      2.   Reconstructed;
      3.   Erected, wholly or in part;
      4.   Moved;
      5.   Demolished, wholly or in part.
Exterior paint schemes, storm doors, storm windows, screens, window air
conditioners, antennas, and similar cosmetic items are not subject to a
certificate of appropriateness.
   (B)   Commencement: No individual group, organization or city department
shall commence such action in subsections (A) through (E) of this section
without first obtaining a certificate of appropriateness.
   (C)   Other Permits Not Required: A certificate of appropriateness shall be
required for any of the actions listed in subsections (A) through (E) of this
section even when the action does not require a building or demolition permit.
   (D)   Certificate Required To Obtain Other Permits: No building or
demolition permit shall be issued for work visible from a public way on any
landmark or within the boundaries of a district unless a certificate of
appropriateness has been issued for same work.
   (E)   Exception: Notwithstanding, a certificate of appropriateness shall be
issued or waived if the applicant shows to the commission that a failure to
grant the permit will cause an imminent threat to life, health or property.
   (F)   Application: The application for the certificate of appropriateness,
available from the building official and returned to the same, shall include
the following information:
      1.   Street address of property involved;
      2.   Legal description of property involved;
      3.   Brief description of the existing improvements situated on the
property;
      4.   Detailed description of the construction, alteration, demolition or
use proposed together with any architectural drawings or sketches if these
services have been utilized by the applicant; and if not, a sufficient
description of the construction, alteration, demolition and use to enable
anyone to determine what the final appearance of the real estate will be;
      5.   Owner;
      6.   Developer, if different from owner;
      7.   Architect, if utilized or retained;
      8.   Each application shall be accompanied by such sketches, drawings,
photographs, descriptions or other information not to exceed the size of eight
and one-half inches by fourteen inches (81/2" x 14"), as may be reasonably
required by the commission to make a decision.
   (G)   Submission Of Application: The building official shall, within five
(5) working days, submit copies of the completed application for a certificate
of appropriateness to the city engineer and the secretary of the commission.
   (H)   Review: The application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be
reviewed at the next meeting of the commission following its receipt by the
secretary of the commission from the building official.
   (I)   Current List Of Landmarks: The secretary of the commission shall
submit to the building official a current list of landmarks and historic
preservation districts.
   (J)   Criteria For Certificate Of Appropriateness For Landmarks: The
application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be reviewed at the next
meeting of the historic commission following its receipt by the secretary of
the historic commission. If the historic commission finds that the activity
proposed by the applicant:
      1.   Will not adversely affect the significant historical or
architectural character cited in the application for landmark designation as
called for in subsection
2-9-7(A) of this chapter; and
      2.   Is appropriate and consistent with the design criteria established
for the landmark as created by this chapter; or
      3.   Will remedy conditions imminently dangerous to life, health and
property as determined in writing by the building official;
then the historic commission shall recommend issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness by the corporate authorities.
   (K)   Denial Of Certificate Of Appropriateness For Landmarks: If the
historic commission finds the activity proposed by the applicant as not meeting
any of the subsections of section
2-9-7 of this chapter, then the commission shall recommend disapproval of the
application and so advise the applicant, building inspector and city council in
writing of the recommendation.
Following the recommended denial of the certificate of appropriateness by the
historic commission, the secretary of the historic commission shall transmit to
the owner a letter within five (5) days, stating changes requested by the
historic commission before the certificate of appropriateness will be
recommended by the commission. The letter will address itself to the
appropriate criteria. If the owner agrees to said changes in writing to the
commission and the commission is satisfied that the criteria in section
2-9-7 of this chapter will be met, it shall recommend issuance of a certificate
of appropriateness; if not, the certificate of appropriateness may be denied by
the city council.
   (L)   Criteria For Certificate Of Appropriateness In Historic Districts: The
application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be reviewed by the
commission not less than thirty (30) days following its receipt by the
secretary of the commission from the building official.
A letter will be sent to all property owners within the historic preservation
district setting forth the question of the application for a certificate of
appropriateness, the date, time and place of the meeting at which the
application will be considered by the commission. The letter shall be sent at
least ten (10) days prior to the proposed meeting.
If the historic commission finds that the activity proposed by the applicant:
      1.   Will not adversely affect the significant historical or
architectural character of the historic preservation district as defined in the
original petition for designation, as called for in subsection
2-9-8(B) of this chapter; and
      2.   Is appropriate and consistent with the design criteria established
for the historic preservation district as created by subsection
2-9-8(B)3(a) of this chapter; or
      3.   Will remedy conditions imminently dangerous to life, health or
property as determined in writing by the building official;
then the historic commission shall recommend issuance of certificate of
appropriateness by the city council.
   (M)   Denial Of Certificate Of Appropriateness For Improvements Within
Historic Preservation District: If the historic commission finds the activity
proposed by the applicant as not meeting any of the subsections of this
section, the historic commission shall recommend disapproval of the application
and so advise the applicant and building official in writing of the
recommendation.
Following the recommendation of denial of the certificate of appropriateness by
the historic commission, the commission secretary shall transmit to the owner a
letter within five (5) working days, stating the changes requested by the
historic commission before the certificate of appropriateness will be
recommended to issue. The letter will address itself to the appropriate
criteria and other points deemed pertinent by the commission. If the owner
agrees to said changes in writing to the commission and the commission is
satisfied that the criteria in this section will be met, it shall recommend
issuance of a certificate of appropriateness; if not, the certificate of
appropriateness may be denied by the city council.
   (N)   Demolition Or Removal Of A Landmark Or Structure Within A Historic
Preservation District; Procedure: The commission secretary shall notify the
commission of any application for a certificate of appropriateness involving
the demolition, partial demolition or removal of a structure or significant
accessory structure. The commission shall schedule a public hearing within
thirty (30) days of the receipt of the application for a certificate of
appropriateness with proper notification through the newspaper and shall notify
the applicant in writing. At the hearing, the commission shall request the
following information:
      1.   A report from the building official on the state of repair and
structural stability of the structure under consideration;
      2.   Information and graphics on the extent and process of demolition or
removal, including information on any proposed changes in landscaping;
      3.   Evidence of any hardship that would result in substantial economic
loss to the applicant from denial of the petition;
      4.   An assessment of any alterations in the essential character of the
area which would occur as a result of demolition or removal action.
   (O)   Decision Of Commission Towards Demolition Or Removal: If the
commission's decision is to recommend postponement of the demolition or
removal, the commission shall notify the owner in writing. During the period
set forth for postponement of the requested action, the commission shall
explore alternatives to demolition or removal. Such alternatives may include
consultation with private civic groups, interested private citizens and other
public boards or agencies in an effort to find a persuasive means of preserving
the structure. If sale of property is considered a feasible alternative to the
owner, the building must remain on the open market, dependent on its
classification, for the following lengths of time:
      1.   Historically and architecturally significant: Six (6) months.
      2.   Noncompatible: No waiting period.
   (P)   Failure To Reach Agreement: If, after a period not to exceed six (6)
months, no alternative agreement has been reached with the applicant, the
commission shall recommend issuance of a certificate of appropriateness for
demolition or removal of the structure in question.
   (Q)   Conditions: In recommending to grant the certificate of
appropriateness, the commission shall recommend conditions necessary to
minimize the adverse impact of the requested activity as outlined in this
section.
   (R)   Appeals: Where the commission has recommended denial of issuance of a
certificate of appropriateness, the applicant for said certificate may appeal
to the city council. Such appeal must be filed with the city clerk within
fifteen (15) days after notification to the applicant by the commission. The
city council shall hold a public hearing and shall vote on said appeal within
forty five (45) days of its receipt. On appeal, a majority vote of the
corporate authorities shall be sufficient to either uphold or reverse any
recommendation of the commission. (Ord. 1192, 5-3-1988)
2-9-10: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION:
Any person who fails to perform any act required herein or performs any act
prohibited herein shall be fined, upon conviction, not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) or not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense. Every day such violation exists shall constitute a separate violation
and a separate offense.
In addition to the penalty provided above, the city may bring an appropriate
action in the circuit court to enjoin any action undertaken by any person in
violation of this chapter and to restore any property to its condition prior to
such unauthorized action. (Ord. 1192, 5-3-1988)
2-9-11: RELATION TO OTHER ORDINANCES:
   (A)   Conflict Between District Regulations: Nothing herein is to be
construed as repealing any requirement relating to the proper wiring, plumbing
and construction of any building or structure, all work to be in conformity
with the building codes and ordinances of the city as now in effect or as
provided by ordinance. If such a permit would otherwise be required, an
application for a building or demolition permit shall be submitted in
conjunction with the application for a certificate of appropriateness. In all
zoning districts lying within the boundaries of a historic preservation
district, the regulations for both the zoning district and the historic
preservation district shall apply. Whenever there is a conflict between the
regulations of the zoning district and the regulations of the historic
preservation district, the more restrictive shall apply.
   (B)   Building Permits And Demolition Permits: No building permit nor any
demolition permit shall issue with respect to any property or improvement
thereon which is subject to any provision of this chapter until the city
council either accepts or rejects the recommendation(s) of the commission with
respect to the subject property or improvement.
   (C)   Restraint Of Alienation And Condemnation: Nothing in this chapter is
intended to be a restraint upon alienation of real property. Nothing in this
chapter is intended to in any way deprive any property owner, legal or
equitable, of any interest in such property. In interpreting and applying this
chapter, the commission, the city council, and all courts of competent
jurisdiction shall interpret and apply this chapter in conformity with the
legislative intent set forth in this section. (Ord. 1192, 5-3-1988)
CHAPTER 10
CANTON PRIDE COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-10-1: Composition
2-10-2: Purpose
2-10-3: Duties
2-10-4: Powers
2-10-5: Internal Organization
2-10-1: COMPOSITION:
The Canton pride commission shall be composed of eight (8) adult citizens of
the city. Each member of said commission shall serve without pay. Four (4) of
the said citizens shall be recommended for appointment by the aldermen of each
of their respective ward and the remaining four (4) shall be members at large
who shall be appointed by the mayor. The manner of appointment and terms of
office shall be as hereinafter set forth:
   (A)   Manner Of Appointment And Terms Of Office: Members of the commission
shall be appointed by the mayor after consultation with the two (2) aldermen of
each respective ward and subject to the approval and confirmation of the city
council. With the exception of the initial appointees, members of the
commission shall be appointed for two (2) year terms commencing and ending with
the first Tuesday in May of applicable years. A membership vacancy which occurs
during a term of office shall be filled for the remainder of such term in the
same manner as provided with respect to the original appointment. No person may
serve as a member of the commission for more than two (2) consecutive terms.
For the purpose of the preceding sentence the tenure of an initial appointee
and the tenure of a member appointed to fill a membership vacancy shall be
considered a "term"; provided, however, that tenure in office for less than
eighteen (18) months shall not be considered a "term" for the purpose of the
preceding sentence.
   (B)   Initial Appointee: This term has reference to those members of the
commission first appointed thereto in creation of Canton pride. The terms of
office of such members shall be as follows: four (4) members shall be appointed
for a one year term and four (4) of said members would be appointed for a two
(2) year term. The term of office for each initial appointee shall be
designated by the mayor and approved and confirmed by the city council at the
time of the appointment to membership to the commission. (Ord. 1295, 11-7-1990)
2-10-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the Canton pride commission is to lead the community in
beautification and instill pride. (Ord. 1295, 11-7-1990)
2-10-3: DUTIES:
The Canton pride commission shall meet not less than four (4) times annually in
implementation of the purposes of its creation. All meetings shall be public,
shall have a stated purpose, shall be held after public notice as to time and
place and pursuant to such other reasonable rules as the commission itself
shall make. Meetings of any subcommittees of the commission may be at
convenience and without condition; provided, however, that subsequent report
thereof shall be made to the commission. The commission shall make report of
its acts, doings, recommendations and suggestions in the premises of its
creation to the mayor and city council not less than twice annually in the
months of November and May of each year. In furtherance of its purpose the
commission shall at all times:
   (A)   Concern itself with beautification of the city, both with respect to
private as well as public property.
   (B)   Concern itself with and accept reasonable assignments in the premises
of its creation from the mayor and city council.
   (C)   Stand ready to meet with individual citizens, groups of citizens and
recognized organizations in and of the city for the purpose of implementing the
premises of its creation. (Ord. 1295, 11-7-1990)
2-10-4: POWERS:
The Canton pride commission shall have no legal powers or force with which to
implement the premises of its creation. The Canton pride commission shall rely
for such implementation only on power of persuasion, reason, constructive
programs and goals, and kindly and helpful concern for fellow citizens of the
city, both individually and collectively. (Ord. 1295, 11-7-1990)
2-10-5: INTERNAL ORGANIZATION:
The Canton pride commission at its organizational meeting and prior to the
transaction of any other business, shall elect a chairman and a secretary from
among its membership, each of whom shall serve for a two (2) year term and who
may not succeed themselves; thereafter, a chairman and secretary shall be
elected for one year terms and may not succeed themselves. The secretary shall
keep minutes of each meeting of the Canton pride commission in a book provided
for that sole purpose so that a continuous and complete record thereof is kept
and the minutes so kept shall be made available to any citizen of the city.
In addition to the foregoing, but not inconsistent therewith, the Canton pride
commission shall provide, in writing filed with the city clerk, for other
matters concerning its internal organization and with respect to its officers,
their nomination and election; the composition of any of its standing
committees, its rules of order; its meetings (but not inconsistent herewith);
and, for such other matters of like nature. (Ord. 1295, 11-7-1990)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
LICENSES, GENERAL
SECTION:
3-1-1: Mayor To Grant, Revoke
3-1-2: Applications, Annual
3-1-3: Mayor's Discretion
3-1-4: License, How Issued
3-1-5: Form Of License
3-1-6: Record Of Licenses
3-1-7: Number Issued
3-1-8: Change Of Location, Notice
3-1-9: License To Be Posted
3-1-10: Term; No Rebate
3-1-11: Transfer Of License
3-1-12: Death Of Licensee
3-1-13: Compliance With Code
3-1-14: Bonds, Sureties Required
3-1-15: Fees Divisible
3-1-16: Expiration, Notice
3-1-17: Enforcement
3-1-18: General Penalty
3-1-19: Raffle Licensing
3-1-19-1: Definitions
3-1-19-2: Licensing
3-1-19-3: License, Application, Restrictions
3-1-19-4: Ineligibility
3-1-19-5: Raffle Manager, Bond
3-1-19-6: Records And Reports
3-1-19-7: Penalty
3-1-20: Criminal Background Checks
3-1-1: MAYOR TO GRANT, REVOKE:
In all cases where licenses are required to be procured, such licenses shall be
granted by the mayor, attested by the clerk, except where provision is
expressly made for the granting of licenses by some other officer of the city.
The mayor shall also have power to revoke, for cause, any license granted by
him. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 24, Art. 1, Sec. 1)
3-1-2: APPLICATIONS, ANNUAL:
Any person desiring a license for any purpose under the provisions of this code
shall, unless otherwise provided for by ordinance, make a written application
therefor through the city clerk, to the mayor, stating his name, the purpose
for which the license is desired, for what length of time and the place where
his business or occupation is to be carried on, and when a bond is required to
be filed before being licensed, he shall name the proposed sureties on the bond
in his application. If the mayor shall grant the application, he shall so
endorse the same, together with the amount of the license fee fixed by
ordinance in the case. Upon the filing of the application so endorsed with the
city clerk, and payment of the sum so specified and required, and upon filing a
proper bond, approved by the mayor, the clerk shall issue to the applicant a
license for the purpose and time therein specified.
A new application shall be made upon the expiration of any license so issued
before a new license shall issue; provided, however, that in cases where
provision is made for the division of any license year into periods, and the
issuance of a license for any such period is provided for, application need not
be made in such cases at the end of each period, it being the intention to
require application to be made for license annually, only. In any case where
frontage consents are required to be procured before a license shall issue, it
shall not be necessary to secure the renewal of such frontage consents upon a
renewal of such license, if such license be renewed forthwith, except where by
law or ordinance it is otherwise provided, and except further that such
frontage consents shall be renewed in each case after the expiration of five
(5) years from the time the same was last obtained. (R.O. 1959, Art. 1, Sec. 2)
3-1-3: MAYOR'S DISCRETION:
In all cases where it is not otherwise expressly provided, the mayor shall have
power to hear and grant applications for licenses upon the terms specified by
this chapter, and all licenses shall be issued to such person or persons as
shall comply in all respects with the provisions of this chapter, and as the
mayor in his discretion shall deem suitable and proper persons to be licensed;
provided, that the mayor may, in his discretion, refuse to grant any
application for license until the same shall have been ordered by the council
to whom he shall refer such application at the next regular meeting of the
council. (R.O. 1959, Art. 1, Sec. 3)
3-1-4: LICENSE, HOW ISSUED:
Every license issued by the city shall, unless otherwise directed by ordinance,
be signed by the mayor, and countersigned and attested by the clerk under the
corporate seal, and no license shall be valid until signed and countersigned as
aforesaid, nor shall any person be deemed to be licensed until the same shall
have been issued to him in due form. (R.O. 1959, Art. 1, Sec. 4)
3-1-5: FORM OF LICENSE:
Licenses shall be issued, as nearly as may be, in the following form (see
exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein):
                     No.    
            LICENSE
             $   
   In Consideration of                     Dollars
   By Authority of the
                                                   
   License is Hereby Granted to       
   To             
   For Term of          
   Commencing          
   and Ending          
   in said           , subject to the Ordinances of said       
   in such case made and provided.
      WITNESS the hand of the            of said    
      and the corporate seal thereof, this       day of    
         , 19     .
         Attest:       
(Ord. 1090, 12-3-1985)
3-1-6: RECORD OF LICENSES:
The city clerk and the city treasurer shall each keep a license register, in
which they shall enter the name of each person, for what business or purpose
licensed, the place of business, the date of license, number of same, the
amount paid for each and the time of expiration thereof. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 24,
Art. 1, Sec. 6)
3-1-7: NUMBER ISSUED:
The city clerk shall, on the close of each month, report to the council in
writing, the number of licenses issued during the preceding month, to whom
issued, the amount of fees collected for the same and the location of the
persons licensed, and he shall annually, at the close of each fiscal year, make
and submit to the council a full and complete abstract of all licenses issued
during the preceding fiscal year, with the amounts taxed and collected for the
same. (Ord. R.O. 1959, Ch. 24, Art. 1, Sec. 7)
3-1-8: CHANGE OF LOCATION, NOTICE:
If any person or corporation licensed by the mayor to carry on, engage in, or
conduct any business or occupation required to be licensed by the provisions of
this code and being designated in his or its license a particular place in
which such business was licensed to be carried on, engaged in or conducted,
shall, before the expiration of such license, change the location of such place
of business, he or it shall first obtain the approval of the mayor and shall
forthwith notify the clerk of such fact and no business shall be carried on,
engaged in or conducted under authority of such license at such new location
until notice of such change has been given as herein provided. (R.O. 1959, Ch.
24, Art. 1, Sec. 8)
3-1-9: LICENSE TO BE POSTED:
Every license granted by the mayor for the purpose of conducting any business
or occupation required by the provisions of this code to be licensed and having
designated therein a room, store, office or place in which such business so
licensed is to be conducted, shall be posted and during the period for which
such license was issued shall remain posted at all times in a conspicuous
place, so that the same may be easily seen upon the wall of the principal room,
or office, of the store or place in which such licensed business or occupation
is carried on, and when such license shall have expired, it shall be removed
from such place in which it has been posted and no license which is not in
force and effect shall be permitted to remain posted upon the wall or upon any
part of any room, store, office or place of business after the period of such
license has expired. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 24, Art. 1, Sec. 9)
3-1-10: TERM; NO REBATE:
No license shall be granted for a lesser period nor for a longer period than
one year, unless specific provision shall elsewhere be made in this chapter for
the issuance of a license for a period of less than one year, and every license
shall expire on the first Tuesday in May next following its issuance, unless
otherwise specifically provided in this chapter. The fee for each license
issued shall be collected in full at the time of issuance and delivery thereof,
unless specific provisions to the contrary be otherwise made in this chapter;
provided, that if application be made after the month of May in any year, the
sum required to be paid shall bear the same ratio to the sum required for the
whole year, that the number of months remaining (inclusive of the month in
which application is made) bears to the whole number of months in the year;
provided, that the foregoing provisions shall not apply in the case of any
person or corporation who shall engage in any business or occupation without
first procuring a license. And any person or corporation who shall engage in
any business or occupation for which a license is required by any section of
this title without first procuring such license shall be required to pay the
full annual license fee. In no event shall any rebate or refund be made of any
license fee or part thereof, by reason of the death of the licensee, for the
purpose of conducting any business or occupation required by the licensee, or
by reason of nonuse of such license, or by reason of the change of location or
occupation of such licensee, unless the same is specifically provided by
ordinance. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 24, Art. 1, Sec. 10)
3-1-11: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
No license granted under this title shall be assignable or transferable, nor
shall any person be authorized to do business or act under such license but the
person to whom it is granted, or at any other place than that specified
therein, nor shall any license authorize any person to act under it at more
than one place, or at any other time than is therein specified; provided, that
any person to whom any license shall have been issued may with the permission
of the mayor assign and transfer the same to any other person, and the person
to whom such license is issued, or the assignee of such license shall surrender
such assigned license and have a new license issued for the unexpired term of
the old license, authorizing the assignee or transferee of such license to
carry on the same business or occupation at the same place designated in the
old license; provided further, that in all cases the person obtaining such new
license shall give a bond with sureties which shall conform as nearly as may be
to the bond upon which such surrendered license was issued. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 24,
Art. 1, Sec. 11)
3-1-12: DEATH OF LICENSEE:
In case of the death of any person licensed under any provision of this code
before the time limited in his license shall have expired, his copartner (if he
has any), or his legal representative, may continue to act under his license
for the unexpired term thereof, subject, however, to the conditions imposed
upon the person to whom the same was originally issued.
Whenever any license is mislaid, lost or stolen, it shall be the duty of the
clerk, upon the licensee or his agent filing an affidavit with him stating such
license was lost, stolen or mislaid, as the case may be, and that if found, he
will not use the same, to reissue said license, and for this purpose the clerk
shall keep a book to be called "reissue license book", and keep a record of the
same. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 24, Art. 1, Sec. 12)
3-1-13: COMPLIANCE WITH CODE:
All licenses shall be subject to the provisions of this code which may be in
force at the time of the issuing thereof, or which may be subsequently passed
by the council, and if any person so licensed shall violate any of the
provisions of any provision regulating or relating to his business, he shall be
liable to be proceeded against for any fine or penalty imposed thereby, and his
license may be revoked in the discretion of the mayor. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 24, Art.
1, Sec. 13)
3-1-14: BONDS, SURETIES REQUIRED:
Any bond given by any person or corporation to the city under any license
ordinance shall, before a license is granted, be approved by the mayor unless
otherwise provided by ordinance; and unless otherwise provided all said bonds
shall be signed either by a responsible surety company or by two (2) good and
sufficient sureties, and shall be conditioned for the due observance of all
provisions of this code regulating or relating to any such business or
occupation, which now are or may be in force during the period of such license.
Said bond shall, unless otherwise provided by ordinance, be filed with the city
clerk. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 24, Art. 1, Sec. 14)
3-1-15: FEES DIVISIBLE:
When specific provision is made anywhere by ordinance for the division of a
license for less than the full annual license fee or for the issuance of a
license for a part or portion of a license year upon the payment of a
proportionate amount of the annual license fee, the amount to be so paid for
such license shall be computed from the first day of the period during which
such license is issued, if the license year be divided into periods, or if
provisions be made for monthly periods, it shall be computed as running from
the first day of the month in which such license is issued; provided, that no
person shall be entitled to the benefit of the provisions of this section who
has engaged without a license so to do in the business for which he applies for
license at the time of such application. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 24, Art. 1, Sec. 15)
3-1-16: EXPIRATION, NOTICE:
It shall be the duty of the city clerk, by notice in writing, to notify all
persons holding licenses, not less than ten (10) days before the expiration of
the same, of the date of their expiration, and also to notify all who, by any
ordinance, are required to procure a license for their trade or occupation.
Such notice shall also be given by the clerk immediately upon the expiration of
any license, or as soon as the fact that any person is acting without license
shall come to his knowledge. The notice shall be served by the chief of police
or any police officer of the city, and may be left at the residence or place of
business of the person notified, or if deemed necessary may be sent through the
mail. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 24, Art. 1, Sec. 16)
3-1-17: ENFORCEMENT:
The members of the police force shall enforce all provisions of this code
relating to licenses, and it is hereby made the duty of the chief of police to
examine, from time to time, the license register of the clerk and to report and
prosecute all persons liable thereto, who may be acting or doing business
without a license. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 24, Art. 1, Sec. 17)
3-1-18: GENERAL PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or who
shall conduct any business required by ordinance to be licensed without a
license, or shall in any manner violate the terms of his license, shall, where
no specific penalty is provided, be subject to a fine of not less than five
dollars ($5.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (R.O. 1959, Ch.
24, Art. 1, Sec. 18)
3-1-19: RAFFLE LICENSING:
3-1-19-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the words and phrases herein defined are
used in this section
3-1-19 in the sense given them in the following definitions:
BUSINESS ORGANIZATION: A voluntary organization composed of individuals and
businesses who have joined together to advance the commercial, financial,
industrial and civic interest of a community.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: An organization or institution organized and operated
to benefit an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those
eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.
EDUCATIONAL ORGANIZATION: An organization or institution organized and operated
to provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods
common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their
scope and intensity with the course of study presented in tax supported
schools.
FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION: An organization of persons having a common interest,
the primary interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and
to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the
burdens of government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for by
the government.
LABOR ORGANIZATION: An organization composed of workers organized with the
objective of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and
the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective
occupations.
NET PROCEEDS: The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles less reasonable
sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable operating
expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION: An organization or institution organized and conducted
on a not for profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result
of the operation.
RAFFLE: A form of lottery, as defined in paragraph 28.2(b) of the Illinois
criminal code of 1961, conducted by an organization licensed under this chapter
in which:
   (A)   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance,
represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by
some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning
chance;
   (B)   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some
other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part
of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the winning
chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting
contest.
RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION: Any church, congregation, society, or organization
founded for the purpose of religious worship.
VETERANS ORGANIZATION: An organization or association comprised of members of
which substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows, or
widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of
its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to
confer a public benefit. (Ord. 1248, 6-6-1989)
3-1-19-2: LICENSING:
   (A)   Location: Sales of raffle chances shall be only at locations
designated in the license application and which are within the corporate limits
of the city.
   (B)   Eligibility For License: Licenses shall be issued only to bona fide
religious, charitable, labor, fraternal, educational, veterans or business
organizations that operate without profit to their members and which have been
in existence continuously for a period of five (5) years immediately before
making application for a license and which have had during the entire five (5)
year period a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their objectives.
   (C)   Duration Of License: Licenses shall permit the applicant to issue or
sell raffle chances only for those dates stated in the license application, but
in no event shall the period of sales exceed one hundred eighty (180) days.
Each license is valid for one raffle only.
   (D)   Maximum Value Of Prizes:
      1.   The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a
licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed one hundred fifty thousand dollars
($150,000.00).
      2.   The retail value of each individual prize awarded by a licensee in a
single raffle shall not exceed one hundred fifty thousand dollars
($150,000.00).
   (E)   Price Of Chances: The price charged for each raffle chance sold or
issued shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). (Ord. 1248, 6-6-
1989)
3-1-19-3: LICENSE, APPLICATION, RESTRICTIONS:
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall conduct a raffle without having
first obtained a license therefor.
   (B)   Each application for a license shall be in writing upon forms provided
by the city clerk of the city and shall contain the following:
      1.   Name and address of individual making application.
      2.   Name and address of organization applying for a license.
      3.   Approximate number of members of the organization and the length of
existence of the organization.
      4.   Name and address of the raffle manager.
      5.   The location(s) at which raffle chances are to be sold or issued.
      6.   The time period during which raffle chances will be sold or issued.
      7.   The maximum number of raffle chances to be sold.
      8.   The time of determination of winning chances.
      9.   The location(s) at which winning chances will be determined.
      10.   A sworn statement, signed by the presiding officer, and secretary,
if there is one, of the organization attesting to the not for profit character
of the organization, and attesting to the fact the organization is not
otherwise ineligible to receive a license.
      11.   Such other information as the city clerk may require.
   (C)   Each application for a license shall be accompanied by payment of a
fee of five dollars ($5.00).
   (D)   Application for licenses shall be submitted to the city clerk. The
city clerk shall act to either issue or deny the license within five (5)
working days. (Ord. 1248, 6-6-1989)
3-1-19-4: INELIGIBILITY:
The following are ineligible for any license under this section
3-1-19:
   (A)   Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
   (B)   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter;
   (C)   Any person who is not of good moral character;
   (D)   Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in subsection (A),
(B), or (C) of this section has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or
in which such a person is active or employed;
   (E)   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection (A), (B), or
(C) of this section is an officer, director, or employee, whether compensated
or not;
   (F)   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection (A), (B), or
(C) of this section is to participate in the management or operation of a
raffle. (Ord. 1248, 6-6-1989)
3-1-19-5: RAFFLE MANAGER, BOND:
All operations of, and the conduct of, raffles shall be under the supervision
of a single raffle manager designated by the organization. At the time the
application is submitted to the city clerk the manager shall give a fidelity
bond in the amount of the maximum dollar amount of all raffle chances to be
sold, as stated on the application, in favor of the organization conditioned
upon his honesty in the performance of his duties.
The above bond requirement may be waived by the unanimous vote of the members
of the organization. The occurrence of said unanimous vote shall be by
affidavit of the organization's presiding officer, filed with the city clerk.
(Ord. 1248, 6-6-1989)
3-1-19-6: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
   (A)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall keep records of
its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single gathering or
occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions from gross
receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented with
receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the purchased
item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the recipient. The
distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount,
and date of payment.
   (B)   Gross receipts from the operation of raffle programs shall be
segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross
receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization
pursuant to license therefor issued by the department of revenue of the state
of Illinois, and placed in separate account. Each organization shall have
separate records for its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts,
expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same
person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.
   (C)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report monthly to
its membership, and to the city clerk its gross receipts, expenses and net
proceeds from raffles, and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as
required by this section.
   (D)   Records required by this section shall be preserved for three (3)
years, and organizations shall make available their records relating to
operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places.
(Ord. 1248, 6-6-1989)
3-1-19-7: PENALTY:
Any person, firm, corporation, society, association or organization that
violates any provision of this section
3-1-19 shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 1248, 6-6-1989)
3-1-20: CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECKS:
Any license issued by the city of Canton that requires, by state statute or
city ordinance, a criminal background check shall require the applicant to pay
an additional fifty dollar ($50.00) fee for reimbursement cost to the state,
the city of Canton and other agencies for administrative and processing of
criminal background checks. Any license or permit issued by the city of Canton,
pursuant to chapter 8, "Intoxicating Liquors", of this title, that requires, by
state statute or city ordinance, a criminal background check shall require the
applicant to pay an additional forty dollar ($40.00) fee for reimbursement cost
to the state, the city of Canton and other agencies for administrative and
processing of criminal background checks. This fee can be adjusted from time to
time by the city council to reflect the reimbursement cost by resolution. (Ord.
1904, 4-18-2007)
CHAPTER 2
LICENSES, CERTAIN OCCUPATIONS
SECTION:
3-2-1: Itinerant Vendors And Transient Merchants
3-2-2: License Application
3-2-3: License Limitations
3-2-4: Miscellaneous Licenses
3-2-5: Secondhand Dealer Defined
3-2-5-1: License Required
3-2-5-2: License; Exemptions
3-2-5-3: License Application
3-2-5-4: License Fees
3-2-5-5: License; Investigation
3-2-5-6: License Issuance
3-2-5-7: License; Posting
3-2-5-8: License Revocation
3-2-5-9: License; Bond
3-2-5-10: License Transfer
3-2-5-11: Change Of Location
3-2-5-12: Hours Of Operation
3-2-5-13: Prohibited Purchases
3-2-5-14: Purchasing, Selling, Etc., Weapons Prohibited
3-2-5-15: Record Of Purchases
3-2-5-16: Reports To Chief Of Police
3-2-5-17: Inspection Of Premises; Seizures
3-2-5-18: Waiting Period
3-2-5-19: Reserved
3-2-5-20: Severability Clause
3-2-6: False Or Misleading Application
3-2-7: Penalty
3-2-8: Antique Dealers
3-2-9: Spoon River Valley Scenic Drive
3-2-10: Roofing Contractors
3-2-11:    Food Trucks
3-2-1: ITINERANT VENDORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS:
   (A)   License Required: It shall be unlawful within the city to offer for
sale or to sell tangible personal property from motor vehicles or unoccupied
lots except in a proper commercial zone, in compliance with the "open air
business" rules and with a license in accordance with this chapter.
   (B)   Definitions: The terms "transient merchant" and "itinerant vendor"
shall have the meanings set forth in the definitions section of the transient
merchant act of 1987.
   (C)   Violation And Penalty: in addition to the penalties provided under
Section 3-2-7, violations of this section, the police department is authorized
to seize trucks or other vehicles and personal property involved in unlicensed
sales. (Ord. 1492, 12-19-1995; amd. Ord. 4296, 8-2-2022)
3-2-2: LICENSE APPLICATION:
   (A)   Contents: All licenses required by this chapter shall be applied for
at the police department on forms prescribed by said department. The forms
shall require the following basic information (additional information may be
required, depending upon the nature of the business):
      1.   The applicant's name.
      2.   The applicant's permanent business address which must include a
street address, a post office box is not sufficient.
      3.   The applicant's residence address, and if the applicant is a
corporation, the residence address of its officers.
      4.   The location at which the applicant intends to conduct business.
      5.   The nature of the business which the applicant intends to conduct.
      6.   A copy of the applicant's certificate of registration under the
retailers' occupation tax act.
      7.   A complete inventory of the goods applicant intends to sell.
      8.   A list of all licenses to conduct business as a transient merchant
or an itinerant vendor in the past twelve (12) months obtained by applicant in
Illinois.
   (B)   Bond: Each applicant must file a surety bond or cash deposit of not
less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) nor more than ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) based on fifty percent (50%) of the wholesale value of the
merchandise.
      1.   All licenses under this chapter shall be issued by the city clerk
after approval by the police department.
      2.   No licenses may be issued until the bond or deposit is filed.
      3.   Any deposit or bond shall be transferred to the attorney general of
Illinois within fourteen (14) days after the applicant ceases to do business in
the city.
   (C)   Term: All licenses issued hereunder shall expire as of December 31 of
the year issued, unless specified otherwise.
   (D)   Licensing Requirements, License Fees:
 
Occupation                              Initial Fees
Door to door books, etc.                $25.00 per person, plus $10.00 per day
                                        per person
Door to door repair, etc.               $50.00, plus $20.00 per day
On site vendors of tangible merchandise $80.00, plus $20.00 per each additional
                                        day
 
Such license fee shall be paid in full in cash to the city before any requested
license shall issue. No refunds of license fees, or any portion thereof, shall
be made. Licenses hereunder are not transferable. No license for the sale of
food items for human consumption shall issue hereunder unless the applicant
presents the city with the original of the appropriate Fulton County health
department license or permit relating to the contemplated sales. (Ord. 1492,
12-19-1995)
   (E)   Fee Waivers: The city council may, for good cause shown, vote to waive
license fees in order to promote tourism, for example, but not limited to,
Spoon River Drive, Friendship Festival, etc. (Ord. 1506, 6-18-1996)
3-2-3: LICENSE LIMITATIONS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful within the city to solicit door to door for
property repairs or improvements, including, but not limited to, driveway
repair, resealing, chimney repair and roof repair without first obtaining a
license therefor. Licensing under this section shall require proof of current
insurance. Licensees shall also provide a warranty, limited or general,
regarding work performed. (Ord. 1492, 12-19-1995)
   (B)   (Rep. by Ord. 1873, 7-18-2006)
   (C)   Door to door sales of an intangible nature, for example book sales,
magazine subscriptions, etc., will be permitted only from ten o'clock (10:00)
A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. and only after a proper license is obtained.
The police department shall utilize an application requiring the information
sought by subsections
3-2-2(A)1 through (A)8 of this chapter.
   (D)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall preclude delivery of goods
purchased on order, nor shall it apply to school activities, school clubs or
not for profit charitable fund drives. (Ord. 1492, 12-19-1995)
3-2-4: MISCELLANEOUS LICENSES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or carry on any business,
occupation or pursuit hereinafter mentioned, within the limits of the city,
without first having obtained a license therefor, in the manner heretofore
provided; and there shall be taxed and collected for issuing and registering
each license, payable strictly in advance, the following license fees.
Application shall be in writing, upon forms provided by the city and verified
by the applicant.
Baby racks or stands, spindle wheels,
cane, knife or pin racks, paddle games
or any similar devices or means
whereby articles are sold by means of
numbers, characters or the like, the   $10.00 per day
specific articles being unknown to the
purchaser, when not engaged in as
incident to a regularly established
business in some building
Canvassers of books, maps or other     $25.00 per month; $10.00 per day
publications or articles
                                       $25.00 per day; and the person seeking
                                       said license shall furnish a good and
                                       sufficient bond to the city, in the sum
                                       of $500.00, conditioned that said
Circus parades on the public streets   licensee shall be fully responsible for
                                       and shall repair any and all damage
                                       occasioned by said parade to any
                                       street, crossing, walk or any other
                                       public or private property in the city
Pawnbrokers                            $50.00 per month
Public scales                          $10.00 per annum
                                       $5.00 per day; $25.00 per month;
                                       $100.00 per annum; provided, no license
                                       for the conducting of any shooting
                                       gallery or place for target shooting
                                       shall authorize the firing of any gun
                                       or firearm within the city in
                                       contravention of any provision of this
                                       code, nor shall any license issue for
Shooting galleries                     the establishment of any such shooting
                                       gallery in any alley of the city or in
                                       or under any place not being within a
                                       substantial building, nor under any
                                       circumstances when it shall appear to
                                       the mayor that due safeguards and
                                       precautions have not been taken for the
                                       safety and protection of life and
                                       property
Vendors of any patent invention or any
article or invention of any kind sold  $25.00 per day
on the streets or in public places
Vendors of patent medicines, sold on   $50.00 per day
the streets or in public places
 
(Ord. 966, 3-1-1983; amd. Ord. 4296, 8-2-2022)
3-2-5: SECONDHAND DEALER DEFINED:
As used in this chapter, a "secondhand dealer" is any person, partnership,
corporation, association, joint venture, trustee, court appointed
representative or agent thereof which operates a business for profit which
buys, sells, possesses on consignment for sale or trades jewelry, stamps, coins
or any precious metals which may have been previously owned by a consumer; or
which derives more than thirty five percent (35%) of its gross receipts from
the sale, consignment for sale, pledge or trade of any goods, wares or
merchandise which have previously been owned by a consumer, including, but not
limited to, furniture, appliances, clothing, automobile accessories, books or
metals, whether in bulk or manufactured state. The term secondhand dealer shall
include businesses commonly known as pawnbrokers, swapshop operators, stamp
dealers, coin dealers and jewelers who purchase and resell items from persons
other than dealers and suppliers. The fact that any business does any of the
following acts shall be prima facie proof that said business is a secondhand
dealership:
   (A)   Advertises in any fashion that it buys or sells secondhand or used
items. Such advertisements shall include, but are not limited to, media
advertisements, telephone listings, and signs whether on the exterior or
interior of the business.
   (B)   Devotes a significant segment or section of the business premises to
the purchase or sale of secondhand or used items. (Ord. 1114, 8-19-1986)
3-2-5-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person, either as owner, manager, lessee, officer or agent, or in any other
capacity, within the city, shall operate or permit to be operated a secondhand
dealership without first having obtained a license from the city to do so.
(Ord. 1114, 8-19-1986)
3-2-5-2: LICENSE EXEMPTIONS:
The following are exempt from the requirements of this chapter:
   (A)   Garage sales. As used in this section, a "garage sale" is defined as
the sale at retail of used personal property by the lawful resident(s) of
residentially zoned property which garage sale is not conducted on a periodic
or ongoing basis. A garage sale shall be deemed to be periodic or ongoing if a
garage sale is held by the lawful resident of residentially zoned property more
than four (4) days in any one calendar month.
   (B)   Sales conducted by governmental, civic, patriotic, fraternal,
educational, religious or benevolent organizations which have been in active
and continuous existence for at least one year prior to the holding of the
sale, or which are incorporated as a not for profit corporation by the state.
   (C)   Sales or purchases which are regulated by the licensing laws of the
state, including automobile dealers, used parts dealers and automotive parts
recyclers.
   (D)   Antique dealers. As used in this section, an "antique dealer" is
defined as one who has a majority fifty one percent (51%) of his gross sales
each year derived from the sale of antiques and/or primitives. As used in this
section, an "antique" or "primitive" is defined as an old and valuable art
object or article no longer in production which is at least fifty (50) years
old. As used in this section, the term "sale" does not include an exchange,
trade, or swap of items.
   (E)   The sales of used paperback books and magazines.
   (F)   Sales and trades of baseball cards. (Ord. 1114, 8-19-1986)
3-2-5-3: LICENSE; APPLICATION:
An application for a license required by section
3-2-5-1 of this chapter shall be made in writing to the Canton city clerk which
shall minimally set forth the following:
   (A)   The name of the individual, partnership, corporation or association
applying for a license;
   (B)   The residence, phone number, date of birth and driver's license number
of the applicant or partners, or, if a corporation or association, the
residence, phone number and driver's license number of the officers and all
shareholders owning more than five percent (5%) of the outstanding shares of
stock;
   (C)   The location for which the license is requested;
   (D)   Whether the applicant, its partners, officers or listed shareholders
have been convicted of any criminal offense or ordinance violation (other than
traffic or parking offenses) in any jurisdiction and, if so, a list of such
convictions with date and prosecuting jurisdiction; and
   (E)   Whether the applicant, its partners, officers or listed shareholders
have held a license or had an interest in a license issued by the city or any
other jurisdiction regulating the purchase or sale of secondhand property
revoked for cause, and, if so, list the date of revocation and jurisdiction.
(Ord. 1114, 8-19-1986)
3-2-5-4: LICENSE FEES:
The applicant shall pay the city clerk prior to filing an application, a
license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per calendar year or part thereof. Should
the license be denied, the license fee shall not be refunded to the applicant.
The license shall be renewed annually and a fifty dollar ($50.00) annual
renewal fee shall be paid in advance for the calendar year or part thereof.
(Ord. 1769, 9-16-2003)
3-2-5-5: LICENSE; INVESTIGATION:
Upon receipt of an application for a license the city clerk shall cause a copy
thereof to be sent to the police department which shall report back to the city
clerk in twenty one (21) days whether the application is in accordance with
applicable city codes. (Ord. 1114, 8-19-1986)
3-2-5-6: LICENSE ISSUANCE:
Upon receipt of the report from the police department referred to in section
3-2-5-5 of this chapter, the city clerk shall issue the license requested
unless the city clerk shall find:
   (A)   The applicant is under the age of eighteen (18);
   (B)   The location requested is not in a permanent structure;
   (C)   The applicant, its partners, officers or listed shareholders have been
convicted of or have pled guilty to any offense related to theft, burglary, or
purchasing or receiving stolen items under the laws of this state, city or any
other jurisdiction within the past ten (10) years, or have forfeited a bond to
appear in court to answer for charges for such offenses during said time;
   (D)   The location requested and structure to be used would not comply with
all applicable laws including the zoning code of the city;
   (E)   The applicant, its partners, officers or listed shareholders have held
a license or had an interest in a license issued by the city or any other
jurisdiction regulating the purchase or sale of secondhand property which was
revoked for cause; or
   (F)   The applicant, its partners, officers or listed shareholders have
knowingly furnished false or misleading information or withheld relevant
information on any application for a license required by section
3-2-5-3 of this chapter or any investigation into any application. (Ord. 1114,
8-19-1986)
3-2-5-7: LICENSE; POSTING:
Every license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall, at all times
during the period for which it is effective, be posted in a conspicuous place
at or near the principal entrance to the premises for which the license is
issued. (Ord. 1114, 8-19-1986)
3-2-5-8: LICENSE REVOCATION:
Any license issued for a secondhand dealer may be revoked or suspended for a
period not to exceed thirty (30) days by the mayor if he shall find after
hearing:
   (A)   The licensee, its officers, agents or employees have violated any of
the provisions of this chapter, the laws of the state or ordinances of the city
in the operation of the business; or
   (B)   The licensee, its partners, officers or shareholders have been
convicted of any offense set forth in section
3-2-5-6 of this chapter; or
   (C)   The licensee, partners, officers or shareholders have knowingly
furnished false or misleading information or withheld relevant information on
any application for a license required by section
3-2-5-3 of this chapter or any investigation into any application.
The licensee shall be responsible for the acts of its agents, servants and
employees in the operation of the business. Prior to holding a hearing
concerning the question of whether a license shall be revoked or suspended, the
mayor shall give at least ten (10) days' written notice to the licensee setting
forth the alleged violation. The licensee may present evidence and cross
examine witnesses at such hearing. (Ord. 1114, 8-19-1986)
3-2-5-9: LICENSE; BOND:
Every applicant for a license under this chapter shall file with the city clerk
a surety bond in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), with two
(2) or more sureties owning real estate in the city approved by the city
attorney, or corporate surety licensed with the state, with the applicant as
obligee, conditioned for the faithful and due performance of the provisions of
this chapter and the laws of the state concerning the operation of the licensed
business, and the payment of all fines and penalties by reason of the violation
thereof. (Ord. 1114, 8-19-1986)
3-2-5-10: LICENSE TRANSFER:
   (A)   No license issued under this chapter may be transferred to any other
person, partnership, corporation or association.
   (B)   No corporate licensee shall permit any transfer of its stock which
would vest in aggregate more than five percent (5%) of the stock outstanding in
said corporation in any shareholder unless said shareholder has first been
certified by the city clerk as meeting the requirements of section
3-2-5-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 1114, 8-19-1986)
3-2-5-11: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
No licensee shall carry on any business required to be licensed under this
chapter except at the location designated on the license. Should the licensee
wish to change the location, application shall be made to the city clerk for
such change in writing. The city clerk shall approve the change of location
unless the new location would be contrary to the provisions of this chapter or
any of the ordinances of the city. There shall be no fee for filing any
application for change of location. (Ord. 1114, 8-19-1986)
3-2-5-12: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No licensee shall purchase any goods, wares, articles or things, whatsoever,
from any person between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M. the next day. (Ord. 1114, 8-19-1986)
3-2-5-13: PROHIBITED PURCHASES:
No licensee shall purchase or accept any goods, wares, articles, or things
under any of the following circumstances:
   (A)   Where the seller is less than the age of eighteen (18);
   (B)   Where the seller is intoxicated. "Intoxicated" is defined as a seller
whose mental or physical functioning is substantially impaired as a result of
the use of alcohol or drugs;
   (C)   Where the seller fails to present two (2) forms of identification of
which at least one contains the seller's full legal name, date of birth, a
photograph or full physical description, and an identification number;
   (D)   Where the article to be purchased had an original manufacturer's
serial number at the time it was new, but no longer legibly exhibits said
number. (Ord. 1114, 8-19-1986)
3-2-5-14: PURCHASING, SELLING, ETC., WEAPONS PROHIBITED:
No licensee shall deal in, or buy or sell, or display in his shop, any pistol,
revolver, derringer, bowie knife, dirk or other deadly weapon of like
character, capable of being secreted upon the person unless such licensee shall
also possess valid and current licenses or permits as required by applicable
federal, state, or local laws, ordinances, rules or regulations. (Ord. 1114, 8-
19-1986)
3-2-5-15: RECORD OF PURCHASES:
Every licensee shall keep at the licensed location a register on multicopy
forms provided by the chief of police in which shall be entered in ink the
following information: a succinct and accurate description of all property
taken, purchased or received in the course of the business licensed under this
chapter including any number or inscription that may be in or on said property;
the full legal name of the person from whom the property is received including
full first name and middle initial, if any; such person's current residential
address, date of birth and physical description; the amount given or loaned to
such person and the terms thereof; the signature of the employee who received
the property; and the signed statement of the person from whom the property was
obtained that he/she is over eighteen (18) years of age and the legal owner of
same clear of all attachments and with the legal right to sell. Entries made in
the register shall be printed or typed and shall be legible. All entries shall
be made immediately upon receipt or purchase of any property. The register
shall be open to inspection by any police officer during normal hours of
operation. (Ord. 1114, 8-19-1986)
3-2-5-16: REPORTS TO CHIEF OF POLICE:
It shall be the duty of every licensee to have available for delivery to the
chief of police, or officer designated by the chief, every business day and
before the hour of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon, a legible and correct copy from
the register of all personal property, or other valuable things, received or
deposited or purchased the preceding day in whatever quantity received,
including property purchased as secondhand merchandise at wholesale, secondhand
merchandise taken in for sale or possessed on consignment for sale, and
secondhand merchandise taken in for trade.
No person shall be required to furnish such description of any new property
purchased from manufacturers or wholesale dealers having an established place
of business, or of any goods purchased at open sale, or from a bankrupt stock.
Such goods must be accompanied by a bill of sale or other evidence of open and
legitimate purchase and must be shown to the chief of police and members of the
police department, when demanded. (Ord. 1114, 8-19-1986)
3-2-5-17: INSPECTION OF PREMISES; SEIZURES:
Every licensee and every person employed by the licensee in the conduct of
business, shall admit to any and every part of the premises designated in the
license, during normal business hours, any law enforcement officer of the city
to examine any goods, articles, things, pledges, pawns, or books or other
records on the premises dealing with purchase or sale of used property and to
search for and to take into possession any article known or for which such
officer has reasonable grounds to believe to have been stolen. Such law
enforcement officer may make any such search or seizure as is provided for in
this section, and property so seized shall be receipted for by such officer,
who shall fully describe the seized property and sign the receipt. Should the
officer determine the property not to be stolen, the officer shall promptly
return same to the licensee and obtain a receipt therefor, as aforesaid. (Ord.
1114, 8-19-1986)
3-2-5-18: WAITING PERIOD:
The licensee shall keep all property purchased or received from an individual
for inspection for a period of seven (7) calendar days before it can be sold or
traded. The waiting period may be waived in writing by the chief of police or
by his authorized representative. (Ord. 1114, 8-19-1986)
3-2-5-19: RESERVED: 
Repealed by Ord. 4296, passed 8-2-2022.
3-2-5-20: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
in this chapter, or any part thereof, or application thereof to any person,
firm, corporation, public agency or circumstance, is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this chapter or any part thereof. It is hereby
declared to be the legislative intent of the city council that this chapter
would have been adopted had such unconstitutional or invalid provision, clause,
sentence, paragraph, section, or part thereof not been included. (Ord. 1114, 8-
19-1986)
3-2-6: FALSE OR MISLEADING APPLICATION:
In addition to being subject to penalty as hereinafter set forth, any person
which obtains a license as herein provided by furnishing the city with a false
or misleading application shall, upon the discovery thereof, suffer an
immediate revocation of such license and forfeiture of all fees paid. (Ord.
966, 3-1-1983)
3-2-7: PENALTY:
Any person who operates without a proper license or otherwise violates any of
the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to the revocation of any
license issued (if any) and/or the forfeiture of any fees paid to the City of
Canton, as determined by the Mayor or the City Council. Additionally, any
person who operates without a property license or otherwise violates any
provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)
upon conviction of each offense. Each calendar day (or portion thereof) during
which any person makes, causes, or continues a violation of any provision of
this Chapter shall be deemed a separate offense or violation. A licensee shall
be fully responsible for any violation of this Chapter occasioned by or with
the condonation of the licensee's partners, directors, members, managers,
officers, shareholders, agents, or employees and any such violation shall be
imputed to the such licensee (if any). (Ord. 966, 3-1-1983; amd. Ord. 4296, 8-
2-2022)
3-2-8: ANTIQUE DEALERS:
   (A)   Antique Dealers: As used in this section, an "antique dealer" is
defined as one who has a majority fifty one percent (51%) of his gross sales
each year derived from the sale of antiques and/or primitives. As used in this
section, an "antique" or "primitive" is defined as an old and valuable art
object or article no longer in production which is at least fifty (50) years
old. As used in this section, the term "sale" does not include an exchange,
trade, or swap of items.
   (B)   License Required: All persons desiring to engage in business within
the corporate limits of the city as an antique dealer shall first obtain a
license therefor under penalty of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00)
nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense.
   (C)   Application: Every application for a license under this section shall,
as a minimum, state and provide the following information: name and residence
address of owner and/or operator; address of proposed business; business hours.
   (D)   License Fee: Fifteen dollars ($15.00) per year, nonrefundable and
payable in advance.
   (E)   Keeping Records Required: All persons holding licenses under this
section shall keep a permanently bound book in which shall be written in ink,
at the time of each and every transaction, load or pledge, an accurate account
and description, in the English language, of all the goods, articles and other
things which were the subject of any transaction; the amount of money exchanged
therefor or the value of any item traded therefor; the time of purchasing or
exchanging; and the name and residence address of the person making such trade
or sale. No entry in such book shall be erased, mutilated or changed.
   (F)   Inspection: The said book, as well as every article or other thing so
traded or exchanged, shall at all times be open to the inspection of the chief
of police of the city of Canton, Fulton County, Illinois, or to any officer or
investigator under his command.
   (G)   Property From Minor: No person licensed under this section shall
purchase, trade or exchange any article or item with a minor without first
obtaining written permission from such minor's parent or guardian. Proof of
receipt of such written permission shall be kept for one calendar year
following such transaction and shall be made available for inspection as
provided in subsection (F) of this section.
   (H)   Revocation Of License: Any person holding a license under this section
who violates any of the provisions hereof shall have his license suspended or
revoked by the mayor as follows:
      1.   First offense or violation: Suspension of license of not less than
thirty (30) days nor more than one hundred twenty (120) days, as determined by
the mayor.
      2.   Second or subsequent offense or violation: Revocation of license for
no less than one year nor more than five (5) years, as determined by the mayor.
   (I)   Penalty: In addition to the revocation of license provided for in
subsection (H) of this Section
3-2-8, any person who violates any of the provisions of this Section
3-2-8 shall be subject to Section
3-2-7.
   (J)   Application Period For Existing Businesses: Any person owning or
operating any of the foregoing businesses on the effective date hereof shall,
within thirty (30) days of such effective date, make application for the
license required of this section. During such thirty (30) day period, all such
businesses already in existence shall be permitted to continue to operate,
pending application for and issuance of the required license. (Ord. 1128-A, 2-
3-1987; amd. Ord. 4296, 8-2-2022)
3-2-9: SPOON RIVER VALLEY SCENIC DRIVE:
   (A)   Registration Contract Required: It shall be unlawful within the city
of Canton to offer for sale or to sell wares that are normal and customary on
the scenic drive including, but not limited to, handmade crafts, antiques,
Native American items, clothing and/or food without a current registration
contract duly entered into with the Spoon River Valley Scenic Drive Associates,
Inc.
   (B)   Proof Of Registration: Vendors shall exhibit their annual registration
contract at a prominent location within their tent/booth/selling area. Vendors
shall have their annual registration contract available for inspection upon
demand by local law enforcement officials.
   (C)   Violation: It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this
section if vendors cannot produce a current, valid registration contract with
the Spoon River Valley Scenic Drive Associates, Inc., upon demand.
   (D)   In addition to the penalties under Section
3-2-7, and in the event of a violation of this Section
3-2-9, local law enforcement officials are authorized to seize all wares
offered for sale by an unregistered vendor or any illegal items offered for
sale by any vendor. (Ord. 1901, 3-20-2007; amd. Ord. 4296, 8-2-2022)
3-2-10: ROOFING CONTRACTORS:
   (A)   License Required: It shall be unlawful within the city of Canton to
perform any roofing work, for profit, unless licensed by the city of Canton.
   (B)   License Requirements: No license will be issued unless the roofing
contractors are properly licensed through the state of Illinois. Contractors
must have the name of their company properly identified on their trucks. Any
advertisement or contract with their letterhead must list their state roofing
license number. Licenses must be renewed annually.
   (C)   Cost Of License: The city will require a nonrefundable ten dollar
($10.00) processing fee to be paid at the time of the application.
   (D)   Application: The contractor will be required to submit, on a form
provided by the city, an annual application.
   (E)   Proof Of License: Contractors shall exhibit their city license at a
prominent location when performing roofing work, such as in their truck or
affixed to the home. Contractors shall have their city license available for
inspection upon demand by local law or code enforcement officials.
   (F)   Violation: It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this
section if contractors cannot produce a current, valid license with the city of
Canton or state of Illinois, upon demand.
   (G)   Penalty: In addition to the penalties under Section 3-2-7, and in the
event of a violation of this Section 3-2-10, local law or code enforcement
officials are authorized to stop all work being performed by any unlicensed
contractor.
(H)   List Of Licensed Contractors: The city will maintain and update, at least
semiannually, a list of all roofing contractors with valid, city licenses. The
city will have a list of licensed roofing contractors readily available from
the building and zoning official and the city clerk's office. The city will
also post the list of licensed contractors at city hall and on the city's
website. (Ord. 1989, 9-1-2009, eff. 1-1-2010; amd. Ord. 4296, 8-2-2022)
3-2-11: FOOD TRUCKS:
   (A)   Definitions:
   FOOD TRUCK: A self-contained food service operation, located in a readily
movable, motorized wheeled or towed vehicle, used to store, prepare, display,
or serve food. A food truck also includes food carts that are non-motorized,
pushcarts, stands, or tents for the sale of food and beverage. A food truck
shall not include:
      1.   A vehicle intended purely for the delivery of food to a restaurant
or business for purposes of resale ( e.g. food distributor);
      2.   A vehicle operating as a delivery vehicle for food and/or beverage
prepared at a permanent location (e.g. pizza delivery) or delivering food or
beverages to regular customers on established routes (e.g. milk delivery);
      3.   An ice cream truck, as defined below;
      4.   A lemonade stand as defined by 410 ILCS 625/3.9; or
      5.   A pushcart, stand, or tent operated by a restaurant or bar, on the
premises of the restaurant or bar, as part of its business operations.
   ICE CREAM TRUCK: A motor vehicle or trailer in which primarily ice cream,
popsicles, ice sherbets, or similar frozen desserts are carried for purposes of
retail sale from the motor vehicle on public roadways in the City of Canton.
   PUSHCART: A nonself-propelled vehicles selling and/or serving food or
beverage products for use or consumption of the purchaser and not for resale.
   (B)   License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to
operate a Food Truck without a Food Truck License issued pursuant to this
Section
3-2-11, except as otherwise stated in this Section
3-2-11.
   (C)   License Application: Prior to the issuance of a Food Truck License,
all persons or entities seeking such license shall complete an application, on
a form approved by the City Clerk. For purposes of this Section
3-2-11, the following information, at a minimum, must be included on or with an
application for a Food Truck License:
      1.   Applicant's Name.
      2.   Applicant's Business Address (P.O. Box is not sufficient).
      3.   Applicant's Residential Address, and if the applicant is a
corporation or other business entity, then the residential addresses of its
partners, officers, or members.
      4.   The location(s) that the Applicant intends to operate the Food
Truck.
      5.   The nature of the business which the applicant intends to conduct.
      6.   Proof, satisfactory to the City, of the Fulton County Health
Department's approval of the Applicant's operation of the Food Truck.
      7.   The Applicant's Illinois business tax (IBT) number.
      8.   Proof of the Applicant's general liability insurance policy with the
City of Canton added as an additionally insured party and minimum limits of one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) individually and in the aggregate. This must be
provided prior to the issuance of the license, if not available at the time of
application.
      9.   The location(s), date(s), and time(s) the Applicant will operate.
      10.   If the Applicant intends to operate on private property, written
proof, satisfactory to the City, of the private property owner's permission to
operate the Food Truck on its premises.
      11.   A sworn statement that the Applicant has reviewed and understands
the ordinances applicable to Food Trucks and that the Applicant will comply
with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, rules, regulations, and/or
ordinances regarding the operation and use of the Food Truck within the City of
Canton.
   Applicants and applications meeting the requirements of this Section
3-2-11 shall be submitted to the City Clerk's Office for consideration, and
upon acceptance of the application by the City Clerk and payment of an annual
fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), a Food Truck License will be issued
to the Applicant for a period of one (1) year. Alternatively, a Food Truck
License may be issued on a daily basis for up to ten (10) days per calendar
year for twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per day. In the event of an application
for a Food Truck License on a daily basis, the application must specifically
set forth the days the Food Truck will operate. Refunds shall not be issued
solely due to weather conditions on the days selected by the Applicant. Food
Truck Licenses may be limited to the locations, dates, and times requested or
otherwise set forth by the City of Canton on the Food Truck License. Each Food
Truck License shall be valid for only one (1) Food Truck, and a separate
application and fee must be submitted for each Food Truck.
   (D)   Special Events: Persons or entities are not required to obtain a Food
Truck License for purposes of a special event, festival, farmer's market, or
other event approved by the City of Canton in which food or beverage will be
sold or served.
   (E)   Food Truck Requirements: In addition to paying the annual fee and
obtaining a Food Truck License, all persons or entities operating a Food Truck
shall:
      1.   Prominently display the Food Truck License so that it can be easily
viewed by any customers of the Food Truck;
      2.   Comply with all other City of Canton ordinances, rules, and
regulations;
      3.   Comply with all federal, state, and local laws, rules, ordinances,
and regulations applicable to the service and/or sale of food and/or beverages,
including but not limited to rules and regulations set forth by the Illinois
Department of Public Health or Fulton County Health Department;
      4.   Not sell any alcoholic beverages without a valid liquor license and
express permission by the City of Canton, State of Illinois, Illinois Liquor
Control Commission, and/or other applicable governing body or agency;
      5.   Have a valid license and registration for any vehicle or trailer, as
applicable;
      6.   Not operate during the hours of twelve o’clock (12:00) a.m. and
seven o’clock (7:00) a.m. on Monday through Friday or between the hours of one
thirty (1:30) a.m. and seven o'clock (7:00) a.m. on Saturday or Sunday;
      7.   Not block, obstruct, or interfere with vehicular, bicycle, or
pedestrian flow or traffic;
      8.   Not use or maintain any sound amplifying equipment or noisemaking
apparatus that disrupts other businesses, exceeds seventy-five (75) decibels as
measured from ten feet away, or unreasonably interferes with resident's quiet
enjoyment of their residence;
      9.   Not operate within five hundred (500) feet of a special event,
farmer's market, or festival authorized by the City of Canton, if the Food
Truck is not part of the event or does not have permission to operate within
the area of the special event, farmer's market, or festival;
      10.   Maintain the Food Truck in a sanitary and good mechanical and/or
structural condition, as applicable;
      11.   Provide trash receptacles sufficient to collect trash generated by
their operation and shall collect and remove all trash generated by said
operation prior to leaving the location;
      12.   Not dispose of any fats, oil, or grease on any public property or
in the City's sewer system;
      13.   Only permit sales from the curbside of a vehicle when parked on a
City street that is otherwise a permitted area for the Food Truck to operate;
      14.   Collect and remit all necessary taxes associated with the sale of
food and/or beverages, in accordance with federal, state, and local laws,
ordinances, rules, and regulations;
      15.   Maintain working, up-to-date fire extinguishers in all cooking
areas.
   (F)   Permitted Areas: Food Trucks shall not operate in any area within the
City of Canton except as expressly enumerated below:
      1.   Areas authorized by the City of Canton for a special event, farmer's
market, or festival.
      2.   Areas that have zoning regulations which would otherwise permit for
the operation of food trucks or food and/or beverage sales, subject to being an
otherwise permissible public or private property as set forth below.
      3.   Public property under the ownership or control of the City of
Canton, but only as designated by the Mayor or the Director of Commercial
Planning & Zoning with the approval of the Mayor, as an approved "Food Truck
Zone." Other public properties under the control of other public entities
located within the corporate boundaries of the City of Canton, such as the
school district or park district, shall also be permitted, provided they are
operating by approval of the other public entity and in an approved Food Truck
Zone as designated by the Mayor or the Director of Commercial Planning & Zoning
with the approval of the Mayor. The City Clerk's Office will maintain a list of
approved Food Truck Zones and the dates/times said Food Trucks may operate
within said Food Truck Zone.
      4.   Private properties with the written permission of the owner,
provided, however, that no Food Trucks shall be permitted North of Hickory
Steet and South of Myrtle Street, between A venue B and Sixth A venue, unless
operating within an Area otherwise authorized by the City of Canton for a
special event, farmer's market, or festival or if designated by the Mayor or
the Director of Commercial Planning & Zoning with the approval of the Mayor as
a Food Truck Zone. The City Clerk's Office will maintain a list of said
approved Food Truck Zones and the dates/times said Food Trucks may operate
within said Food Truck Zone.
   (G)   Peripheral Setup to Food Truck: No tents, tables, or chairs shall be
placed outside the Food Truck without the express permission of the City of
Canton. Signage shall be limited to the Food Truck and/or a free-standing
sandwich board. Connection to city water and sewer is prohibited unless proper
approval by the City of Canton is obtained. Trash receptacles must be visible
to patrons of the Food Truck and must be removed before the Food Truck departs.
   (H)   License Revocation or Denial: The Mayor or the City Council may deny
an application for a Food Truck License or, in addition to the other penalties
set forth in this Chapter, revoke a Food Truck License without a refund of any
fees if:
      1.   The applicant has failed to comply with this Chapter or any other
ordinances of the City of Canton or is found in violation of this Chapter or
any other ordinances of the City of Canton;
      2.   The applicant has any outstanding debt owed to the City of Canton;
      3.   The applicant made a false material statement on the application for
a Food Truck License; or
      4.   The applicant failed to comply with the terms or conditions of any
Food Truck License issued pursuant to this Chapter.
   (I)   Exemptions: The following organizations or entities are exempt from
the Food Truck licensing and fee requirements of this Section
3-2-11:
      1.   Youth Organizations: Members of the Girl Scouts, the Boy Scouts, and
other such youth organizations which are sponsored by the elementary and
secondary schools in this City who sell merchandise on behalf of such
organizations.
      2.   Nonprofit Organizations: Food or beverage sales conducted or
sponsored by governmental, civic, patriotic, fraternal, educational, religious,
or benevolent organizations which have been in active and continuous existence
for at least one year prior to the holding of the sale, or which are
incorporated as a not-for-profit corporation by the State of Illinois, unless
done for the financial gain of the individual, corporation, or other business
entity so engaged in such activity.
      3.   Concessions: Sales incidental to sporting events, concerts, or
performances of plays, circuses, or similar presentations where said sales are
conducted by the person producing the event. (Ord. 4296, 8-2-2022)
CHAPTER 3
AMUSEMENTS
SECTION:
3-3-1: Definition
3-3-2: Classification For License
3-3-3: License
3-3-4: Application
3-3-5: License Fees
3-3-6: Where Classes Are Mixed
3-3-7: Compliance With Chapter
3-3-8: Immoral Exhibitions
3-3-9: Local Talent Excepted
3-3-10: Tent Shows
3-3-11: Proprietor, Preserve Order
3-3-12: Chairs In Aisles
3-3-13: Public Dances
3-3-14: Currency Operated Amusement Machines
3-3-14-1: Video Gaming Machines
3-3-15: Fee For Portion Of Year
3-3-16: Penalty
3-3-1: DEFINITION:
The word "entertainment" wherever used in this chapter shall be taken to mean
and include theatricals, and other exhibitions, shows, and amusements wherein
or whereby any person or persons shall act, play or perform any play, opera or
other dramatic musical composition or give performance of any kind, or give any
show or public exhibition for gain. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 7, Art. 1, Sec. 6)
3-3-2: CLASSIFICATION FOR LICENSE:
For the purpose of providing for the regulation and licensing of theatrical,
dramatic and operatic entertainments, shows, amusements, and public exhibitions
of every kind intended or calculated to amuse, instruct or entertain, where
such entertainments, shows, amusements and exhibitions are given for gain, or
for admission to which the public is required to pay a fee, such
entertainments, shows, amusements, and exhibitions are divided into nine (9)
classes, as follows:
   (A)   First class: All entertainments of theatrical, dramatic, operatic,
vaudeville, or musical character shall belong to and be known as entertainments
of the first class.
   (B)   Second class: All circuses and menageries, or combined circuses and
menageries, caravans and wild west shows shall belong to and be known as
entertainments of the second class.
   (C)   Third class: All theatrical or dramatic entertainments, sideshows,
concerts, vaudeville, minstrel or musical entertainments given under a covering
of canvas or within any structure or enclosure intended for temporary use and
capable of easy transfer or removal, shall belong to and be known as
entertainments of the third class.
   (D)   Fourth class: All entertainments or exhibitions of moving pictures
known as mutoscope, kinetoscope, cinematograph or other like automatic or
motion picture devices, shall belong to and be known as entertainments of the
fourth class.
   (E)   Fifth class: All swings and all itinerant shows, such as bird shows,
galvanic batteries, lifting machines, blowing, striking or other testing
machines of like character, and all other exhibitions and devices given or
performed, from place to place in the city, shall belong to and be known as
entertainments of the fifth class.
   (F)   Sixth class: All merry-go-rounds, revolving wheels carrying
passengers, slides and all similar amusement devices, exhibitions, performances
or entertainments not included in or carried on as part of class eight as
hereinafter described, shall belong to and be known as entertainments of the
sixth class.
   (G)   Seventh class: All roller skating rinks and similar amusement devices
or places, shall belong to and be known as entertainments of the seventh class.
   (H)   Eighth class: When several amusement enterprises commonly known as a
"street carnival" such as revolving wheels, merry-go- rounds, shooting
galleries, giant swings, panoramas, musical and theatrical entertainments, and
various other devices or entertainments, are carried on, engaged in, or
conducted as one enterprise or by several concessionaires and whether one
admission fee is charged for admission to all such entertainments or separate
fee is charged to each amusement entertainment or enterprise, the various
entertainments offered or conducted shall for the purpose of this chapter be
considered as one enterprise, and shall belong to and be known as
entertainments of the eighth class.
   (I)   Ninth class: All exhibitions, performances, entertainments, or
amusement devices not included in any of the foregoing classes, shall belong to
and be known as entertainments of the ninth class. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 7, Art. 1,
Sec. 1)
3-3-3: LICENSE:
No person, either as owner, lessee, manager, officer or agent, or in any other
capacity, shall give, conduct, produce, present or offer, for gain or profit,
any of the entertainments, exhibitions or performances, mentioned or included
in any of the nine (9) classes specified and defined in this chapter, at any
place within the corporate limits of the city without first having been issued
a license for that purpose. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
section shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and each and every day upon
which any such person shall give, conduct, produce, present or offer any such
entertainment, exhibition or performance contrary to or in violation of any of
the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 7, Art. 1, Sec. 2)
3-3-4: APPLICATION:
Any person desiring to produce, present, conduct or offer for gain or profit,
any of the entertainments, exhibitions or performances mentioned or included in
any of the nine (9) classes specified in this chapter, shall make application
to the mayor in writing, setting out the full name of the applicant, a
description of the kind and class of entertainment he intends to offer, and the
place at which it is desired to produce, present, conduct or offer such
entertainment, exhibition or performance. Upon the payment by such applicant to
the clerk of the license fee hereinafter specified for the particular class of
entertainment such applicant desires a license for the production or
presentation of, the clerk shall issue to such applicant a license authorizing
him to conduct, produce, present or offer the class of entertainment specified
in such license, at the place described in such application, and for the period
of time specified in such license; provided, however, that if the place at
which it is desired to offer such entertainment be not a fit or proper place,
and not conducted and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this code
governing or controlling such places, or if the entertainment desired to be
produced or offered be of an immoral, indecent or dangerous character, or if
the person making application for a license be not of good character, the mayor
may refuse to approve such application, and no license shall be issued by the
clerk except upon the approval of the application therefor by the mayor. (R.O.
1959, Ch. 7, Art. 1, Sec. 3)
3-3-5: LICENSE FEES:
In any case where any person shall desire to produce, offer, present or conduct
any entertainment mentioned or included in any of the classes hereinbefore
defined and specified, the license fee to be charged for each particular class
of entertainment shall be as follows:
   (A)   First class: Five dollars ($5.00) for each day or part thereof
provided, that proprietors, managers, or lessees of opera houses or theaters
may pay a license fee of two hundred forty dollars ($240.00) per year for each
opera house or theater, in lieu of all separate license fees for shows or
amusements given in such opera house or theater during the period of such
license, and such license shall be taken out for a period of twelve (12) months
only.
   (B)   Second class: Where an admission fee of forty cents ($0.40) or more is
charged, one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day or part thereof; where an
admission fee of twenty five cents ($0.25) and less than forty cents ($0.40) is
charged, fifty dollars ($50.00) for each day or part thereof; and where an
admission fee of less than twenty five cents ($0.25) is charged, the license
fee shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each day or part thereof.
   (C)   Third class: Ten dollars ($10.00) for one day, or fifty dollars
($50.00) for each week. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 7, Art. 1, Sec. 4)
   (D)   Fourth class: Where the seating capacity is under seven hundred fifty
(750), seventy five dollars ($75.00) per year; where the seating capacity is
seven hundred fifty (750) or over, one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00) per
year. (Ord. 150, 9-7-1965)
   (E)   Fifth class: Five dollars ($5.00) for each day or part thereof.
   (F)   Sixth class: Ten dollars ($10.00) per day, or fifty dollars ($50.00)
per week.
   (G)   Seventh class: Twenty dollars ($20.00) each month or part thereof.
   (H)   Eighth class: Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per week or part
thereof.
   (I)   Ninth class: Five dollars ($5.00) per day or part thereof. (R.O. 1959,
Ch. 7, Art. 1, Sec. 4)
3-3-6: WHERE CLASSES ARE MIXED:
Where any entertainment, show, exhibition, performance or amusement enterprise
embraces two (2) or more of the classes above specified, such entertainment,
show, exhibition, performance or amusement enterprise shall be classified and
charged for as wholly belonging to that class for which the highest license fee
is charged. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 7, Art. 1, Sec. 5)
3-3-7: COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER:
Every license granted under the provisions of this chapter shall at all times
be subject to the provisions of this code, existing when the same shall be
issued, or which shall thereafter be passed, so far as the same shall apply,
and shall be subject to revocation by the mayor at any time upon failure of any
person obtaining the same or any person in his employment to so conform to the
provisions of this code. It shall be the duty of the chief of police or any
policeman to report all violations of the holders of such licenses to the
mayor, and in case such license shall be revoked, to see to it that such place
of amusement, entertainment, performance or exhibition is closed. (R.O. 1959,
Ch. 7, Art. 1, Sec. 7)
3-3-8: IMMORAL EXHIBITIONS:
No person, whether licensed or not, shall give, produce, present, conduct or
offer, either publicly or privately, with or without charging an admission fee,
any indecent, immoral, lewd or impure play, exhibition, entertainment,
performance, apparatus or production or any play, exhibition, entertainment,
performance, apparatus or production suggestive of anything indecent, immoral,
lewd or impure, within the city, under penalty of not less than twenty dollars
($20.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (R.O.
1959, Ch. 7, Art. 1, Sec. 8)
3-3-9: LOCAL TALENT EXCEPTED:
This chapter shall not require the taking out of license or payment of license
fees by citizens or residents of the city for the production of theatricals,
musical entertainments, cantatas, lectures, church or band fairs, balls or like
entertainments, where such entertainments shall be under the auspices of local
organizations or persons, wholly or in the greater part consisting of local
talent, and for the benefit of religious, charitable or educational
organizations, or where the proceeds of such entertainment shall go to the
general fund for the maintenance of local organizations, churches, schools,
bands, lodges, hospitals or for like purposes, such entertainments being
produced only for a period not exceeding one week in any month by any one
organization. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 7, Art. 1, Sec. 9)
3-3-10: TENT SHOWS:
No license shall be granted to any owner, agent or manager of any circus,
menagerie or show conducted under a tent or tents unless every part of any such
tent be removed at least fifty feet (50') from any dwelling house or other
building, except when the written consent of the occupant or occupants of such
buildings be first obtained and presented to the city clerk, and the license
for such exhibition shall not authorize the erection of such tent or tents upon
any other grounds than those therein designated. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 7, Art. 1,
Sec. 10)
3-3-11: PROPRIETOR, PRESERVE ORDER:
It shall be the duty of every proprietor or lessee of any theater or public
hall, and of every person giving or conducting any show or amusement within the
city to preserve good order in and about his place of exhibition or amusement,
and if necessary for that purpose, he shall employ at his own expense a
sufficient number of special policemen. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 7, Art. 1, Sec. 11)
3-3-12: CHAIRS IN AISLES:
No chairs, stools or seats of any description shall be placed or permitted to
remain in the aisles or passageways in any theater, hall or other public
building when the same is occupied by the public or any audience, under a
penalty of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars
($100.00) for each and every violation of this section. It shall be the duty of
the chief of police and all members of the police force to see that this
section is strictly observed; and in case of any violation thereof to forthwith
proceed to clear any obstructed aisle or passageway and to arrest the offender
or offenders. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 7, Art. 1, Sec. 12)
3-3-13: PUBLIC DANCES:
   (A)   Permit Required: No person, either as owner, lessee, agent, manager or
proprietor, shall conduct any public dance in the city, or use or rent any hall
or room in the city for a public dance, without first having obtained a permit
from the mayor and paid the license fee hereinafter provided for. Application
for such licenses shall be made to the clerk of the city, and applicants shall
state the name of the person proposing to conduct said public dance, the
location thereof and the time when said public dance or dances are to be held.
Before the issuance of any permit the same shall be presented to the mayor for
his approval. (1959 Code § 7-1-13)
   (B)   License Fee: A license fee of three dollars ($3.00) for each public
dance for which a permit is sought shall be paid to the clerk before any permit
shall issue. (1959 Code § 7-1-14)
   (C)   Moral Character: A permit to conduct a public dance shall not be
issued unless the applicant or applicants therefor are of good moral character.
(1959 Code § 7-1-15)
   (D)   Police Supervision: Any public dance conducted in the city shall be
under the supervision of the police department of the city and any permit the
issuance of which is hereby provided for shall be issued subject to this
provision. (1959 Code § 7-1-16)
   (E)   Power Of Police: Any police matron, special policeman or any police
officer of the city shall have the power to arrest or eject any person guilty
of loud, boisterous or disorderly conduct, or improper, vulgar or disorderly
dancing, and to regulate the style of dancing. (1959 Code § 7-1-17)
   (F)   Time For Dancing: No public dances shall be conducted in the city on
Sunday. No licensee or permittee hereunder shall permit any person under the
age of sixteen (16) years to attend any such public dance unless accompanied by
a parent or guardian. (1959 Code § 7-1-18)
   (G)   Definition Of Public Dance: By a "public dance" is meant any dance or
gathering where dancing is engaged in wholly or in part as the evening's
amusement, and which is open to the public generally, whether the same is free
to the public or whether an admission fee is paid or tickets sold for the same.
(1959 Code § 7-1-19)
3-3-14: CURRENCY OPERATED AMUSEMENT MACHINES:
   (A)   Definition: A "currency operated machine", within the meaning of this
chapter, shall be a machine, for amusement or otherwise, which depends, for its
operation and the fulfillment of its intended purpose, upon a deposit or
insertion into the machine itself of currency, whether coin or bill, authorized
as legal tender by the United States Of America. This definition shall not
include those machines designated as video gaming machines as set forth in
section
3-3-14-1 of this chapter.
   (B)   License Required: Every person, firm or corporation, operating its
place of business or carrying on its activities at a location within the
territorial limits of the city of Canton, Illinois, shall first obtain a
license for each machine operated or active at such location. The annual
license fee for each such machine shall be the sum of thirty five dollars
($35.00) payable annually in advance and no fee or portion thereof shall be
refunded. The license shall be displayed on each machine at all times.
   (C)   Application For License: Before any license shall be granted under the
terms of this section, the person seeking said license shall file with the
clerk, an application showing the location where the currency operated machine
for which such license is sought will be placed. The mayor shall then grant
said license, attested by the clerk.
   (D)   Penalty: Any person convicted for a violation of any of the provisions
of this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). Each currency operated
machine which is not licensed shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1770,
9-16-2003)
3-3-14-1: VIDEO GAMING MACHINES:
   (A)   Definition: "Video gaming machine" means any electronic video game
machine that, upon insertion of cash, is available to play or simulate the play
of a video game, including, but not limited to, video poker, in line, and
blackjack, utilizing a video display and microprocessors in which the player
may receive free games or credits that can be redeemed for cash. The term does
not include a machine that directly dispenses coins, cash, or tokens or is for
amusement purposes only. (Ord. 1773, 9-16-2003)
   (B)   License Required: Every person, firm or corporation, operating its
place of business or carrying on its activities at a location within the
territorial limits of the city of Canton, Illinois, shall first obtain a
license for each video gaming machine operated or active at such location. The
annual license fee for each such machine shall be the sum of twenty five
dollars ($25.00) payable, by the owner of the gaming machines, annually in
advance and no fee or portion thereof shall be refunded. The license shall be
displayed on each machine at all times. (Ord. 2099, 10-3-2012)
   (C)   Application For License: Before any license shall be granted under the
terms of this section, the person seeking said license shall file with the
clerk, an application showing the location where the video gaming machine for
which license is sought will be placed. The mayor shall then grant said
license, attested by the clerk.
   (D)   Penalty: Any person convicted for a violation of any of the provisions
of this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each video
gaming machine, which is not licensed, shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 1773, 9-16-2003)
3-3-15: FEE FOR PORTION OF YEAR:
In all cases enumerated in this chapter where an annual license fee only is
specified, it shall be lawful to issue a license for the remainder of the
municipal year in which application for such license is made, and to charge for
such license such proportion of the annual license as the remaining portion of
the municipal year bears to the entire year. (1959 Code § 7-1-20)
3-3-16: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, shall,
where no specific penalty is provided, be subject to a fine of not less than
five dollars ($5.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense. (1959 Code § 7-1-21)
CHAPTER 4
AUCTIONS; AUCTIONEERS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Definition
3-4-2: Auctioneer's License
3-4-3: Bond
3-4-4: License Fee
3-4-5: Application, Contents
3-4-6: License Not Transferable
3-4-7: License Restrictions
3-4-8: How Jewelry Sold
3-4-9: Rights Of Purchasers
3-4-10: Sales, Description
3-4-11: False Representations
3-4-12: Deceiving Bidders
3-4-1: DEFINITION:
All sales of property within the city by public outcry to the highest bidder,
as well as the public offer of property at a price beyond its value, then
lowering the price or increasing the number of articles until someone accepts
the property offered as a purchase, shall be held and deemed a selling at
auction within the meaning of this chapter. But this chapter shall not apply to
nonresident auctioneers selling goods of a nonresident, but such nonresident
auctioneers shall be held to be itinerant and transient merchants. (R.O. 1959,
Ch. 9, Sec. 12)
3-4-2: AUCTIONEER'S LICENSE:
No sale of goods, chattels, personal or real property, at auction, except sales
made under legal process, shall be made except by an auctioneer or other person
who shall first have obtained from the clerk a license, and executed a bond to
the city as hereinafter provided. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 9, Sec. 1)
3-4-3: BOND:
No person shall receive a license to sell goods at auction in the city until he
shall first have executed to the city a bond in the penal sum of five hundred
dollars ($500.00), with two (2) or more securities residents of the city,
conditioned for the strict observance of the provisions of this code, said bond
to be approved by the mayor. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 9, Sec. 3)
3-4-4: LICENSE FEE:
There shall be charged for every license granted to any auctioneer under the
provisions of this chapter, for one year, twenty five dollars ($25.00); for six
(6) months, fifteen dollars ($15.00); for three (3) months, ten dollars
($10.00); and for a shorter period than three (3) months, five dollars ($5.00)
per day; provided, that licenses may be granted for the sale of livestock on
the premises of the owner thereof, and for the sale of household goods and
mortgaged property, without bond, for a shorter period at the rate of two
dollars ($2.00) per day; and provided further, that the clerk shall issue
license without charge to any auctioneer who is an honorably discharged soldier
or sailor of the United States of America upon presentation of his certificate
of discharge showing his honorable discharge from the military or naval service
of the United States. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 9, Sec. 3)
3-4-5: APPLICATION, CONTENTS:
Any person desiring to obtain a license as an auctioneer shall make application
in writing to the mayor, setting forth in such application, his name, place of
residence, place of business, and the names of his sureties, and thereupon the
mayor shall cause the clerk to issue a license to such applicant to act as an
auctioneer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, upon the filing
of the bond as required herein. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 9, Sec. 4)
3-4-6: LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE:
No license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable,
or be held to authorize any person other than the one named therein, or his
agent or servant, to sell or cry goods or realty at auction, and such agent or
servant shall only be authorized to auction goods when it may be necessary to
rest his employer, or when from sickness or other emergency such employer is
unable to attend to the business himself. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 9, Sec. 5)
3-4-7: LICENSE RESTRICTIONS:
In no case shall any license be held to authorize any two (2) persons to sell
under it at one and the same time, or to cover more than one place of business
or to authorize auction sales at any other than the regular place of business
of the person receiving such license, if he has such regular place; provided,
that any auctioneer may by first notifying the clerk, change the location of
his place of business, in which case the license shall be held to cover such
new place; and provided further, that any licensed auctioneer may temporarily
leave his place of business and sell where situated any property which cannot
conveniently be moved to such place of business. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 9, Sec. 6)
3-4-8: HOW JEWELRY SOLD:
Every auctioneer who shall offer for sale any watch, plate or jewelry of any
kind, shall announce to the persons present, in a loud manner, whether the same
is gold or silver, gold or silver plate or wash, or base metal, before offering
the same for sale, and for a failure to make such an announcement, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined in a sum not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor
more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each and every offense. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 9,
Sec. 7)
3-4-9: RIGHTS OF PURCHASERS:
The purchaser of any watch, plate or jewelry at any auction sale shall be
entitled to return the same to the auctioneer at any time within five (5) days
from the date of sale, if the article purchased be not of the quality
represented to him by said auctioneer, and thereupon it shall be the duty of
such auctioneer to refund the purchase price to such purchaser, and for a
failure so to do shall forfeit his license, and be liable to a fine of not less
than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00); and the
closing of the place of sale or business of any such auctioneer at any time
during said five (5) days in order to avoid an offer to return any such article
so sold, shall be construed a violation of this section. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 9,
Sec. 8)
3-4-10: SALES, DESCRIPTION:
It shall be the duty of every auctioneer who shall offer for sale real or
personal property of any kind whatever, to announce to the persons present, in
a loud tone of voice, before proceeding to sell the same, the character,
quality and description of the property offered for sale. Any auctioneer who
shall violate the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not
less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each
offense. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 9, Sec. 9)
3-4-11: FALSE REPRESENTATIONS:
Any auctioneer who shall, by himself or another, at any sale of any real or
personal property at public auction, with intent to induce any person to
purchase the same, make any false representations or statements as to the
ownership or quality of the article or property offered for sale, or as to the
poverty or circumstances of the owner or pretended owner of such property,
shall, upon conviction, be fined in a sum of not less than ten dollars ($10.00)
nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense, and the license
of such auctioneer shall be revoked. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 9, Sec. 10)
3-4-12: DECEIVING BIDDERS:
Whoever shall exhibit and offer for sale at auction any article and induce its
purchase by any bidder, and shall afterwards secretly substitute any other
article for the one so exhibited, with the intent to deceive and defraud such
bidder, or whoever shall, while engaged in or about the making of any auction
sale, be guilty of any device, trick or fraudulent practice with intent thereby
to deceive or defraud any bidder shall be fined fifty dollars ($50.00) and the
license of such person shall be deemed to be forfeited. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 9, Sec.
11)
CHAPTER 5
BILLBOARDS; POSTERS
SECTION:
3-5-1: License Required
3-5-2: Billboards
3-5-3: Construction, Height, Location
3-5-4: Billposting
3-5-5: Consent Of Property Owners
3-5-6: Existing Boards
3-5-7: License Expiration
3-5-8: Penalty
3-5-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Intentionally omitted. (Ord. 4395, 2-20-2024)
3-5-2: BILLBOARDS:
Intentionally omitted. (Ord. 4395, 2-20-2024)
3-5-3: CONSTRUCTION, HEIGHT, LOCATION:
Intentionally omitted. (Ord. 4395, 2-20-2024)
3-5-4: BILLPOSTING:
Intentionally omitted. (Ord. 4395, 2-20-2024)
3-5-5: CONSENT OF PROPERTY OWNERS:
Intentionally omitted. (Ord. 4395, 2-20-2024)
3-5-6: EXISTING BOARDS:
Intentionally omitted. (Ord. 4395, 2-20-2024)
3-5-7: LICENSE EXPIRATION:
Intentionally omitted. (Ord. 4395, 2-20-2024)
3-5-8: PENALTY:
Intentionally omitted. (Ord. 4395, 2-20-2024)
CHAPTER 6
BILLIARDS; BOWLING ALLEYS
SECTION:
3-6-1: License Required; Bond
3-6-2: License Fee
3-6-3: Bowling Alleys, Frontage Consents
3-6-4: Windows And Doors Clear
3-6-5: Card Playing
3-6-1: LICENSE REQUIRED; BOND:
No person shall keep within the city any billiard, pool, bagatelle, pool, pin
pool or pigeonhole or other like table, or any bowling, pin and ball or box
ball or like alley, to be used or played upon by others for hire or gain,
without first giving a bond in the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) to the
city, to be approved by the council, conditioned for a full and faithful
compliance with all the material provisions of this chapter, and having
obtained a license therefor, under a penalty of not less than twenty five
dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense.
(R.O. 1959, Ch. 11, Sec. 1)
3-6-2: LICENSE FEE:
The annual charges for licenses issued under this chapter shall be as follows:
   (A)   For license to keep billiard or pool tables, twenty dollars ($20.00)
shall be charged for the first table; seventeen dollars fifty cents ($17.50)
for the second table; twelve dollars fifty cents ($12.50) for the third table,
and five dollars ($5.00) for each additional table.
   (B)   For license to keep a pigeonhole or bagatelle table, the sum of fifty
dollar ($50.00) shall be charged for each table.
   (C)   For license to keep a nine (9) or ten (10) pin alley (or any number of
pin alley), or any box ball or like alley, the sum of twenty five dollars
($25.00) for the first alley, and five dollars ($5.00) for each additional
alley, where all are within one building.
All license fees to be paid quarterly in advance. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 11, Sec. 2)
3-6-3: BOWLING ALLEYS, FRONTAGE CONSENTS:
It shall not be lawful for any person to keep, use or operate any bowling, or
pin and ball, box ball or like alleys in any building, structure or place
located upon any street or alley in the city in any block in which two-thirds
(2/3) of the buildings on both sides of the street in such block between the
two (2) nearest intersecting streets are used exclusively for residence
purposes, without the written consent of a majority of the owners of the
property, according to frontage, on both sides of such street or alley between
such intersecting streets. Such written consent shall accompany the application
made for a license. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 11, Sec. 3)
3-6-4: WINDOWS AND DOORS CLEAR:
It shall be unlawful for any person to whom a license may be granted to operate
or keep any billiard or pool room or ball and pin alley to frost, paint, stain
or color the glass in any window or door in any room or place where any such
business may be carried on, or to board up any such window to a greater height
than three feet (3') above the floor. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 11, Sec. 4)
3-6-5: CARD PLAYING:
It shall be unlawful for any proprietor or keeper of any billiard or pool room
or ball and pin alley or other similar place or places of public resort in the
city, to keep or maintain any table or tables for the purpose of card playing
in any such place or to permit persons to assemble in any such place for the
purpose of card playing or to permit people who are assembled in any such place
to play at cards therein or in any room or other place connected therewith.
(R.O. 1959, Ch. 11, Sec. 5)
CHAPTER 7
CIGARETTES
SECTION:
3-7-1: License Required
3-7-2: License Fee
3-7-3: Revocation Of License
3-7-4: License To Be Posted
3-7-5: Cigarettes Containing Drugs
3-7-6: Sale Of Tobacco And Possession Of Tobacco Involving Minors
3-7-7: Officers To Enforce
3-7-8: Vending Machines
3-7-9: Penalty
3-7-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in the sale of cigarettes containing tobacco in any
form, electronic cigarettes, or smokeless tobacco, in the City, without first
having taken out a license therefor in the manner following: Any person
desiring to sell the same shall make written application to the Mayor through
the Clerk, designating the location at which such sales are proposed to be
made, which said application shall be accompanied by a bond payable to the
City, in a penal sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00), with two (2) good and
sufficient sureties, to be approved by the Mayor, conditioned for the faithful
observance and obedience of all the laws of the State of Illinois, and all
provisions of this Code now in force, or which may hereafter be in force, with
reference to the sale of such cigarettes, electronic cigarettes, or smokeless
tobacco upon compliance with such requirements and the payment, in advance, of
the required license fee to the Clerk, a license shall be issued by the Mayor,
countersigned by the Clerk, authorizing such sale by the person and at the
place designated in such license. (Ord. 3062, 6-3-2014)
3-7-2: LICENSE FEE:
The license fee, payable in advance, shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) per
annum, or part thereof, provided no license shall be issued for less than three
(3) months, or part thereof, and no license shall be issued to extend beyond
the end of the Municipal year. (1959 Code § 13-2)
3-7-3: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any license so granted may be revoked by the Mayor on written notice, whenever
it shall appear that the person licensed has violated any provisions of the
laws of this State, or any provision of this Code, relating to the selling or
giving away of cigarettes. (1959 Code § 13-3)
3-7-4: LICENSE TO BE POSTED:
The said licensee shall immediately cause such license to be posted, and shall
keep the same posted, in some conspicuous place, in the place of business
designated in such license. (1959 Code § 13-4)
3-7-5: CIGARETTES CONTAINING DRUGS:
No person shall expose for sale, sell or offer to sell or give away to any
person, directly or indirectly, within the City, any cigarette or cigarettes
containing opium, morphine, glycerine, cocaine, jimson weed, belladonna or any
injurious or dangerous drug or substance. (1959 Code § 13-5)
3-7-6: SALE OF TOBACCO AND POSSESSION OF TOBACCO INVOLVING MINORS:
No person, either as principal, clerk or agent, shall sell, buy for or give
away, either directly or indirectly, any cigarette, electronic cigarette, cigar
or tobacco (including smokeless tobacco), in any form, to any minor person
under the age of twenty one (21) years, within the City. Additionally, it shall
be unlawful for any minor person under the age of twenty one (21) years, within
the City limits, to possess any cigarette, electronic cigarette, cigar or
tobacco (including smokeless tobacco) or tobacco in any of its forms. (Ord.
4152, 7-16-2019)
3-7-7: OFFICERS TO ENFORCE:
It is hereby made the duty of the Chief of Police, and all members of the
police force, from time to time, to inspect and examine all places where
cigarettes are sold, with a view of ascertaining whether the provisions of this
chapter are being complied with, and it is made the duty of each of said
officers to see that the same is rigorously enforced. And the said Chief of
Police is hereby authorized to purchase, and it is hereby made the duty of such
licensee to sell to him samples of cigarettes sold or offered for sale by such
licensee for the purpose of having the same analyzed by such Chief of Police in
order to ascertain whether the same contain any of the drugs or injurious
substances mentioned in section
3-7-5 of this chapter, and said Chief of Police shall preserve a record of such
analysis. (1959 Code § 13-7)
3-7-8: VENDING MACHINES:
Where any person having secured a license from the City for the sale of
cigarettes shall sell or vend the same by means of a cigarette vending machine,
said licensee shall attach thereon a label or stamp to be furnished said
licensee by the Clerk, showing thereon the name of the licensee, the address
thereof, and payment of the license. Such license shall be issued only to the
person conducting the place of business where such vending machine is located.
(1959 Code § 13-8)
3-7-9: PENALTY:
Violations of this chapter shall be governed by title 1, chapter 27, "General
Penalty", of this Code and the fee schedule that is adopted by City Council
from time to time. (Ord. 4034, 7-19-2016)
CHAPTER 8
INTOXICATING LIQUORS
SECTION:
3-8-1: Definitions
3-8-2: License Required
3-8-3: Application
3-8-4: Classes Of Licenses
3-8-5: Liquor Control Commissioner
3-8-6: Residence District; License Restriction
3-8-7: Hours Of Sale, Closing Hours On New Year's Eve
3-8-8: License Fee
3-8-9: Certain Persons; Minors
3-8-9-1: Warning Signs To Be Posted
3-8-9-2: Serving Alcohol; Age Of Employees
3-8-10: Bonds Required
3-8-11: License Restrictions
3-8-12: Interpretation
3-8-13: Reporting Of Incidents To Police; Telephone On Premises
3-8-14: Illegal Activities On Premises
3-8-14-1: Removal Of Alcoholic Liquor From Premises
3-8-14-2: Police Power To Enter Premises
3-8-15: Revocation
3-8-15-1: Fire Code; Inspections; Penalties
3-8-16: Certain Forms Of Nudity Prohibited
3-8-17: Certain Acts Prohibited
3-8-18: Showing Of Certain Films, Pictures Prohibited
3-8-19: Bartender Permit; Required; Display (Rep. by Ord. 3047, 1-7-2014)
3-8-20: Notice; Hearing; Appeal
3-8-21: Penalty
3-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the words and phrases herein defined are
used in this chapter in the sense given them in the following definitions:
ALCOHOL: The product of distillation of any fermented liquor, whether rectified
or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes synthetic ethyl
alcohol. It does not include denatured or wood alcohol.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: The four (4) varieties of liquor herein defined, "alcohol",
"spirits", "wine" and "beer", and every liquid or solid, patented or not,
containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and capable of being consumed as a
beverage by a human being. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to
alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured alcohol produced in accordance
with the acts of Congress and regulations promulgated thereunder, nor to any
liquid or solid containing one-half of one percent (0.5%) or less, of alcohol
by volume. Nor shall the provisions of this chapter apply to flavoring
extracts, syrups, or medicinal, mechanical, scientific, culinary or toilet
preparations, or food products unfit for beverage purposes, but the provisions
of this chapter shall not be construed to exclude or not apply to alcoholic
liquor used in the manufacture, preparation or compounding of such products.
None of the provisions of this chapter shall apply to wine intended for use and
used by any church or religious organization for sacramental purposes.
BEER: A beverage obtained by alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes,
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.
BOTTLE CLUB OR SETUP ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment operated or maintained
within the City wherein patrons supply or bring to the premises their own
alcoholic liquor or beverages and purchase or obtain from the operator mix,
ice, glasses or other materials in order to provide themselves with
refreshments.
CLUB: A corporation organized under the laws of the State of Illinois, not for
pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the
sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used and maintained by its
members through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring, or leasing a
building or space in a building, of such extent and character as may be
suitable and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation
of its members and their guests and provided with suitable and adequate kitchen
and dining room space and equipment and maintaining a sufficient number of
servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for
its members and their guests; provided, that such club files with the Local
Commission at the time of its application for a license under this chapter two
(2) copies of a list of the names and residences of its members, and similarly
files within ten (10) days of the election of any additional member his name
and address; and, provided further, that its affairs and management are
conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen
by the members at their annual meeting, and that no member, or any officer,
agent or employee of the club is paid, or directly or indirectly receives, in
the form of salary or other compensation any profits from the distribution or
sale of alcoholic liquor to the club or members of the club or its guests
introduced by members beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed and
voted at any annual meeting by the members or by its board of directors or
other governing body out of the general revenue of the club.
GOLF COURSE/CLUBHOUSE: A public or private golf course consisting of at least
nine (9) holes, a minimum of thirty (30) acres, and having fairways, greens,
and other attributes common to the sport of golf, with a clubhouse having
facilities used, kept and maintained as a place where food is served, such
space being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room
equipment and capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind
of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests.
MICROBREWERY: An establishment that is or is reasonably anticipated within
three (3) months of the City' s approval of the license to be authorized to
produce beer pursuant to a valid manufacturer' s license, craft brewer license,
brew pub license, or similar license (as determined by the Local Liquor
Commissioner) from the State of Illinois and pursuant to any applicable federal
law(s) and/or regulations.
PACKAGE STORE: A place of business, operated for profit, whose exclusive
business is to sell alcoholic beverages at retail in packages for consumption
only off the premises and not for consumption on the premises where sold and to
sell related items. No bar, chairs and tables shall exist or be maintained on
the premises of a package store for use in connection with the consumption of
alcoholic beverages on said premises at any time. The words "package store
license" shall mean and have reference to the liquor license required and
provided for under this chapter for the operation of such a business.
RESTAURANT: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to
the public as a place where meals are actually and regularly served for profit,
without sleeping accommodations, with space provided for adequate and sanitary
kitchen and dining room equipment and area and where a sufficient number and
kind of employees are employed to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for
guests or patrons.
RESTAURANT, BEER AND WINE LICENSE: A place of business, operated for profit,
whose primary business is the operation of a restaurant and which is licensed
to sell beer and wine at retail as an incident to its primary business for
consumption only on the premises thereof and in conjunction with the
simultaneous or near simultaneous consumption of food. No bar, chairs and
tables shall exist or be maintained on the premises except in connection with
the simultaneous or near simultaneous consumption of food. The words
"restaurant, beer and wine license" shall mean and have reference to the liquor
license required and provided for under this chapter for the operation of such
a business.
RETAILER: Any person who sells, or offers for sale, alcoholic liquor for use or
consumption and not for resale in any form.
SALE: Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner or by any means whatsoever
for a consideration, and includes and means all sales made by any person,
whether principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee.
SELL AT RETAIL AND SALE AT RETAIL: Sales for use or consumption and not for
resale in any form.
SPIRITS: Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed
with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey,
gin or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors when rectified, blended or
otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
SUPPER CLUB: A place of business, operated for profit, whose primary business
is the operation of a restaurant and which is licensed to sell alcoholic
beverages at retail as an incident to its primary business for consumption only
on the premises thereof and in conjunction with the simultaneous or near
simultaneous consumption of food. The words "supper club license" shall mean
and have reference to the liquor license required and provided for under this
chapter for the operation of such a business.
TAVERN: A place of business, operated for profit, whose primary business
involves the sale, at retail, of alcoholic beverages for consumption on or off
the premises thereof even though food is served as an incident of the primary
business. The words "tavern license" shall mean and have reference to the
liquor license required and provided under this chapter for the operation of
such a place of business.
TO SELL: The words "to sell" include to keep or expose for sale and to keep
with intent to sell.
VIDEO GAMING CAFE: An establishment whose primary or major focus is to operate
video gaming terminals as defined under the Illinois Video Gaming Act and the
service of alcohol and food is incidental to the operation of the video gaming.
The following factors may be considered by the Local Liquor Commission when
determining if the establishment is a video gaming cafe:
   (A)   The design of the establishment;
   (B)   Whether food and beverages are offered or prepared on the premises;
   (C)   The presence of a full-service kitchen;
   (D)   The number of video gaming terminals relative to the customer seating
capacity of the establishment;
   (E)   The square footage of space devoted to video gaming terminals and
video gaming as compared to the amount of space devoted to other activities;
   (F)   The source of the proposed or actual revenue derived from the
establishment;
   (G)   The number of employees at the establishment and their proposed job
duties and functions; and
   (H)   Any other factors determined as relevant by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by fermentation of the natural contents
of fruits or vegetables, containing sugar, including such beverages when
fortified by the addition of "alcohol" or "spirits", as defined herein.
WINERY: An establishment that is or is reasonably anticipated within three (3)
months of the City' s approval of the license to be authorized to produce wine
pursuant to a valid manufacturer' s license, wine-maker' s license, wine-maker'
s premises license, or similar license (as determined by the Local Liquor
Commissioner) from the State of Illinois and pursuant to any applicable federal
law(s) and/ or regulations. (Ord. 4085, 10-3-2017; amd. Ord. 4246, 8-3-2021;
Ord. 4306, 9-20-2022)
3-8-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to sell or
offer for retail sale any alcoholic liquor or operate and maintain a bottle
club or setup establishment within the corporate limits of the City without
having first obtained a license to do so as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 1905,
4-18-2007)
3-8-3: APPLICATION:
Any person desiring a license hereunder shall make application therefor to the
Local Liquor Control Commission, as established by the Statutes of the State,
upon a form of application to be provided by said commission.
New and initial licenses for any class of license shall only be issued after
application to the Local Liquor Control Commission, referral by the commission
to the Corporate Authorities and then by the commission only after
authorization therefor by a majority vote of the Corporate Authorities.
Subsequent licenses may be issued by the commission. (Ord. 1905, 4-18-2007)
3-8-4: CLASSES OF LICENSES:
Licenses for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor or operation and maintenance
of a bottle club or setup establishment within the corporate limits of the City
shall be divided into the following classes:
   (A)   Class A, Tavern License:
      1.   Class A: Class A licenses shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquors on the premises of any tavern for consumption on the
premises, as well as other retail sales of such liquor for consumption off said
premises.
      2.   Subclass A: A supplemental license shall be obtained for the retail
sale of alcoholic beverages in an outdoor beer garden or cafe or a sidewalk
restaurant adjacent to the licensed premises. A supplemental license will be
limited to the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
Sunday through Thursday and eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. to twelve o'clock (12:
00) midnight Friday and Saturday. If outside entertainment will be permitted on
the premises, all supplemental licenses shall be further subject to the
provisions of subsection (A)2(b) of this section.
         (a)   Application for this license shall be made for each outdoor beer
garden or cafe or sidewalk restaurant where alcoholic beverages will be sold at
retail. To apply for this supplemental license, the licensee shall file its
request, in writing, with the Canton Liquor Commission. Application for the
supplemental license must be received by the Canton Liquor Commission fourteen
(14) days in advance of the opening of the outdoor beer garden or cafe or
sidewalk restaurant. A nonrefundable application fee of ten dollars ($10.00)
shall be paid by the licensee requesting this supplemental license if the
supplemental license is for a single outside event or for one day only.
Otherwise, a nonrefundable application fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00)
shall be paid by the licensee requesting the supplemental license. The request
for the supplemental license shall include a scale drawing of the proposed
outdoor facility which shall, at a minimum, include the following:
            (1)   A method by which the area shall be confined to prohibit the
removal of alcoholic liquor and constrict noise to the approved area;
            (2)   A reasonably substantial structure across which alcoholic
liquor shall be served which shall afford bartenders reasonable protection from
patrons, unless the outdoor facility is serviced directly by the indoor
licensed premises;
            (3)   The locations of at least two (2) exits from the area, only
one of which shall be through a building or, in the case of a patio, deck, open
porch, balcony or rooftop facility, such exits as are required by the City Fire
Codes, as adopted in section
5-6-1 of this Code;
            (4)   The location of the telephone required by section
3-8-13 of this chapter for the outside area;
            (5)   A description of the nature of the outside entertainment
planned, if any.
         (b)   The supplemental license requested shall not be issued for any
location in a residential section of the City, as defined in section
10-4-1 of this Code. No live entertainment shall be permitted outside except
live music. No music (recorded or live) or any other broadcast, including
public address, shall be made at an unreasonable level and shall conform with
the City ordinances including prohibition of noise or similar nuisance. All
outside entertainment or music shall be limited to the hours of eleven o'clock
(11:00) A.M. Friday to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight Friday and eleven
o'clock (11:00) A.M. Saturday to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight Saturday. Any
extensions of time shall be by special permit request to be approved by the
City Council. Outside entertainment or music shall be prohibited on Sunday.
Only holders of a Class A, B, C, D, G, MB or W license may apply for such
supplemental license. If a supplemental license is granted to a Class B license
holder, the licensee shall continue to maintain its primary business as a
restaurant pursuant to section 3-8-2 of this chapter. Such license may be
revoked at any time should the above rules not be followed.
   (B)   Class B, Supper Club License: Class B licenses shall authorize the
retail sale of alcoholic liquors on the premises of any restaurant for
consumption on the premises.
   (C)   Class C, Restaurant, Beer And Wine License: Class C licenses shall
authorize the retail sale of beer and wine only on the premises of any
restaurant for consumption on the premises.
      1.   Subclass C License: Wine and champagne tasting may be permitted by a
Subclass C license as a promotion each week not to exceed four (4) consecutive
days per week. No licensee shall give or offer to give away alcoholic liquors
as a gift, gratuity or tie in with the sale of nonalcoholic products or to
induce the purchase or promote the sale of nonalcoholic products. A
supplemental license must be obtained for the retail sale of champagne or wine
to be sold exclusively as incidental to a wine or champagne tasting. The
license shall only be available as a supplemental license for the premises
holding a Class B or C license.
   (D)   Class D, Club License: Class D licenses shall authorize the retail
sale of alcoholic liquors on the premises of any club for consumption on the
premises.
   (E)   Class E, Package Store License: Class E licenses shall authorize the
retail sale of alcoholic liquors in packages for consumption off the premises
and not for consumption on the premises where sold.
      1.   Subclass EE: A supplemental license must be obtained for the
offering and tasting, on the premises of the licensee, of free samples of
beverages to be sold by the licensee. Said license must be applied for and
obtained annually. The license shall only be available as a supplemental
license for the premises holding a Class E license.
         (a)   Limit: Any offerings or tastings shall not exceed two (2) ounces
and must comply with all applicable liquor laws of the State of Illinois.
   (F)   Class F, Special Events License: Class F licenses shall authorize the
retail sale of alcoholic liquors on the premises in any nonresidential location
for a period of two (2) weeks or less, as determined by the Local Liquor
Control Commission. So long as streets and other public areas outside of the
premises selling alcoholic liquors are barricaded and closed pursuant to a
request approved by the City Council of the City of Canton, alcoholic liquors
may be consumed by those of lawful age in said designated barricaded areas
pursuant to this Class F license. The license shall only apply to catered
functions or special events. No person can obtain a Class F license more than
once in a period of sixty (60) consecutive days.
   (G)   Class G, Golf Course/Clubhouse License: Class G licenses shall
authorize the licensee to sell alcoholic liquor to its patrons and guests by
the drink, for consumption in the clubhouse and on the golf course, and not for
resale in any form. The license shall only be available for premises defined as
a "golf course/clubhouse" herein.
   (H)   Class H, Packaged Beer And Wine License: Class H licenses shall
authorize the retail sale of beer and wine in packages for consumption off the
premises and not for consumption on the premises where sold.
      1.   Subclass HH: A supplemental license must be obtained for the
offering and tasting, on the premises of the licensee, of free samples of
beverages to be sold by the licensee. Said license must be applied for and
obtained annually. The license shall only be available as a supplemental
license for the premises holding a Class H license.
         (a)   Limit: Any offerings or tastings allowed under the Subclass HH
supplemental license shall not exceed two (2) ounces and must comply with all
applicable liquor laws of the State of Illinois.
   (I)   Class S. Bottle Club or Setup Establishment. Class S licenses shall
authorize an establishment to be operated or maintained wherein patrons supply
or bring to the premises their own alcoholic liquor or beverages and purchase
or obtain from the operator mix, ice, glasses, or other materials in order to
provide themselves with refreshments. This license does not authorize the sale
of alcoholic liquor by the license holder.
   (J)   Class T, Wine/Champagne Basket Sales License: Class T licenses shall
authorize the retail sale of bottled wine or champagne to be sold exclusively
as part of an arrangement in a gift basket by an establishment in which the
retail sale of flowers or floral merchandise is the primary and principal
business thereof. A Class T license shall only be issued to persons who can
demonstrate they are operating a bona fide floral business and participate in
fulfillment of orders through national sales companies. Wine and champagne
shall be sold in sealed packages only and must accompany a floral arrangement
and/or floral merchandise. Consumption on the premises where sold is not
permitted.
      1.   Subclass TT: A supplemental license must be obtained for the
offering and tasting, on the premises of the licensee, of free samples of wine
or champagne to be sold by the licensee. Said license must be applied for and
obtained annually. The license shall only be available as a supplemental
license for the premises holding a Class T license.
         (a)   Limit: Any offerings or tastings shall not exceed two (2) ounces
and must comply with all applicable liquor laws of the State of Illinois.
   (K)   Class U, Catering: Class U licenses shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises only, subject to the
following condition: The retail sale of alcoholic liquors shall be allowed only
at private or civic functions on the premises, which are not open to the
general public, and at which the licensee provides food for consumption by
those persons attending the function.
   (L)   Video Gaming Cafes: Video gaming cafes shall not be qualified to
obtain any existing classifications of the City of Canton liquor licenses. No
such licenses allowing video gaming cafes shall be created, maintained or
authorized by this chapter.
The above described classes of licenses shall be the only classes of licenses
available for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor or operation and maintenance
of a bottle club or setup establishment within the corporate limits of the
City.
   (M)   Class MB, Microbrewery: Class MB licenses shall authorize a
microbrewery to produce beer on- premise, along with the subsequent storage of
beer and distribution of the produced beer, provided said production, storage,
and distribution is in compliance with all state and federal laws, regulations,
and/ or licenses authorizing the production, storage and distribution of beer.
A Class MB license further authorizes the retail sale of alcoholic liquors on
the premises of the microbrewery for consumption on the premises, as well as
other retail sales of beer produced on premises for consumption off said
premises. No other consumption or retail sale under a Class MB license is
allowed. A holder of a Class MB License may only operate as Microbrewery if it:
carries a valid manufacturer' s license under 235 ILCS 5/ 5-1( a) for the
manufacturing and retail sale of beer; is a valid brew pub licensee under 235
ILCS 5/ 5-1( n); or holds a similar license to operate as a craft brewer,
brewery, or manufacturer of beer under state and federal law, as deemed
appropriate and applicable by the Liquor Commissioner. Failure to keep valid
and maintain the necessary state and/ or federal licenses within three (3)
months of the City' s approval of the Class MB license, and at all times
thereafter, will be cause for immediate revocation of a Class MB license and
said licenses shall be tendered to the City Clerk immediately upon receipt of
same.
   1.   Subclass MBMB: A supplemental license must be obtained for the offering
and tasting, on the premises of the licensee, of free samples of beer produced
and to be sold by the licensee. The offering and tasting may allow the
consumption of up to four samples, not to exceed four ounces per sample, of the
beer produced on premises without charge. Said license must be applied for and
obtained annually. Said license shall only be available as a supplemental
license for the premises holding a valid Class MB license.
   (N)   Class W, Winery: Class W licenses shall authorize a winery to produce
wine onpremise, along with the subsequent storage of wine and distribution of
the produced wine, provided said production, storage, and distribution is in
compliance with all state and federal laws, regulations, and/ or licenses
authorizing the production, storage and distribution of wine. A Class W license
further authorized the retail sale of alcoholic liquors on the premises of the
winery for consumption on the premises where sold as well as other retail sales
of wine produced on the premises for consumption off said premises. A holder of
a Class W License may only operate as Winery if it: carries a valid
manufacturer' s license under 235 ILCS 5/ 5-1(a) for the manufacturing and
retail sale of wine; is a valid wine- makers premises licensee under 235 ILCS
5/ 5-1(i); or holds a similar winemaker or other license for the manufacturing
of wine, as deemed appropriate and applicable by the Liquor Commissioner.
Failure to keep valid and maintain the necessary state and/ or federal licenses
within three (3) months of the City' s approval of the Class W license, and at
all times thereafter, will be cause for immediate revocation of a Class W
license and said licenses shall be tendered to the City Clerk immediately upon
receipt of same.
   1.   Subclass WW: A supplemental license must be obtained for the offering
and tasting, on the premises of the licensee, of free samples of wine produced
and to be sold by the licensee. The offering and tasting may allow the
consumption of up to four samples, not to exceed four ounces per sample, of the
wine produced on premises without charge. Said license must be applied for and
obtained annually. Said license shall only be available as a supplemental
license for the premises holding a valid Class W license. (Ord. 4155, 8-6-2019;
amd. Ord. 4246, 8-3-2021; Ord. 4306, 9-20-2022; Ord. 4365, 9-19-2023)
3-8-5: LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
   (A)   Duties:
      1.   The Mayor of the City shall be the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner.
      2.   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the following
powers, functions and duties:
         (a)   To receive applications for liquor licenses under this chapter,
to investigate applicants, and to grant or renew liquor licenses;
         (b)   To receive complaints from citizens of the city that the
provisions of this chapter or state law have been or are being violated and to
investigate and act upon such complaints;
         (c)   To enter or authorize any law enforcement officer to enter at
any time upon any premises licensed under this chapter to determine whether any
provisions of this chapter or state law have been or are being violated and at
such time to examine the premises of the licensee;
         (d)   To appoint deputies or other persons to assist him in the
performance of his duties and responsibilities as local liquor control
commissioner;
         (e)   To require any licensee at any reasonable time to produce such
licensee's books and records of his operations under his liquor license for
inspection and examination;
         (f)   To require any licensee at reasonable times, and from time to
time, to file reports or provide information concerning such licensee's
operation of his licensed establishment as may be convenient to permit proper
enforcement of this chapter or state law;
         (g)   To promulgate rules and regulations under this chapter and state
law consistent therewith;
         (h)   To convene and conduct hearings upon complaint or upon
information that a violation of this chapter has occurred; to conduct hearings
concerning the fitness of any person to receive, continue to hold or renew any
license issued under this chapter; to administer oaths, issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant documents or
other evidence; to receive testimony and take proof; to make findings of fact
and determinations of law; to enter written orders and decisions;
         (i)   To require all license holders to comply with the fire codes of
the city of Canton. Any violation of the fire codes may result in a suspension
or revocation of the license pursuant to the penalties set forth in subsection
(A)2(k) of this section;
         (j)   To represent the city on any appeal of any action taken under
this chapter;
         (k)   To prescribe penalties for violations of this chapter and state
law and enforce such penalties. Permissible penalties shall include:
            (1)   A written reprimand;
            (2)   To attend BASSET (beverage alcohol servers and sellers
education training) training program licensed by the Illinois liquor control
commission and provide evidence of successful completion;
            (3)   A fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each
violation but not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) against any
licensee during any license year;
            (4)   To suspend any licensee's license for not more than thirty
(30) days for any violation;
            (5)   To revoke any license issued under this chapter for cause;
         (l)   To keep and maintain books and records concerning the
performance of his duties, functions and responsibilities under this chapter;
         (m)   To receive license fees, fines and other monies under this
chapter and to promptly deposit such funds with the city treasurer;
         (n)   To cause legal proceedings to be initiated on behalf of the city
regarding the duties, functions and responsibilities under this chapter;
         (o)   To declare the existence of any emergency and thereafter to
alter the hours of operation of any licensee and take all other actions that
may be necessary or proper due to such emergency;
         (p)   To notify the Illinois secretary of state where a club
incorporated under the general not for profit corporation act or a foreign
corporation functioning as a club in Illinois under a certificate of authority
issued under that act has violated the Illinois liquor control act or this
chapter by selling or offering for sale at retail alcoholic liquor without a
license;
         (q)   To take any and all actions necessary and incidental to the
furtherance of his duties and functions as set forth in this chapter or by
state law.
   (B)   Salary Of Liquor Commissioner And Assistants: The local liquor control
commissioner and his duly appointed assistants shall receive the sum of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) per annum for their services; provided, however, that
not more than two (2) assistants shall receive said salary. (Ord. 1988, 8-4-
2009)
3-8-6: RESIDENCE DISTRICT; LICENSE RESTRICTION:
It is hereby ascertained, determined and provided that the portion of the city
lying outside of the territory bounded as follows: Commencing at the
intersection of the centerlines of West Locust Street and North Avenue A,
thence running south to the centerline of West Pine Street, thence east to the
centerline of South Second Avenue, thence north to the centerline of East
Locust Street, thence west to the place of beginning, is predominately a
residence district, so that no new license permitting the sale of alcoholic
liquors shall be issued by the local liquor commission within the said
residence district so determined, unless advisory opinions are obtained from
the owner or owners of the frontage, two hundred feet (200') in each direction
along the street and streets adjacent to the place of business for which a
license is sought. Such opinions shall either be opposed to such issuance, in
favor of or no opinion. Reasons for opposition shall be stated and all shall be
filed with the local liquor commission. The commission shall not be bound by
said opinions. This provision shall apply only to the initial issuance of a
license for a given location.
It is also provided that no license for the sale of alcoholic liquor, other
than a class B, supper club license, shall be issued to any person for the sale
of any alcoholic liquor in any room, store or other place or building that
faces, fronts or adjoins the public square of the city or that has any exit or
entrance thereon. (Ord. 1905, 4-18-2007)
3-8-7: HOURS OF SALE, CLOSING HOURS ON NEW YEAR'S EVE:
It shall be unlawful for any person holding a class A, D, E, F, G, H, S, T or U
license to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor in the city at
any time other than during the following hours: Monday through Saturday, from
six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to one o'clock (1:00) A.M.; Sunday, from ten o'clock
(10:00) A.M. to eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. These closing hours are hereby
extended to permit the sale of alcoholic liquors at retail until three o'clock
(3:00) A.M. on any New Year's Day.
It shall be unlawful for any person holding a class B or C license to sell or
offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor in the city at any time other
than during the following hours: Monday through Saturday, from six o'clock (6:
00) A.M. to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight; Sunday, from ten o'clock (10:00)
A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. These closing hours are hereby extended to
permit the sale of alcoholic liquors at retail until two o'clock (2:00) A.M. on
any New Year's Day.
It shall be unlawful to keep open for business, or to permit the public to
patronize any premises where alcoholic liquors are sold at retail during the
hours within which the sale of such liquor is prohibited, or to give away or
allow the consumption of alcohol or to consume alcohol upon the premises during
hours in which the sale of such liquor is prohibited; provided, however, that
in the case of supper clubs, restaurants, clubs, bottle clubs or setup
establishments and bowling alleys, such establishments may be kept open during
such hours, but no alcoholic liquors may be sold or consumed during such hours,
except as provided in this chapter. Be it further provided that class A license
holders may keep their establishments open for food service for food prepared
on the premises if such establishments secure all alcoholic beverages from
possible sale or consumption during such hours in which the sale of alcoholic
beverages is prohibited.
All establishments availing themselves of the food service additional open
hours must have prior approval of the police department.
The police department shall have the right to enter upon the licensed premises
at any time for the purpose of inspection to control the unlawful sale of
alcoholic beverages. (Ord. 4044, 10-4-2016)
3-8-8: LICENSE FEE:
The annual fee for licenses for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor for the
various categories of licenses shall be for a six (6) day license (Monday
through Saturday). Said fees shall be payable annually in advance beginning May
1 of each fiscal year of the city and shall be as follows:
   (A)   The annual license fee for a six (6) day class A, tavern license shall
be nine hundred dollars ($900.00).
   (B)   The annual license fee for a six (6) day class B, supper club license
shall be six hundred dollars ($600.00).
   (C)   The annual license fee for a six (6) day class C, restaurant, beer and
wine license shall be six hundred dollars ($600.00).
      1.   The annual license fee for a subclass C supplemental license shall
be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
   (D)   The annual license fee for a six (6) day class D, club license shall
be four hundred eighty dollars ($480.00).
   (E)   The annual license fee for a six (6) day class E, package store
license shall be one thousand twenty dollars ($1,020.00).
      1.   The annual license fee for a six (6) day subclass EE supplemental
license shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
   (F)   The annual license fee for a six (6) day class G, golf course/
clubhouse license shall be four hundred eighty dollars ($480.00).
   (G)   The annual license fee for a six (6) day class H, packaged beer and
wine license shall be one thousand twenty dollars ($1,020.00).
      1.   The annual license fee for a six (6) day class HH supplemental
license shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
   (H)   The annual license fee for a six (6) day class S, bottle club or setup
establishment license shall be seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
   (I)   The annual license fee for a class T, wine/champagne basket license
shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
      1.   The annual license for a six (6) day class TT supplemental license
shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
   (J)   The annual license fee for a class U, catering license shall be six
hundred dollars ($600.00).
   (K)   The fee for a class F, special events license shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00) plus ten dollars ($10.00) for each day for which the license
is to be used.
   (L)   The annual license fee for a six (6) day class MB, microbrewery
license shall be one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00).
      1.   The annual license for a six (6) day class MBMB supplemental license
shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
   (M)   The annual license fee for a six (6) day class W, winery license shall
be one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00).
      1.   The annual license for a six (6) day class WW supplemental license
shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
Those licensees who desire to sell alcoholic liquor at retail on Sunday shall
pay an additional one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a seven (7) day license
(Monday through Sunday) in each of the categories set out above, with the
exception of a class A tavern licensee which shall pay an additional four
hundred fifty dollars ($450.00) for a seven (7) day license (Monday through
Sunday). (Ord. 3034, 11-19-2013; amd. Ord. 4246, 8-3-2021)
3-8-9: CERTAIN PERSONS; MINORS:
   (A)   No person who is licensed to sell intoxicating liquors, as defined in
this chapter, at retail, shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any
person as to whom the prohibition thereof any applicable law of the state would
apply.
If a licensee or his agents or employees believe or have reason to believe that
a sale or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of the age of
the prospective recipient, he shall, before making such sale or delivery,
demand presentation of some form of positive identification, containing proof
of age, issued by a public officer in the performance of his official duties.
Proof that the defendant/licensee or his employees or agent demanded, was
shown, and reasonably relied upon such written evidence in any transaction
forbidden by this section is competent evidence and may be considered in any
criminal prosecution therefor or in any proceedings for the suspension or
revocation of any license based thereon.
It is unlawful for anyone under the age of twenty one (21) years to present or
offer to any licensee, his agent or employee, any written, printed or
photostatic evidence of age and identity which is false, fraudulent, or not
actually his own for the purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting to
purchase or otherwise procuring or attempting to procure, the serving of any
alcoholic beverage, or who has in his possession any false or fraudulent,
written, printed, or photostatic evidence of age and identity, is guilty of
violating this code.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21)
years to enter upon or to attempt to enter upon any premises which has a
license under this chapter unless:
      1.   Accompanied by his or her parent or legally appointed guardian, or
      2.   Such person is in the exercise of his or her legitimate business or
trade or acting in the course of his or her employment.
This provision does not apply to hotels, restaurants, clubs, or that portion of
bowling alleys, rental halls, grocery stores, drugstores, or other retail
establishments other than those used exclusively or primarily for the sales
and/or consumption of alcoholic liquor. Such exclusion as to restaurants shall
not apply in the event that food is no longer being consumed, specifically
offered for sale, and/or the kitchen area is closed, and the premises is
dispensing alcoholic liquor in any room or place in the premises.
         (a)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this chapter or his
officer, partner, associate, representative, agent or employee to suffer or
permit any person to be or remain in any licensed premises in violation of this
subsection (B).
         (b)   It shall be unlawful for a business licensed under this chapter
that does not meet the exemption in this subsection (B) to permit minors on the
premises or a portion of the premises by not selling alcoholic liquor on the
premises or that portion thereof on a temporary basis.
   (C)   No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall purchase,
consume, or have in his possession, actual, constructive, or, otherwise, within
the corporate limits of the City any alcoholic beverage or liquor as defined in
this chapter, unless such person is making delivery of alcoholic liquor in
pursuance of his employment. (Ord. 1905, 4-18-2007)
   (D)   Violations of any provision of this section shall be governed by title
1, chapter 27, "General Penalty", of this Code and the fee schedule that is
adopted by City Council from time to time. (Ord. 4034, 7-19-2016)
3-8-9-1: WARNING SIGNS TO BE POSTED:
Every licensee shall display in a prominent place a printed card in any
location which he uses for the sale of alcoholic liquor. The card should read
as follows:
   WARNING TO MINORS
You are subject to a fine up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) under the
ordinances of the City of Canton, if you purchase alcoholic liquor for
yourself, or misrepresent your age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining
alcoholic liquor for yourself.
(Ord. 1905, 4-18-2007)
3-8-9-2: SERVING ALCOHOL; AGE OF EMPLOYEES:
Bartenders in licensed establishments shall be twenty one (21) years of age.
Persons serving drinks (i.e., servers, waiters, waitresses) in licensed
establishments shall be eighteen (18) years of age.
An employee who is eighteen (18) years or older, may sell packaged liquor, beer
or wine in the course of his or her employment, provided, however, that no such
employee under twenty one (21) years of age may conduct such activity unless an
employee who is twenty one (21) years of age or older is in the licensed retail
premises and is supervising the employment activities of any such employee who
is under the age of twenty one (21). (Ord. 3054, 2-18-2014)
3-8-10: BONDS REQUIRED:
Before any person shall be issued a license, he shall be required to furnish a
good and sufficient bond with sureties to be approved by the Local Liquor
Control Commission in the penal sum of fifteen hundred dollars ($1,500.00)
payable to the City conditioned upon the said licensee observing all
requirements of this chapter and the laws of the State. As an alternative to
the bond and upon approval by the Local Liquor Control Commission, the licensee
can also post as surety: cash, postal money order, draft or cashier's check in
the sum of fifteen hundred dollars ($1,500.00) payable to the City conditioned
upon the said licensee observing all requirements of this chapter and the laws
of the State. (Ord. 4142, 5-7-2019)
3-8-11: LICENSE RESTRICTIONS:
   (A)   Class A, tavern licenses, shall be restricted to nine (9) licenses in
the City.
   (B)   All licenses for Class B and Class C shall only be issued to
businesses where sixty percent (60%) of gross revenues are for food and non-
alcoholic beverages.
      1.   All license holders of Class B and Class C licenses, being supper
clubs and restaurants, shall, at the request of the Local Liquor Commission or
Commissioner, provide verified financial reports from a certified accountant or
tax preparer providing sufficient information and detail to establish that the
gross revenues of food and nonalcoholic beverages are at least sixty percent
(60%) of the business’ gross revenues.
      2.   Should the business fail to establish the minimum requirements of
sixty percent (60%) of gross revenues, as set forth above, the license may be
suspended or revoked after a hearing before the Local Liquor Commission.
      3.   Class B, Supper Club Licenses, shall be restricted to four (4)
licenses in the City.
      4.   Class C, Restaurant Licenses, shall be restricted to one (1) license
in the City.
   (C)   Class E, package store licenses, shall be restricted to two (2)
licenses in the City.
   (D)   Class G, golf course/clubhouse licenses, shall be restricted to one
license in the City.
   (E)   Package stores shall be required to have outside ingress and egress
only. Under no circumstances shall a package store be permitted to have an exit
or an entrance to or from another building from within the package store
building.
   (F)   A video gaming cafe shall not be qualified to obtain any existing
classification of the City of Canton liquor licenses. No such licenses allowing
video gaming cafes shall be created, maintained or authorized by this Code.
   (G)   Class MB, microbrewery licenses, shall be restricted to two (2)
licenses in the City.
   (H)   Class W, winery licenses, shall be restricted to two (2) licenses in
the City.
   (I)   Class H, Packaged Beer and Wine Licenses, shall be restricted to
twelve (12) licenses in the City.
   (J)   All licenses hereunder shall be issued only to a named person or
organization for the use at a particular location.
   (K)   The Local Liquor Control Commission shall also impose any conditions
or restrictions upon the issuance of liquor licenses which are specifically set
forth by an applicable law of the State.
   (L)   All licenses hereunder which require that the licensee secure liquor
liability insurance coverage shall only be issued after proof of liquor
liability insurance coverage in an amount at least equal to the maximum
liability amounts set forth in 235 ILCS 5/621 et seq. or as set forth by the
applicable laws of the State of Illinois. (Ord. 4085, 10-3-2017; amd. Ord.
4246, 8-3-2021; Ord. 4365, 9-19-2023)
3-8-12: INTERPRETATION:
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to require the Corporate
Authorities of the City to issue licenses in any category of license beyond
that which from time to time exist and the best interests of the City shall be
the only consideration in the determination as to whether any new or additional
licenses shall issue at all. (Ord. 1905, 4-18-2007)
3-8-13: REPORTING OF INCIDENTS TO POLICE; TELEPHONE ON PREMISES:
Each licensee and each of his agents and employees shall promptly report to the
Police Department of the City any incident occurring on or about the licensed
premises in his knowledge or view relating to the commission of any crime,
including any violation of this chapter and shall truthfully and fully answer
all questions and investigations of any identified police officer who makes
inquiry concerning any persons in or about the licensed premises, and any
events taking place in and about the licensed premises and cooperate fully in
any such investigation including the giving of any oral or written statements
at such reasonable times and in such reasonable locations to any police officer
engaged in said investigation.
Each licensee shall maintain on each licensed premises not less than one
telephone in operating order, which phone must be within the easy access of the
bartender or other responsible person in charge of the premises at all times,
for the purpose of reporting to the Police Department incidents occurring on or
about the licensed premises. (Ord. 1905, 4-18-2007)
3-8-14: ILLEGAL ACTIVITIES ON PREMISES:
No licensee or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or
employee of such licensee shall engage in any activity or conduct or suffer or
permit any other person to engage in any activity or conduct in or about the
licensed premises which is prohibited by any ordinance of the City or law of
the State of Illinois or the United States. (Ord. 1905, 4-18-2007)
3-8-14-1: REMOVAL OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR FROM PREMISES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry any alcoholic liquors in an
unsealed or opened container from the licensed premises where such alcoholic
liquor was purchased subject to the amendments of Public Act 094-1047 and
codified at 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-33, effective January 1, 2007.
No licensee or person as proprietor, agent, servant or employee of such
licensee shall knowingly permit any patron to violate this section nor continue
to sell alcoholic liquors to such person knowing that such person intends to
carry the alcoholic liquor from the premises in an open or unsealed container.
(Ord. 1905, 4-18-2007)
3-8-14-2: POLICE POWER TO ENTER PREMISES:
The police department shall have the right to enter upon any premises licensed
hereunder to determine whether any of the provisions of this chapter or any
rules or regulations adopted by the city of Canton or imposed by the state of
Illinois or United States have been or are being violated, and at such time, to
examine said premises of said licensee in connection therewith. (Ord. 1905, 4-
18-2007)
3-8-15: REVOCATION:
Any license granted as provided by this chapter may be revoked for cause by the
local liquor control commissioner by notice in writing served either by
registered mail, personal service, or by posting such notice on the affected
premises.
Violation of any provision of this chapter or of the state alcoholic liquor
act, indebtedness to the city for other license fees required by any
regulation, violations of the criminal laws of the state of Illinois, or
misstatements or withholding of information in application for a liquor license
shall be deemed cause for refusal or revocation of license. (Ord. 1905, 4-18-
2007)
3-8-15-1: FIRE CODE; INSPECTIONS; PENALTIES:
License holders shall comply with all fire codes as herein adopted and
authorized by this code. Furthermore, license holders will allow their premises
to be inspected, at least annually, by a duly designated inspector of the
Canton fire department. In addition to any penalties prescribed by Illinois law
or by this code, licensees' failure to correct fire code violations within the
applicable time period or refusal to allow a fire code inspection are subject
to penalties by the liquor commission pursuant to subsections
3-8-5(A)2(i) and (A)2(k) of this chapter. (Ord. 1905, 4-18-2007)
3-8-16: CERTAIN FORMS OF NUDITY PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this chapter to suffer or permit
any person to appear on the licensed premises, or in any area which can be
viewed from the premises, in such manner or attire as to expose to view any
portion of the pubic area, anus, vulva, or genitals, or any simulation thereof,
nor shall suffer or permit any female to appear on the licensed premises in
such manner or attire as to expose to view any portion of the breast below the
top of the areola or simulation thereof. (Ord. 1905, 4-18-2007)
3-8-17: CERTAIN ACTS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this chapter to suffer or permit
any person to perform on the premises, or any area which can be viewed from the
premises, acts of or acts which simulate:
   (A)   Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation,
flagellation, or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law.
   (B)   The touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or
genitals.
   (C)   The displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals.
   (D)   To permit any person to remain in or upon the licensed premises who
commits any of the acts described above or allows another person to commit upon
his or her body any of the acts described herein. (Ord. 1905, 4-18-2007)
3-8-18: SHOWING OF CERTAIN FILMS, PICTURES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this chapter to suffer or permit
the showing on the premises, or in any area which can be viewed from the
premises, of film, still pictures, electronic reproduction, or other visual
reproductions depicting:
   (A)   Acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy,
bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or any sexual acts which are
prohibited by law.
   (B)   Any person being touched, caressed or fondled on the breast, buttocks,
anus or genitals.
   (C)   Scenes wherein a person displays the vulva or the anus or the
genitals.
   (D)   Scenes wherein artificial devices or inanimate objects are employed to
depict or drawings are employed to portray any of the prohibited activities
described above. (Ord. 1905, 4-18-2007)
3-8-19: BARTENDER PERMIT; REQUIRED; DISPLAY:
(Rep. by Ord. 3047, 1-7-2014)
3-8-20: NOTICE; HEARING; APPEAL:
The local liquor control commissioner may revoke or suspend any license issued
by him if he determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of
the liquor control act of 1934 1  or of any valid ordinance or resolution
enacted by this particular city council or any applicable rule or regulations
established by the local liquor control commissioner or the state commission
which is not inconsistent with law.
In addition to the suspension, the local liquor control commissioner in any
county or municipality may levy a fine on the licensee for such violations. The
fine imposed shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a first
violation within a twelve (12) month period, one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00) for a second violation within a twelve (12) month period, and two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for a third or subsequent violation
within a twelve (12) month period. Each day on which a violation continues
shall constitute a separate violation. Not more than fifteen thousand dollars
($15,000.00) in fines under this section may be imposed against any licensee
during the period of his license. Proceeds from such fines shall be paid into
the general corporate fund of the municipal treasury.
However, no such license shall be so revoked or suspended and no licensee shall
be fined except after a public hearing by the local liquor control commissioner
with a three (3) day written notice to the licensee affording the licensee an
opportunity to appear and defend. All such hearings shall be open to the public
and the local liquor control commissioner shall reduce all evidence to writing
and shall maintain an official record of the proceedings. The licensee may, at
their own expense, cause a certified shorthand reporter or court reporter to
generate a transcript of the proceeding, if they so choose.
If the local liquor control commissioner has reason to believe that any
continued operation of a particular licensed premises will immediately threaten
the welfare of the community he may, upon the issuance of a written order
stating the reason for such conclusion and without notice or hearing, order the
licensed premises closed for not more than seven (7) days, giving the licensee
an opportunity to be heard during that period, except that if such licensee
shall also be engaged in the conduct of another business or businesses on the
licensed premises such order shall not be applicable to such other business or
businesses.
The local liquor control commissioner shall, within five (5) days after such
hearing, if he determines after such hearing that the license should be revoked
or suspended or that the licensee should be fined, state the reason or reasons
for such determination in a written order, and either the amount of the fine,
the period of suspension, or that the license has been revoked, and shall serve
a copy of such order within the five (5) days upon the licensee.
The licensee, after the receipt of such order of suspension or revocation,
shall have the privilege, within a period of twenty (20) days after the receipt
of such order of suspension or revocation, of appealing the order to the state
commission for a decision sustaining, reversing or modifying the order of the
local liquor control commissioner. If the state commission affirms the local
commissioner's order to suspend or revoke the license at the first hearing, the
appellant shall cease to engage in the business for which the license was
issued, until the local commissioner's order is terminated by its own
provisions or reversed upon rehearing or by the courts. (Ord. 1905, 4-18-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. 235 ILCS 5.
3-8-21: PENALTY:
Violations of this chapter shall be governed by title 1, chapter 27, "General
Penalty", of this code and the fee schedule that is adopted by city council
from time to time. (Ord. 4034, 7-19-2016)
CHAPTER 9
SCAVENGERS
SECTION:
3-9-1: License Required
3-9-2: Permit, Fee
3-9-3: License, Bond
3-9-4: Privy Vaults
3-9-5: Penalty
3-9-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
The mayor and council of the city may, from time to time, grant a license to
any person to engage in the business of emptying, cleaning or removing the
contents of privy vaults, cesspool, sink holes, or in removal of filth, offal
or any offensive matter. Every person engaging in said business shall be deemed
a scavenger within the meaning of this chapter. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 40, Sec. 1)
3-9-2: PERMIT, FEE:
No person within the city shall empty, clean or remove the contents of any
privy vault, or in any manner engage in the business of a scavenger, without
first having obtained a license so to do, under a penalty of not less than
twenty dollars ($20.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each
offense; provided, that the owners, occupants or agents owning or using privy
vaults within the city, desiring to clean or remove the contents thereof
themselves without the aid of scavengers, may be allowed to do so upon the
written permission of the chief of police, and then only in such manner as the
chief of police in said permit shall direct. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 40, Sec. 2)
3-9-3: LICENSE, BOND:
Every person applying for such license shall pay to the city treasurer therefor
the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) per annum, and shall execute a bond to the city
in the penal sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00), with at least two (2)
sureties, to be approved by the mayor and council, conditioned that said
scavenger shall comply with the provisions of this code, and the ordinances
which hereafter may be passed by the council relating to the occupation or
employment of scavengers. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 40, Sec. 3)
3-9-4: PRIVY VAULTS:
   (A)   Manner Of Cleaning Vaults: The cleaning, emptying and removing of the
contents of privy vaults shall be done in an inoffensive manner, and any
scavenger having begun any such scavenger work, shall, without any interruption
or delay, finish the same, and shall in every instance leave the privy vaults
in as good condition as when the work was undertaken. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 40, Sec.
4)
   (B)   Contents To Be Removed Beyond City: The contents of privy vaults, so
removed by any scavenger, shall be conveyed beyond the city limits in airtight
tanks or vessels, and shall be disposed of in such a manner as to cause no
offense. Said tanks or vessels shall be kept clean and inoffensive when not in
actual use. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 40, Sec. 5)
   (C)   Contents Not To Be Deposited Or Buried Within City: The contents of
privy vaults removed as above provided shall not be deposited or buried within
the city. If any scavengers shall not bury said contents as above provided, and
cover the same so as to prevent any smell arising therefrom, his license shall
be immediately forfeited and annulled. (Ord. 842, 10-21-1980)
   (D)   Chief Of Police May Order Privies Cleaned: Whenever, in the opinion of
the chief of police any privy vault shall be offensive and need cleaning, it
shall be his duty to notify the owner, agent or occupant to cleanse the same
within a period named in said notice, and unless the person notified shall
comply within the time mentioned, it shall be the duty of said officer to cause
the said privy vault to be cleaned by one or more of the city scavengers; and
such person so failing to comply with said notice shall be fined in any sum not
less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars
($100.00); provided, that nothing in this subsection contained shall discharge
the owner, agent or occupant of the premises from any liability otherwise
provided, to pay all the expenses of such cleaning. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 40, Sec. 7)
3-9-5: PENALTY:
Any person, without license aforesaid, who shall engage in business as
scavenger, or who shall undertake to remove any contents of any privy vault
within the city without license or permit as aforesaid, shall pay a fine of not
less than twenty dollars ($20.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00)
for each offense; and any scavenger licensed as aforesaid, or owner, agent or
occupant as aforesaid, acting under permit as aforesaid, who shall violate any
provision or section, or clause of any provision or section of this chapter,
where no other penalty is imposed, shall pay a fine of not less than ten
dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense.
(R.O. 1959, Ch. 40, Sec. 8)
CHAPTER 10
TAXICABS
SECTION:
3-10-1: Definitions
3-10-2: Owner's Name Required
3-10-3: Schedule Of Rates
3-10-4: Inspection
3-10-5: Mechanical Condition
3-10-6: Sanitary Requirements
3-10-7: Locations Of Taxi Stands
3-10-8: Parking In Other Locations
3-10-9: Driver's License
3-10-9-1: License Required; Registration
3-10-9-2: Application Photograph
3-10-9-3: Standards Of License Issuance
3-10-9-4: License Fee
3-10-9-5: License Contents
3-10-9-6: Display Of License
3-10-9-7: Expiration Of License
3-10-9-8: Revocation Of License
3-10-10: Permit
3-10-10-1: Permit Required; Application
3-10-10-2: Standards Of Permit Issuance
3-10-10-3: Financial Responsibility
3-10-10-4: Permit Fee
3-10-10-5: Permit Renewal
3-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
OWNER: In addition to meaning the complete ownership of a motor vehicle,
includes the lessee of a motor vehicle.
SEX OFFENSES: Offenses described in 730 Illinois Compiled Statutes 150/2 or the
laws of any other jurisdiction punishing the same acts, whether defined as a
felony or misdemeanor.
TAXICAB: Includes any motor vehicle, carrying not more than seven (7)
passengers for hire, for which public patronage is solicited, not being
operated over fixed routes on fixed time schedules. (Ord. 1598, 9-1-1998)
3-10-2: OWNER'S NAME REQUIRED:
No person shall operate a taxicab in the city unless such taxicab shall have
painted in letters at least two inches (2") in height on at least one door on
each side of the taxicab the name of the owner thereof. If the taxicab is owned
by a corporation and is operating under a firm name, the name of the actual
owner shall be registered in the office of the city clerk. If any person owns
more than one cab, a distinguishing number shall be placed on each cab in the
manner hereinbefore provided in regard to the name of the owner. The city clerk
shall keep a register of the name and address of each person owning or
operating a taxicab in the city, and it shall be the duty of each person owning
a taxicab to file such information with the city clerk. The city clerk shall
record make, model, year built, and serial or engine number of each taxicab
registered. Such register shall be a public record and open to inspection by
the public. (Ord. 1598, 9-1-1998)
3-10-3: SCHEDULE OF RATES:
Each and every person obtaining a permit to operate a taxicab shall file with
the city council a schedule of maximum rates for passenger service, and the
actual rates charged shall not exceed such schedule unless a new schedule shall
be filed with and accepted by the city council. Such schedule shall be placed
in the custody of the city clerk and be open to public inspection at any time
during city hall business hours. (Ord. 1598, 9-1-1998)
3-10-4: INSPECTION:
No person shall operate a taxicab or cause the same to be done unless the
taxicab is in a condition thoroughly safe for the transportation of passengers,
clean, of good appearance, well painted, and in good mechanical condition.
(Ord. 1598, 9-1-1998)
3-10-5: MECHANICAL CONDITION:
Proof of good mechanical condition of each taxicab shall be submitted to the
chief of police when the taxicab is placed into service. This taxicab must then
be retested every six (6) months after the initial test. Such proof shall
consist of a certificate signed by the operator of one of the public garages
approved by the chief of police to the effect that an inspection has been made
of such taxicab which shows that the steering mechanism, tires, brakes and
lighting equipment are in good and safe operating condition. The expense of
procuring and furnishing such certificate shall be borne by the owner of the
taxicab for which the permit is issued or sought. (Ord. 1598, 9-1-1998)
3-10-6: SANITARY REQUIREMENTS:
Each taxicab shall be kept in a neat, clean condition and the interior thereof
shall be clean and free of foreign material or substance; the windows shall be
clear, free from cracks and shall be kept clean; the upholstery shall be free
of dirt or other foreign substance likely to soil clothing, and it shall be
free of rents, tears or loss of padding. Cabs not meeting these standards may
be removed from service by the police department until such condition is
remedied. (Ord. 1598, 9-1-1998)
3-10-7: LOCATIONS OF TAXI STANDS:
   (A)   The areas approved by ordinance are hereby designated as taxi stands
and shall be used for the temporary standing or parking of such vehicles:
First Avenue, west side, beginning 89 feet south of the southwest corner of Elm
Street along the westerly curb line, continuing 20 feet south.
First Avenue, west side, beginning 109 feet south of the southwest corner of
Elm Street along the westerly curb line, continuing 20 feet south.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stand or park
any other vehicle in a taxicab stand above designated, except that the operator
of such vehicle may temporarily stop such vehicle in any such stand for the
purpose of, and while actually engaged in, the loading or unloading of
passengers. (Ord. 1971, 4-21-2009)
3-10-8: PARKING IN OTHER LOCATIONS:
   (A)   Taxicab operators may park in locations other than taxicab stands
provided that they are in compliance with the traffic ordinance, the parking
ordinance and any other applicable ordinances of the city.
   (B)   The street superintendent shall designate by appropriate signs,
markings and devices, the taxicab stands hitherto established. (Ord. 1598, 9-1-
1998)
3-10-9: DRIVER'S LICENSE:
3-10-9-1: LICENSE REQUIRED; REGISTRATION:
No person shall operate or drive a taxicab in the city unless such person has
first obtained a valid Illinois driver's license and has caused such valid
Illinois driver's license to be registered with the chief of police, and has
been issued a city taxicab driver's license as such taxicab operator. (Ord.
1598, 9-1-1998)
3-10-9-2: APPLICATION PHOTOGRAPH:
Each application for a taxicab driver's license shall be accompanied by a
recent one and one-half inch by two inch (11/2" x 2") photograph of the
applicant. (Ord. 1598, 9-1-1998)
3-10-9-3: STANDARDS OF LICENSE ISSUANCE:
   (A)   No taxicab operator's license shall be granted unless approved by the
chief of police.
   (B)   The following persons shall not be licensed:
      1.   Any person who has been convicted of three (3) moving traffic
violations during the previous twelve (12) months.
      2.   Any person whose driver's license is currently suspended or revoked.
      3.   Any person who has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years.
      4.   Any person who has been convicted of a sex offense as outlined in
the definitions herein.
      5.   Any person who has been convicted of a felony as defined under the
laws of the jurisdiction in which the conviction occurred, within the preceding
five (5) years.
   (C)   If the chief of police shall determine that an applicant complies with
this section
3-10-9, he shall approve his taxicab driver's license. If any section has been
violated, the chief of police shall not issue a taxicab driver's license, but
shall endorse on the application such refusal, along with the section violated,
his basis for such determination, and his signature, and deliver a copy
thereof, by mail, to such applicant at his listed address, within thirty (30)
days from the date of application. A list of all taxicab driver's licenses
issued and refusals shall be delivered to the city clerk to be entered in the
city records.
   (D)   Where an applicant may find a material error, and so state in writing,
he may demand a review of his application within thirty (30) days after any
denial of license, such demand setting forth in detail such material error.
   (E)   Within thirty (30) days after such review determines no material
error, an unsuccessful applicant may appeal to a panel composed of the city
clerk and city attorney for review. They shall render a written decision within
thirty (30) days after it is filed. Appeals from the above designated review
board shall be made to the circuit court. (Ord. 1598, 9-1-1998)
3-10-9-4: LICENSE FEE:
The fee for the taxicab license required by this chapter shall be twenty five
dollars ($25.00) upon original application and five dollars ($5.00) upon
application for renewal. (Ord. 1769, 9-16-2003)
3-10-9-5: LICENSE CONTENTS:
Each taxicab driver's license issued by the city clerk shall be of such size
and design as designated by the city clerk and shall contain the city permit
number, date of issuance, date of expiration, driver's name, address, date of
birth, physical description and photograph. (Ord. 1598, 9-1-1998)
3-10-9-6: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
Each taxicab driver's license shall be openly displayed to the full view of all
passengers at all times. (Ord. 1598, 9-1-1998)
3-10-9-7: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE:
Every taxicab operator's license issued under this section
3-10-9 shall expire April 30 following date of issue. (Ord. 1598, 9-1-1998)
3-10-9-8: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The taxicab operator's license of an individual may be revoked by the chief of
police for the offenses set forth in subsections
3-10-9-3(B)1 through (B)5 of this chapter. (Ord. 1598, 9-1-1998)
3-10-10: PERMIT:
3-10-10-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
No person shall operate a taxicab over, across or upon any public street or
alley in the city unless and until a permit therefor has been issued.
Application for such permit shall be made to the city clerk, at which time the
applicant shall present a certificate of title or other evidence of ownership
or right to possession for such vehicle which the applicant proposes to operate
as a taxicab. (Ord. 1598, 9-1-1998)
3-10-10-2: STANDARDS OF PERMIT ISSUANCE:
No permit shall be issued for any vehicle which does not have a current state
registration, does not meet the requirements of sections
3-10-4 through
3-10-6 or section
3-10-10-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 1598, 9-1-1998)
3-10-10-3: FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY:
No person shall operate a taxicab over, across or upon any public street or
alley in the city, unless and until there is in full force and effect, and on
file with the secretary of state proof of financial responsibility for such
taxicab, furnished in accordance with the applicable statutes of the state, and
unless and until there is displayed upon the windshield or a window of such
taxicab a certificate issued by such secretary of state currently evidencing
the fact that such proof of financial responsibility is on file with him. A
permit to operate a taxicab issued under this section
3-10-10 shall be canceled for a violation of this section. In addition, any
person violating any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof,
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 1598, 9-1-1998)
3-10-10-4: PERMIT FEE:
The annual fee charged for each permit issued under this section
3-10-10 shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). The fees shall be paid to the city
collector. All permits issued under this section
3-10-10 shall expire on April 30 next succeeding the date of issuance. (Ord.
1769, 9-16-2003)
3-10-10-5: PERMIT RENEWAL:
A permit to operate a taxicab in the city shall be reissued to the person
previously holding such permit, provided that proper application is made
therefor prior to the expiration of such license previously issued, and
provided further that such person is properly qualified to receive such permit.
(Ord. 1598, 9-1-1998)
CHAPTER 11
TATTOO AND BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
3-11-1: Definitions
3-11-2: License Required
3-11-3: License Fee
3-11-4: Application For License; Contents
3-11-5: Exemptions
3-11-6: Age Requirement
3-11-7: Health And Sanitary Requirements
3-11-8: Sanitation And Sterilization Procedures
3-11-9: Infections
3-11-10: Penalty
3-11-11: Suspension Or Revocation Of Permits
3-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the words and terms defined below shall have the
following meanings:
BODY PIERCING: Any procedure whereby a part or parts of the human body are
pierced by a sharp instrument in order to allow insertion of a piece or pieces
of jewelry, a ring or other ornamental device through the orifice thus created.
OPERATOR: Any individual, firm, company, corporation or association that owns
or operates an establishment where tattooing or body piercing is performed and
any individual who performs or practices the art of tattooing or body piercing
other human beings.
TATTOO, TATTOOED, TATTOOING: Any method of placing designs, letters, scrolls,
figures, symbols or any other marks upon or under the skin with ink or any
other substance resulting in the coloration of the skin by the aid of needles
or other instruments designed to touch or puncture the skin. (Ord. 1967, 4-7-
2009)
3-11-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
The operator of the facility shall file an annual application for a license
with the city clerk that shall be accompanied by the requisite fee. Before
issuing a license to an applicant, the city, or its designee, shall inspect the
premises of the establishment to ensure compliance under this chapter. It shall
be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating a tattooing
establishment or body piercing establishment without first having obtained a
license from the city. A permit is not transferable from one place or operator
to another. (Ord. 1967, 4-7-2009)
3-11-3: LICENSE FEE:
The license fee for engaging in the business of operating a tattooing
establishment or body piercing establishment within the city shall be one
hundred dollars ($100.00) per annum, payable in advance to the city clerk at
the time application for a license is made. (Ord. 1967, 4-7-2009)
3-11-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; CONTENTS:
All applications for licenses to operate a tattooing or body piercing
establishment shall be made in writing to the city clerk on a form provided by
the city clerk and shall be accompanied by the license fee for the period for
which the application is made. All permits will be valid from the date of
issuance and shall automatically expire on April 30 of each calendar year.
Renewals shall be made by April 30 of each calendar year. Any change of
ownership shall require a new application and license with payment of fees
therefor. (Ord. 1967, 4-7-2009)
3-11-5: EXEMPTIONS:
Individuals who pierce only the lobe of the ear with a presterilized single use
stud and clasp ear piercing system are exempt from these regulations.
Individuals who use ear piercing systems must conform to the manufacturer's
directions on use and applicable U.S. food and drug administration
requirements. (Ord. 1967, 4-7-2009)
3-11-6: AGE REQUIREMENT:
No person under the age of eighteen (18) may be tattooed or pierced except by a
physician provided by the statutes of the state of Illinois 1 . Age
verification shall be obtained by government issued identification containing a
birth date and photograph. A photocopy of the government issued identification
must be retained by the operator for a period not less than twelve (12) months.
(Ord. 1967, 4-7-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. 720 ILCS 5/12-10(a).
3-11-7: HEALTH AND SANITARY REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Each person who operates a tattooing establishment shall comply with
the following requirements:
      1.   The establishment shall have a certificate of compliance with or
inspection by the Fulton County health department, if available.
      2.   The operator will have attended and submitted proof of attendance
and completion of a bloodborne pathogen training program. Examples of approved
courses include courses such as "preventing disease transmission" (American red
cross) and bloodborne pathogen training (U.S. OSHA). Training/courses provided
by professional body art organizations or associations or by equipment
manufacturers may also be submitted to the city for approval.
      3.   The room in which tattooing is done shall have an enclosed area of
not less than one hundred (100) square feet. The walls, floors and ceiling
shall have an impervious, smooth and washable surface. Tattooing cannot be
performed in any room where piercing is performed.
      4.   A toilet shall be located in the establishment and shall be
accessible at all times the tattooing establishment is open for business. The
lavatory shall be supplied with hot and cold running water, soap and sanitary
towels.
      5.   All tables and other equipment shall be constructed of easily
cleanable material, shall be painted or finished in a light color, with a
smooth washable finish and shall be separated from waiting customers or
observers by a solid wall or door totally eliminating any view into the
tattooing room.
      6.   The entire premises and equipment shall be maintained in a clean,
sanitary condition and in good repair.
      7.   The operator shall wash his hands thoroughly with antiseptic soap
and water before starting to tattoo; the hands shall be dried with individual,
single use towels. The operator shall wear disposable medical gloves,
discarded, at a minimum, after completion of each procedure on a client.
      8.   The area on the patron to be tattooed shall first be thoroughly
washed with a sterile, single use sponge with warm water containing an
antiseptic liquid soap. The area should be shaved with a safety razor, using
single service blades for each customer or patron, followed by a solution of
seventy percent (70%) alcohol to be applied to the area before tattooing is
begun.
      9.   Only petroleum jelly in collapsible metal or plastic tubes shall be
used on the area to be tattooed and it shall be applied with sterile gauze.
      10.   Single service or individual containers of dye or ink shall be used
for each patron and the container therefor shall be discarded immediately after
completing work on a patron and any dye in which the needles are dipped shall
not be used on another person. After completing work on any person, the
tattooed area shall be washed with sterile gauze and seventy percent (70%)
alcohol solution and allowed to dry. The sterile gauze dressing shall then be
fastened to the tattooed area.
   (B)   Each person who operates a body piercing establishment shall comply
with the following requirements:
      1.   The establishment shall have a certificate of compliance with or
inspection by the Fulton County health department, if available.
      2.   The operator will have attended and submitted proof of attendance
and completion of a bloodborne pathogen training program. Examples of approved
courses include courses such as "preventing disease transmission" (American red
cross) and bloodborne pathogen training (U.S. OSHA). Training/courses provided
by professional body art organizations or associations or by equipment
manufacturers may also be submitted to the city for approval.
      3.   The room in which piercing is done shall have an enclosed area of
not less than one hundred (100) square feet. The walls, floors and ceiling
shall have an impervious, smooth and washable surface. Piercing cannot be
performed in any room where tattooing is performed.
      4.   A toilet shall be located in the establishment and shall be
accessible at all times the piercing establishment is open for business. The
lavatory shall be supplied with hot and cold running water, soap and sanitary
towels.
      5.   All tables and other equipment shall be constructed of easily
cleanable material, shall be painted or finished in a light color, with a
smooth washable finish and shall be separated from waiting customers or
observers by a solid wall or door totally eliminating any view into the
piercing room.
      6.   The entire premises and equipment shall be maintained in a clean,
sanitary condition and in good repair.
      7.   The operator shall wash his hands thoroughly with antiseptic soap
and water before starting to pierce; the hands shall be dried with individual,
single use towels. The operator shall wear disposable medical gloves,
discarded, at a minimum, after completion of each procedure on a client.
      8.   The area on the patron to be pierced shall first be thoroughly
washed with a sterile, single use sponge with warm water containing an
antiseptic liquid soap. (Ord. 1967, 4-7-2009)
3-11-8: SANITATION AND STERILIZATION PROCEDURES:
   (A)   All establishments must have an autoclave on site. All other forms of
sterilization are prohibited. All nonsingle use, nondisposable instruments used
for body art shall be cleaned thoroughly after each use by scrubbing with an
appropriate soap or disinfectant solution and hot water or by following the
manufacturer's instructions, to remove blood and tissue residue, and shall be
placed in an ultrasonic unit also operated in accordance with manufacturer's
instructions.
   (B)   After being cleaned, all nondisposable instruments used shall be
packed individually in peel packs and subsequently sterilized. All peel packs
shall contain either a sterilizer or internal temperature indicator. Peel packs
must be dated with an expiration date not to exceed six (6) months.
   (C)   All cleaned, nondisposable instruments used for body art shall be
sterilized in a steam autoclave. The sterilizer shall be used, cleaned, and
maintained according to manufacturer's instruction. A copy of the
manufacturer's recommended procedures for the operation of the sterilization
unit must be available for inspection by the city. Sterile equipment may not be
used if the package had been breached or after the expiration date without
first repacking and resterilizing. Sterilizers shall be located away from work
stations or areas frequented by the public. If the establishment uses only
single use, disposable instruments and products, and uses sterile supplies, an
autoclave shall not be required.
   (D)   Each holder of a permit to operate shall demonstrate that the
sterilizer used is capable of attaining sterilization by quarterly spore
destruction tests. These tests shall be verified through an independent
laboratory. The permit shall not be issued or renewed until documentation of
the sterilizer's ability to destroy spores is received by the city. These test
records shall be retained by the operator for a period of three (3) years and
made available to the city upon request.
   (E)   All instruments used for tattooing/body piercing shall remain stored
in sterile packages until just prior to the performance of a body art
procedure. When assembling instruments used for body art procedures, the
operator shall wear disposable medical gloves and use medically recognized
techniques to ensure that the instruments and gloves are not contaminated.
   (F)   All inks, dyes, pigments, needles, and equipment shall be specifically
manufactured for performing body art procedures and shall be used according to
manufacturer's instructions. The mixing of approved inks, dyes, or pigments or
their dilution with potable water is acceptable. Any other dilution outside of
the manufacturer's recommendations must be approved by the city prior to use.
Immediately before a tattoo is applied, the quantity of the dye to be used
shall be transferred from the dye bottle and placed into single use paper cups
or plastic cups. Upon completion of the tattoo, these single cups or caps and
their contents shall be discarded.
   (G)   Only sterile, single use needles are allowed. Single use items shall
not be used on more than one client for any reason. After use, all single use
needles, razors, and other sharps shall be immediately disposed of in approved
sharps containers.
   (H)   All products applied to the skin, including body art stencils, shall
be single use and disposable. (Ord. 1967, 4-7-2009)
3-11-9: INFECTIONS:
Persons, customers or patrons having any skin infection or other disease,
including, but not limited to, jaundice, hepatitis, AIDS or any communicable
disease shall not be tattooed. (Ord. 1967, 4-7-2009)
3-11-10: PENALTY:
A violation of this chapter shall subject the person violating it to a fine of
fifty dollars ($50.00) to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Underage
recipients of a tattoo in this city shall be subject to prosecution as well as
the operator. (Ord. 1967, 4-7-2009)
3-11-11: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMITS:
   (A)   Permits issued under the provisions of the code may be suspended
temporarily by the city for failure of the holder to comply with the
requirements of this code.
   (B)   Whenever a permit holder or operator has failed to comply with any
notice issued under the provisions of this code, the operator must be notified
in writing that the permit is, upon service of this notice, immediately
suspended. The notice must also contain a statement informing the permit holder
or operator that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written
request for a hearing is filed with the department within the time specified by
law.
   (C)   Any person whose permit has been suspended may, at any time, make
application for reinstatement of the permit. Within ten (10) days of receipt of
a written request, including a statement signed by the applicant that in his or
her opinion the conditions causing the suspension have been corrected and
submission of the appropriate reinspection fees, the department shall reinspect
the body art establishment or evaluate documentation provided by an operator.
If the applicant is in compliance with the provisions of this code, the permit
will be reinstated.
   (D)   For repeated or serious (any code infraction that threatens the health
of the client or operator) violations of any of the requirements of this code
or for interference with department personnel in the performance of their
duties, a permit may be permanently revoked after a hearing. Before taking such
action, the city shall notify the permit holder or operator in writing, stating
the reasons for which the permit is subject to revocation and advising the
permit holder or operator of the requirements for filing a request for a
hearing. A permit may be suspended for cause, pending its revocation or hearing
relative thereto.
   (E)   The city may permanently revoke a permit after five (5) days following
service of the notice unless the permit holder files a request for a hearing
within the five (5) day period with the department.
   (F)   The hearings provided for in this section must be conducted by the
city at a time and place designated by the city. On the basis of the record of
the hearing, the city shall make a finding and may sustain, modify, or rescind
any official notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the
hearing decision must be furnished to the permit holder or operator by the
city. (Ord. 1967, 4-7-2009)
CHAPTER 12
FARMERS' MARKETS
SECTION:
3-12-1: Definitions
3-12-2: Established
3-12-3: Application/Agreement
3-12-4: Vendor Spaces; Fees
3-12-5: Vendor Spaces; Stalls
3-12-6: Right To Sell; Licenses
3-12-7: Penalties For Violations; Revocation Of License
3-12-8: Hours, Days, Location Of Operation
3-12-9: Cleanliness And Weighing Of Commodities
3-12-10: Inspection And Condemnation Of Food
3-12-11: General Regulations
3-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter only, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings, and are hereby defined, as follows:
GOODS OR PRODUCTS: Those items grown or produced within the state of Illinois.
GROWER: Any person offering for sale articles for human consumption, including,
but not limited to, fruits, vegetables, edible grains, nuts and berries, apiary
products, maple sugars and syrups, eggs, dairy products, prepackaged meat,
poultry or fish that are frozen and that have been processed and properly
labeled at a federal or state licensed facility. All meat, poultry and fish
offered for sale at the farmers' market shall conform with the Illinois retail
food store sanitation code and all regulations imposed by the Fulton County
health department.
MARKET OR FARMERS' MARKET: A designated area where, on designated days and
times, growers, producers and retailers may sell directly to the public in
accordance with the city of Canton regulations. The city of Canton shall have
the right to relocate or discontinue the market, to specify the days and times
of its use, and to stipulate what goods may be sold.
PARK: The public park owned and maintained by the city of Canton, commonly
referred to as Jones Park.
PRODUCER: Any person offering for sale nonedible articles produced within the
state of Illinois, including, but not limited to, cut or potted flowers,
candles, jewelry, and handmade/homemade craft items.
SPACE OR STALL: The diagonal parking spaces and curb located directly adjacent
to Jones Park.
VENDOR: Any person who participates in the market or farmers' market by the
selling of goods or products therein. (Ord. 2087, 6-5-2012)
3-12-2: ESTABLISHED:
It is in the public interest of the city of Canton to provide for a farmers'
market, whereby growers of food may sell directly to the public, pursuant to
505 Illinois Compiled Statutes 70/1, products and items necessary for the
sustenance and convenience of the residents of the city of Canton. Producers
may also participate in the market subject to all rules and regulations imposed
by this chapter. (Ord. 2087, 6-5-2012)
3-12-3: APPLICATION/AGREEMENT:
An applicant for a space to sell goods within the market may request an
application/agreement from the Canton area chamber of commerce/Spoon River
partnership for economic development/Canton Main Street and shall submit
together with the required fee and the application/agreement the following
information:
   (A)   Name and address of applicant;
   (B)   Product(s) to be sold;
   (C)   A warrant that the product is fit for human consumption or use;
   (D)   Additional information required by the regulations of the farmers'
market adopted hereunder;
   (E)   Such other information as may be required by the Canton area chamber
of commerce/Spoon River partnership for economic development/Canton Main
Street. (Ord. 2087, 6-5-2012)
3-12-4: VENDOR SPACES; FEES:
Pursuant to state statute, no license fee will be charged of any participant in
the farmers' market subject to section
3-12-6 of this chapter. The Canton area chamber of commerce/Spoon River
partnership for economic development/Canton Main Street will charge vendors a
space rental fee at a weekly cost of five dollars ($5.00), or seasonal cost of
seventy five dollars ($75.00) depending on the vendor's preference and
availability of space. Vendors will be required to display the space rental
receipt in public view at the time of the market. (Ord. 2087, 6-5-2012)
3-12-5: VENDOR SPACES; STALLS:
Vendors shall occupy as market stalls the diagonal parking spaces and adjacent
curb space as assigned by the Canton area chamber of commerce/SRPED/Canton Main
Street. Each vendor will be allowed approximately ten feet (10') of curb space,
and can set up one table no longer than eight feet (8'). Vendors wishing to
sell from the trunk of an automobile or bed of a truck are encouraged to back
into the parking space, and vendors with vehicles too large to be safely
accommodated in a single space may be required to rent an additional space
(maximum of 2 spaces). Other vendors may also rent an additional space (up to a
maximum of 2 spaces). (Ord. 2087, 6-5-2012)
3-12-6: RIGHT TO SELL; LICENSES:
Every grower of food may sell directly to the public products and items
necessary for the sustenance and convenience of the residents of the city of
Canton and in any quantity he/she may think proper, without paying any state,
county or city tax, or license. Taxes that may result from producers selling
nonedible items are the sole responsibility of the producers and shall be
collected according to state and local tax laws. Nothing in this chapter shall
be so construed as to authorize the sale of spirituous, vinous or malt liquors,
contrary to laws which now are or hereafter may be in force prohibiting the
sale thereof. (Ord. 2087, 6-5-2012)
3-12-7: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS; REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association violating any
provisions of this chapter including the regulations adopted hereunder, shall
be fined not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each offense. The Canton area chamber of commerce/Spoon
River partnership for economic development/Canton Main Street may, in their
discretion, suspend or revoke the license or permit of any individual for the
violation of any market rule or regulation or upon proof of conviction for a
violation hereof. The failure of the vendor to appear in court after service of
an official notice upon the vendor to appear in court shall constitute adequate
grounds for the suspension or revocation of the vendor's permit. (Ord. 2087, 6-
5-2012)
3-12-8: HOURS, DAYS, LOCATION OF OPERATION:
The city council shall, from time to time by resolution, prescribe the days and
time the farmers' market shall be open to the public, as well as the location
of the market. (Ord. 2087, 6-5-2012)
3-12-9: CLEANLINESS AND WEIGHING OF COMMODITIES:
Every vendor in the farmers' market shall be required to keep the space
occupied by him/her in a clean and wholesome condition. Every vendor shall be
required to keep a true set of scales for the proper weighing of all
commodities if sold by weight. Whenever any scales are found to be faulty, the
vendor using the same shall forfeit the right to the use of the farmers'
market. (Ord. 2087, 6-5-2012)
3-12-10: INSPECTION AND CONDEMNATION OF FOOD:
All edible products at the farmers' market may be subject to inspection by the
Fulton County health department who shall cause all unwholesome, decayed,
diseased or corrupted provisions or other articles to be immediately removed
and destroyed by the vendor thereof. (Ord. 2087, 6-5-2012)
3-12-11: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   (A)   No vendor under this chapter shall:
      1.   Sell any meat, poultry and fish that does not conform to the
Illinois retail food store sanitation code or without approval by the Fulton
County health department;
      2.   Sell any prepackaged food items without first completing a form at
the Fulton County health department stating what items they will be selling;
      3.   Sell any type of meat without a mechanical refrigeration unit;
      4.   Sell any canned foods, eggs, cream pies or items with creamy
frosting unless required certifications and licensing is obtained;
      5.   Sell or offer for sale any unwholesome or spoiled articles;
      6.   Attract attention to his/her goods by hawking or crying out; and
      7.   Allow any waste, garbage or any other refuse to remain on or near
his/her space after the closing hour of any market day.
   (B)   All vendors under this chapter shall:
      1.   Be responsible for any and all sales tax due according to local and
state sales tax law; and
      2.   Agree to hold harmless the city of Canton, Canton area chamber of
commerce/Spoon River partnership for economic development/Canton Main Street
for any injury to the person or property of the vendor arising from operation
within the market. (Ord. 2087, 6-5-2012)
CHAPTER 13
TRAILER COACHES; PARKS
(Rep. by Ord. 844, 10-21-1980)
CHAPTER 14
GARBAGE HAULERS
SECTION:
3-14-1: Definitions
3-14-2: Permit Required; Annual Fee
3-14-3: Landfill Use (Rep. by Ord. 845, 1980)
3-14-4: Nonassignable
3-14-5: Application; Restrictions
3-14-6: Council Approval (Rep. by Ord. 4005, 9-15-2015)
3-14-7: Revocation
3-14-8: Fees (Rep. by Ord. 845, 1980)
3-14-9: Restrictions (Rep. by Ord. 845, 1980)
3-14-10: Payment; Receipt (Rep. by Ord. 845, 1980)
3-14-11: Garbage Disposal Fund
3-14-12: Penalty
3-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used herein shall have the meanings set forth
below:
ENGAGED IN THE BUSINESS: Any service rendered by any person or entity for hire
which primarily involved the collection, removal, or recycling of wastes for
the purposes of disposal or recycling thereof.
WASTES: Any property as to which the owner thereof has relinquished ownership
and delivered to or authorized collection and removal by a person or entity
authorized by permit hereunder for disposal or recycling. (Ord. 4002, 5-2-2015)
3-14-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; ANNUAL FEE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be engaged in the business of
collecting, removing, or recycling waste from the city without first having
secured a permit therefor. The annual fee for such permit for an individual
engaged in the business of hauling waste shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00)
per vehicle and for an entity engaged in the business of hauling waste shall be
three hundred dollars ($300.00) per entity and one hundred dollars ($100.00)
per vehicle. This fee shall apply to each vehicle used in the city by such
individual or entity engaged in such business. Said permits shall be
transferable to vehicles. Said fee shall be payable annually and in full, on or
before May 1 of the year in which the permit is for. (Ord. 4002, 5-2-2015)
3-14-3: LANDFILL USE:
(Rep. by Ord. 845, 1980)
3-14-4: NONASSIGNABLE:
The permit herein provided is hereby to be a license or privilege which is not
assignable in any manner. Refunds of permit fees on permits issued are not
allowed for any reason. (Ord. 4002, 5-2-2015)
3-14-5: APPLICATION; RESTRICTIONS:
The permit herein contemplated shall be issued on the approval of the city
council if for an individual applicant; however, if for an entity applicant,
the approval shall be issued by the city clerk. All first or original
applications of an individual therefor shall be made in writing and filed with
the city clerk who shall refer the same as an order of business at the regular
council meeting thereafter following such application. All applications by an
entity shall be made in writing and filed with the city clerk who shall review
such application and if appropriate, approve and issue such permit. All
applications must be accompanied by the appropriate permit fees, shall set
forth the name and address of the applicant, shall particularly describe the
vehicle or vehicles to be used (including the state license currently assigned
to each such vehicle), shall set forth the general nature of the waste proposed
to be handled, and shall set forth the period of time for which the permit is
desired. In the case of an individual applicant, the applicant shall personally
appear at said city council meeting. No such permit shall be issued in the
absence of an affirmative and satisfactory showing by the applicant that each
vehicle proposed to be used is sufficiently self-contained and equipped to
prevent the spillage of wastes along and upon any street or road, whether
public or private, which is likely to be traversed by such vehicle in the
collection, disposal, and recycling of wastes. The city clerk may deny any
entity's application for a permit, in which event the accompanied fee shall be
returned. The city council may deny any individual's application, in which
event the accompanied fee shall be returned. In the case of the city clerk's
denial of an entity's application, the entity may appeal the city clerk's
denial to the city council at the next regularly scheduled city council
meeting. The city council may limit the number of permits issuable. Permits
granted shall be issued in writing over the signature of the mayor and
attestation of the city clerk, shall set forth the name and the address of the
person or entity to whom the permit is granted, and the effective period of the
permit by appropriate dates. The person or entity may submit one application
requesting permits for more than one vehicle, but each vehicle must be
described appropriately as outlined above and the fee for each vehicle must be
included with such application. Duplicate originals of the written permit shall
be provided for each vehicle over one authorized by said permit. Each such
vehicle shall conspicuously display such written permit at all times when
engaged or used in said business. Permits may be renewed only by application
made and processed as provided with respect to an original application. No
permit shall issue for any period in excess of one year and every permit shall
expire on April 30 of the year it is issued. An application may be filed for a
permit for a period of less than one year and a permit therefor may be issued
in the same manner as provided above, but there shall be no remission or
reduction of the permit fee. (Ord. 4005, 9-15-2015)
3-14-6: COUNCIL APPROVAL:
(Rep. by Ord. 4005, 9-15-2015)
3-14-7: REVOCATION:
The council may revoke any permit granted under the authority of this chapter,
after notice and for cause. Cause for revocation shall include, but not be
limited to, the violation of the provisions of this chapter, the spillage of
wastes along or upon any street or road, whether public or private, whether
intentional or unintentional, done by any person or entity acting under any
permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or any person or entity allowing any
vehicle authorized by such permit to remain overnight in the city while loaded
or partially loaded with waste. No portion of any permit fee shall be refunded
upon any revocation. (Ord. 4005, 9-15-2015)
3-14-8: FEES:
(Rep. by Ord. 845, 1980)
3-14-9: RESTRICTIONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 845, 1980)
3-14-10: PAYMENT; RECEIPT:
(Rep. by Ord. 845, 1980)
3-14-11: GARBAGE DISPOSAL FUND:
The permit fees herein provided shall be paid over to and credited to the
garbage disposal fund of the city. (Ord. 845, 1980)
3-14-12: PENALTY:
Any person or entity who violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined
not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 4002, 5-2-
2015)
CHAPTER 15
NON-HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' AND SERVICE OCCUPATION TAXES
SECTION:
3-15-1: Taxes Imposed; Exemptions
3-15-2: Administration And Enforcement Of Taxes
3-15-1: TAXES IMPOSED; EXEMPTIONS:
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal
property titled and registered with an agency of this State's government, at
retail in this Municipality at the rate of one percent (1%) of the gross
receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this chapter
is in effect; and a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this
Municipality in the business of making sales of service, at the rate of one
percent (1%) of the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred
by such serviceman as an incident to a sale of service.
   (B)   This "Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax" and this
"Non-Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax" shall not be applicable to the
sales of food for human consumption that is to be consumed off the premises
where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks, and food that
has been prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and non-
prescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing
materials, syringes, and needles used by diabetics.
   (C)   The imposition of these Non-Home Rule Taxes is in accordance with and
subject to the provisions of sections 8-11-1.1, 8-11-1.2, 8-11-1.3 and 8-11-1.4
of the Illinois Municipal Code 1 . (Ord. 4099, 4-3-2018, eff. 4-3-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.1, 5/8-11-1.2, 5/8-11-1.3 and 5/8-11-1.4.
3-15-2: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF TAXES:
The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois. The Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 4099, 4-3-2018,
eff. 4-3-2018)
CHAPTER 16
SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
(Rep. by Ord. 1811, 9-7-2004, eff. 1-1-2005)
CHAPTER 17
MUNICIPAL USE TAX
SECTION:
3-17-1: Tax Imposed
3-17-2: Collection Of Taxes
3-17-3: Transmittal Of Ordinance
3-17-1: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions of section
8-11-6 of the Illinois municipal code upon the privilege of using in the
municipality any item of tangible personal property which is purchased outside
Illinois at retail from a retailer, and which is titled or registered with an
agency of Illinois government. The tax shall be at a rate of one percent (1%)
of the selling price of such tangible property with selling price to have the
meaning as defined in the use tax act, approved July 14, 1955. (Ord. 476, 12-3-
1974)
3-17-2: COLLECTION OF TAXES:
Such tax shall be collected by the Illinois department of revenue for all
municipalities imposing the tax and shall be paid before the title or
certificate of registration for the personal property is issued. (Ord. 476, 12-
3-1974)
3-17-3: TRANSMITTAL OF ORDINANCE:
The city clerk is hereby directed to transmit to the Illinois department of
revenue a certified copy of the ordinance codified herein not later than five
(5) days after its effective date. (Ord. 476, 12-3-1974)
CHAPTER 18
ADULT BUSINESSES
SECTION:
3-18-1: Definitions
3-18-2: Adult Uses Enumerated
3-18-3: Limitations On Adult Uses
3-18-4: Measurement Of Distances
3-18-5: License Required; Filing Of Application; Filing Fee
3-18-6: Contents Of Application For License
3-18-7: Issuance Of Adult Use License
3-18-8: Suspension Or Revocation Of License For Adult Use
3-18-9: Automatic Suspension
3-18-10: Exterior Display
3-18-11: Display Of License And Permit
3-18-12: Employment Of Persons Under Age Of Eighteen Prohibited
3-18-13: Illegal Activities On Premises
3-18-14: Severability Clause
3-18-15: Violation And Penalty
3-18-16: Repeal Of Conflicting Ordinances
3-18-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively prescribed to them by this section. Any reference to the
masculine shall include the feminine, and any reference to the singular shall
include the plural.
ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment having as a substantial portion of its stock
in trade, books, magazines, films for sale or viewing on the premises by use of
motion picture devices or any other coin operated means, and other periodicals
which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to "specified sexual activities", or "specified
anatomical areas" or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the
sale or display of such material.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET: A public or private establishment which is
licensed to serve food and/or alcoholic beverages, which features topless
dancers and/or waitresses, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar
entertainers.
ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building with a capacity for
less than fifty (50) persons used for presenting material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation
by patrons therein.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building with a capacity of fifty
(50) or more persons used regularly and routinely for presenting motion
pictures having as a dominant theme material distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein.
BODY SHOP OR MODEL STUDIO: Any public or private establishment which describes
itself as a body shop or model studio, or where for any form of consideration
or gratuity, figure models who display "specified anatomical areas" are
provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or
similarly depicted by persons paying such consideration or gratuity, or where
for any form of consideration or gratuity, nude and seminude dancing, readings,
counseling sessions, body painting and other activities that present materials
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing
or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"
are provided for observation by or communication to persons paying such
consideration or gratuity.
BUILDING STRUCTURE: Any structure or group of structures housing two (2) or
more businesses which share a common entry, exit, wall or frontage wall,
including, but not limited to, shopping centers, shopping malls, shopping
plazas or shopping squares.
MASSAGE: Any method of pressure on or friction against or stroking, kneading,
rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of the external soft parts
of the body with the hands or other parts of the human body or with the aid of
any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance with or without such
supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder,
creams, lotions, ointments or other similar preparations commonly used in this
practice.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: Any establishment having a fixed place of business where
any person, firm, association or corporation engages in or carries on, or
permits to be engaged in or carried on, any of the activities mentioned under
the definition of "massage" in this section.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Any of the following conditions:
   (A)   Less than completely and opaquely covered:
      1.   Human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair;
      2.   Buttock; and
      3.   Human breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola;
and
      4.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Any of the following conditions:
   (A)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   (B)   Acts or representations of acts of human masturbation, sexual
intercourse or sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation or flagellation.
   (C)   Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock
or breast.
   (D)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any activities
set forth in subsections (A) through (C) of this definition. (Ord. 903, 12-1-
1981)
3-18-2: ADULT USES ENUMERATED:
The following shall be considered adult uses for the purpose of this chapter:
Adult bookstore.
Adult entertainment cabaret.
Adult mini-motion picture theater.
Adult motion picture theater.
Body shop or model studio.
Massage establishment. (Ord. 903, 12-1-1981)
3-18-3: LIMITATIONS ON ADULT USES:
Adult uses shall be permitted subject to the following restrictions:
   (A)   An adult use shall not be allowed within five hundred feet (500') of
another existing adult use.
   (B)   An adult use shall not be located within seven hundred feet (700') of
any zoning district which is zoned for single-family residential (R-1), single-
family residential (R-2), two-family residential (R-3) or multi-family
residential (R-4).
   (C)   An adult use shall not be located within five hundred feet (500') of a
preexisting school or place of worship.
   (D)   An adult use shall not be located in a building structure which
contains another business that sells or dispenses in some manner alcoholic
beverages.
   (E)   Any adult use doing business at the time this chapter takes effect
shall have one year from the effective date of this chapter to comply with the
provisions of subsections (A) through (D), inclusive, of this section.
   (F)   Any adult use doing business at the time this chapter takes effect
shall have thirty (30) days from the effective date of this chapter to apply
for the issuance of an adult use license. (Ord. 903, 12-1-1981)
3-18-4: MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCES:
For the purposes of this chapter, measurements shall be made in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the property
line of the adult use to the nearest property line of another adult use,
school, place of worship or district zoned for residential use. (Ord. 903, 12-
1-1981)
3-18-5: LICENSE REQUIRED; FILING OF APPLICATION; FILING FEE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to
permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises in
the city, the operation of an adult use as herein defined, without first having
obtained a separate license for such adult use from the mayor of the city.
Every applicant for a license to maintain, operate or conduct an adult use
shall file an application in duplicate under oath with the city clerk upon a
form provided by the city clerk and pay a nonrefundable filing fee of twenty
five dollars ($25.00) to the city clerk, who shall issue a receipt which shall
be attached to the application filed with the city clerk.
Within ten (10) days after receiving the application, the mayor shall notify
the applicant that his application is granted, denied or held for further
investigation. Such additional investigation shall not exceed an additional
thirty (30) days unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant. Upon the
conclusion of such additional investigation, the mayor shall advise the
applicant in writing whether the application is granted or denied.
Whenever an application is denied or held for further investigation, the mayor
shall advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for such action.
Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any information relevant to the
investigation of the application or his or her refusal or failure to appear at
any reasonable time and place for examination under oath regarding said
application, or his or her refusal to submit to or cooperate with any
inspection or investigation required by this chapter, shall constitute an
admission by the applicant that he or she is ineligible for such permit and
shall be grounds for denial thereof by the mayor. (Ord. 903, 12-1-1981)
3-18-6: CONTENTS OF APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An applicant for a license shall furnish the following information under oath:
   (A)   Name and address.
   (B)   Written proof that the individual is at least eighteen (18) years of
age.
   (C)   The exact nature of the adult use to be conducted and the proposed
place of business and facilities thereto. (Ord. 903, 12-1-1981)
3-18-7: ISSUANCE OF ADULT USE LICENSE:
The mayor shall issue a license to maintain, operate or conduct an adult use
unless he finds:
   (A)   That the applicant is under age of eighteen (18) years or under any
legal disability.
   (B)   That the applicant, at the time of application for renewal of any
license issued under this chapter, would not be eligible for such license upon
a first application.
Every adult use license issued pursuant to this chapter will terminate at the
expiration of one year from the date of its issuance, unless sooner revoked.
(Ord. 903, 12-1-1981)
3-18-8: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE FOR ADULT USE:
Any license issued for an adult use may be revoked or suspended by the mayor if
the mayor shall find:
   (A)   That the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter
regulating adult use.
   (B)   The licensee has knowingly furnished false or misleading information
or withheld relevant information on any application for any license or permit
required by this chapter or knowingly caused or suffered another to furnish or
withhold such information on his or her behalf.
The mayor before revoking or suspending any license shall give the licensee at
least ten (10) days' written notice of the charges against him or her and the
opportunity for a public hearing before the mayor, at which time the licensee
may present evidence bearing upon the question. In such cases, the charges
shall be specific and in writing. (Ord. 903, 12-1-1981)
3-18-9: AUTOMATIC SUSPENSION:
   (A)   In the event a person under the age of eighteen (18) years is on the
premises of an establishment operating as an adult use under this chapter, and
views any "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", as
defined in section
3-18-1 of this chapter, then the license issued pursuant to this chapter shall
be suspended for a period of three (3) months.
   (B)   In the event a licensee is convicted of violating any of the
provisions of Illinois Compiled Statutes as they pertain to this chapter as now
in force or as may be amended from time to time or any of the provisions of
section
6-3-5-1 of this code, as now in force or as may be amended from time to time,
then the license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be suspended for a
period of three (3) months.
   (C)   The mayor, before suspending any license, shall give at least ten (10)
days' written notice of the charge. The licensee may within five (5) days of
receipt of said notice request a public hearing before the mayor at which time
the licensee may present evidence bearing upon the question. The notice
required hereunder may be delivered personally to the licensee or be posted on
the premises of the establishment being used as an adult use. (Ord. 903, 12-1-
1981)
3-18-10: EXTERIOR DISPLAY:
No adult use shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of
any material depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas" by display, decoration, sign, show window or
other opening from any public way or from any property not licensed as an adult
use. (Ord. 903, 12-1-1981)
3-18-11: DISPLAY OF LICENSE AND PERMIT:
Every licensee shall display a valid license in a conspicuous place within the
adult use business so that same may be readily seen by persons entering the
premises. (Ord. 903, 12-1-1981)
3-18-12: EMPLOYMENT OF PERSONS UNDER AGE OF EIGHTEEN PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any adult use licensee or his manager or employee to
employ in any capacity within the adult business any person who is not at least
eighteen (18) years of age. (Ord. 903, 12-1-1981)
3-18-13: ILLEGAL ACTIVITIES ON PREMISES:
No licensee or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or
employee of such licensee shall engage in any activity or conduct or permit any
other person to engage in any activity or conduct in or about the licensed
premises which is prohibited by any ordinance of the city or law of the state
of Illinois or of the United States. (Ord. 903, 12-1-1981)
3-18-14: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this chapter, or any part thereof, or application thereof to any person,
firm, corporation, public agency or circumstance, is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this chapter or any part thereof. It is hereby
declared to be the legislative intent of the city council that this chapter
would have been adopted had such unconstitutional or invalid provision, clause,
sentence, paragraph, section or part thereof not then been included. (Ord. 903,
12-1-1981)
3-18-15: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. A person who is convicted shall be punished by a fine
of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00). A second or subsequent offense is punishable by a fine of
not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 903, 12-1-1981)
3-18-16: REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES:
Any other ordinances or resolutions of the city which may contain provisions
contrary to those in this chapter are hereby expressly revoked and shall be
considered to be superseded by this chapter. (Ord. 903, 12-1-1981)
CHAPTER 19
MUNICIPAL AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION TAX
SECTION:
3-19-1: Tax Imposed
3-19-2: File Report
3-19-3: Payment
3-19-1: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of renting
automobiles in this city at the rate of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts
from such rentals made in the course of such business while this chapter is in
effect, in accordance with the provisions of section
8-11-7 of the Illinois municipal code. (Ord. 914, 1-19-1982)
3-19-2: FILE REPORT:
Every such person engaged in such business in the city shall file on or before
the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state department of
revenue required by section two and three of "an act in relation to a tax upon
persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property to
purchasers for use or consumption" approved June 29, 1933, as amended. (Ord.
914, 1-19-1982)
3-19-3: PAYMENT:
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state department
of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the renting of
automobiles during the preceding month. (Ord. 914, 1-19-1982)
CHAPTER 20
MUNICIPAL AUTOMOBILE RENTING USE TAX
SECTION:
3-20-1: Tax Imposed
3-20-2: Collection Of Tax
3-20-3: Payment
3-20-1: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using in this city an automobile
which is rented from a renter outside Illinois and which is titled or
registered with an agency of this state's government in this city at the rate
of one percent (1%) of the rental price of such automobile while this chapter
is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of section
8-11-8 of the Illinois municipal code. (Ord. 915, 1-19-1982)
3-20-2: COLLECTION OF TAX:
The tax provided for in this chapter shall be collected from the persons whose
Illinois address for titling or registration purposes is given as being in this
city. (Ord. 915, 1-19-1982)
3-20-3: PAYMENT:
The tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid to the Illinois department of
revenue. (Ord. 915, 1-19-1982)
CHAPTER 21
MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX
SECTION:
3-21-1: Definitions
3-21-2: Imposition; Rate
3-21-3: Exemptions From Tax
3-21-4: Returns; Payment Of Tax
3-21-5: Overpayments
3-21-6: Statute Of Limitations
3-21-7: Effective Date Of Tax
3-21-8: Other Payments
3-21-9: Violations
3-21-10: Application Of Funds
3-21-11: Penalty
3-21-12: Severability Clause
3-21-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
GROSS RECEIPTS: The consideration received for distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas or electricity for use or consumption and not for
resale, as the case may be, and for all services rendered in connection
therewith valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including
cash, credit, services and property of every kind and material and for all
services rendered therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on
account of the cost of the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of
materials used, labor or service cost or any other expense whatsoever; the term
"gross receipts" shall include charges added to customers' bills in respect of
other taxes.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, municipal corporation or
political subdivision of the state or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other
representative appointed by order of any court, the state of Illinois, or the
United States government or any subdivision thereof. (Ord. 1163, 9-15-1987)
3-21-2: IMPOSITION; RATE:
A tax is hereby imposed on the following persons at the following rates:
   (A)   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing
or selling gas for use or consumption in the city, and not for resale, at the
rate of five percent (5%) of the gross receipts therefrom.
   (B)   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing
or selling electricity for use or consumption in the city, and not for resale,
at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross receipts therefrom. (Ord. 1163,
9-15-1987)
   (C)   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing
or selling cable television service for use or consumption in the city, and not
for resale, at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross receipts therefrom.
(Ord. 1382, 1-19-1993)
3-21-3: EXEMPTIONS FROM TAX:
   (A)   No tax shall be imposed by this chapter with respect to any
transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such
business may not, under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be
made subject to taxation by the state or any political subdivision thereof.
(Ord. 1163, 9-15-1987)
   (B)   No person engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas, electricity or cable television service is subject
to taxation under this chapter for such transactions as are or may become
subject to taxation under the provisions of the "municipal retailers'
occupation tax act" authorized by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1 of the
Illinois municipal code 1 . (Ord. 1382, 1-19-1993)
   (C)   Accounts that are owned by the city of Canton shall be exempt from the
municipal utility tax imposed in this chapter. (Ord. 4006, 9-15-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.
3-21-4: RETURNS; PAYMENT OF TAX:
   (A)   On or before December 31, 1987, each taxpayer shall make a return to
the city clerk for the month of November 1987, stating:
      1.   The taxpayer's name;
      2.   The taxpayer's principal place of business;
      3.   The taxpayer's gross receipts during the months upon the basis of
which the tax is imposed;
      4.   The amount of the tax; and
      5.   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
   (B)   On or before the last day of every month thereafter, each taxpayer
shall make a like return to the clerk for the preceding month.
   (C)   The taxpayer shall, at the time of making the return, pay to the clerk
the amount of tax imposed under this chapter, provided that, in connection with
any return, the taxpayer may, if he or she so elects, report and pay an amount
based upon his or her total billings of business subject to the tax during the
period for which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously
billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon any difference
between such billings and the taxable gross receipts. (Ord. 1163, 9-15-1987)
3-21-5: OVERPAYMENTS:
If it appears that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under this
chapter, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then
such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this
chapter from the taxpayer who made the erroneous payment. However, no amount
erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior to the filing of a claim
therefor shall be so credited. (Ord. 1163, 9-15-1987)
3-21-6: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
No action to recover any amount of tax due or any taxes which might be overpaid
by the utility company under this chapter shall be commenced more than three
(3) years after the date of such amount. (Ord. 1163, 9-15-1987)
3-21-7: EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX:
The tax provided for herein shall be based on the gross receipts actually paid
to the taxpayer for services billed on or after November 1, 1987. (Ord. 1163,
9-15-1987)
3-21-8: OTHER PAYMENTS:
Any of the taxes enumerated in this chapter shall be in addition to the payment
of money, or value of products or services furnished to the city by the
taxpayer as compensation for the use of the city's streets, alleys, or other
public places, or installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder
of poles, wires, pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the
taxpayer's business. (Ord. 1163, 9-15-1987)
3-21-9: VIOLATIONS:
No person who is liable for the tax imposed by this chapter shall fail to make
a return, or make a fraudulent return, or wilfully violate or fail to comply
with any other provision of this chapter. (Ord. 1163, 9-15-1987)
3-21-10: APPLICATION OF FUNDS:
All funds derived from the utility tax imposed by this chapter shall be used,
as needed, in the sole and exclusive discretion of the Canton city council, to
fund city operations by placing same in the general fund and shall be used for
general corporate purposes. (Ord. 1163, 9-15-1987)
3-21-11: PENALTY:
Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each day of such violation or failure and is also
liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due. (Ord. 1163, 9-15-1987)
3-21-12: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
That in the event that a court of competent jurisdiction should hereafter
determine that one or more of the provisions of this chapter are invalid or
unconstitutional, the remainder of this chapter, and each and every other
clause and provision hereof, shall be and remain in full force and effect as
though the invalid or unconstitutional provision had never been a part of this
chapter. (Ord. 1163, 9-15-1987)
CHAPTER 22
ALARM SYSTEMS
SECTION:
3-22-1: Definitions
3-22-2: License For Operation Required
3-22-3: Testing, Grace Period, False Alarm Fees, Failure To Pay False Alarm
Fees
3-22-4: Liability For Functioning Of Alarm Systems
3-22-5: Penalty
3-22-1: DEFINITIONS:
ALARM SYSTEM: An assembly of equipment and devices arranged to signal the
presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which police or fire
department personnel are expected to respond. Alarm systems include those
through which public safety personnel are notified directly of such signals
through automatic recording devices or are notified indirectly by way of third
persons who monitor the alarm systems and who report such signals to the police
department. Alarm systems also include those designated to register a signal
which is so audible, visible or in other ways perceptible outside a protected
building, structure or facility as to notify persons in the neighborhood beyond
the zoning lot where the signal is located who in turn may notify the
appropriate emergency provider of the signal. Alarm systems do not include
auxiliary devices installed by telephone companies to protect telephone
equipment or systems which might be damaged or disrupted by the use of an alarm
system. The term "alarm system" shall include the terms "automatic" or "manual
hold up alarm systems", "burglar alarm systems", "security alarm systems", and
"automatic" or "manual fire alarm systems". Fire alarm systems shall include
alarms received from heat and smoke detectors, automatic extinguishing systems,
manual pull stations, and related supervisory systems. An alarm system which
has a security function and a fire and/or smoke function shall constitute two
(2) separate alarms for purposes of subsection
3-22-2(A)1 of this chapter.
ALARM USER: Any person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained within
the city and whose alarm is received by the public safety communications center
of the city. Alarms in separate structures are to be counted as separate
systems even though owned by the same person or entity.
AUDIBLE ALARM: A device designed for the detection of unauthorized entry on the
premises which generates an audible sound on the premises when it is activated.
AUTOMATIC TELEPHONE DIALING DEVICE: A device which is interconnected to a
telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined seven (7) digit
telephone number and transmit by voice message or code signal an emergency
message indicating a need for emergency response.
CITY: The city of Canton, Fulton County, Illinois, a municipal corporation.
COMMUNICATION CENTER: The Canton police department dispatch center located at
the public safety building, 2 North Main Street, Canton, Illinois, used for
receipt and transmission of signals by radio or wire transmissions.
DIRECTOR OF COMMUNICATIONS: The person designated by the chief of police to
supervise and direct the communication center.
FALSE ALARM: The activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure,
malfunction, improper installation, or as a result of the negligence, misuse or
misconduct of the owner or lessee of an alarm system or of his employees or
agents. This does not include alarms caused by severe weather, natural or
manmade disaster, power or telephone service outages, authorized alarm testing,
for which prior notification of the communications center had been made or
malicious acts of person or persons not under the direct control of the owner,
lessee or his employees or agents.
LICENSE: An authorization issued by the city clerk of the city of Canton to
allow a responsible party to install or maintain an alarm system within the
city of Canton which is commercially monitored or which is electronically
connected to the communications center and when activated would result in a
police or fire department response.
PERSON: Any association, club, society, firm, partnership or corporation and
any group acting as a unit as well as individuals.
PREMISES: Any private, public, residential, commercial or industrial land and/
or buildings located within the city of Canton.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY: Any person, firm, partnership, company, association or
corporation, or any owner or lessee of premises on which an alarm system is
installed or maintained, or the agents or representatives of the aforementioned
which or who utilize an alarm system on premises located within the city of
Canton. A license obtained by an owner or lessee of premises shall be personal
to the owner or licensee. Any new or subsequent owner or lessee shall be
required to obtain a separate license.
SILENT ALARM: Inaudible alarm which summons police or fire through the
communications center.
YEAR: A period beginning May 1 and continuing through April 30. (Ord. 2021, 12-
7-2010; amd. Ord. 3003, 12-4-2012)
3-22-2: LICENSE FOR OPERATION REQUIRED:
   (A)   All responsible parties shall obtain from the city clerk a license
which authorizes the operation of an alarm system which is commercially
monitored or which is electronically connected to the communications center.
(Ord. 2021, 12-7-2010)
      1.   A license shall be obtained for each alarm on a premises when an
alarm is in operation. Individual licenses must be obtained for each individual
structure. Individual licenses must be obtained for each individual business
within a single structure. The renewal date shall be May 1 of each year.
      2.   The initial registration charge for all licenses shall be twenty
five dollars ($25.00). There shall be an annual renewal fee for the license of
twenty five dollars ($25.00) for all nonresidential systems. There is no
renewal fee for residential systems. Renewal fees are due no later than May 1
for the following year. (Ord. 2021, 12-7-2010; amd. Ord. 3003, 12-4-2012)
      3.   The responsible party shall supply the following information when
applying for or renewing a license:
         (a)   Name, telephone number and address of responsible party;
         (b)   Address and telephone number at which the alarm is located;
         (c)   Alarm service (police, fire, other);
         (d)   Alarm type (commercial monitoring, audible, silent, direct
connection, other);
         (e)   Names, addresses and telephone numbers of at least two (2)
people who can be contacted in the event of an alarm activation;
         (f)   The name, address and telephone number of the alarm company;
         (g)   Any other additional information requested on the license.
      4.   The city clerk shall send a copy of the license which will include
the information stated in subsection (A)3 of this section to the director of
communications.
      5.   It is a violation of this chapter for any responsible party who is
otherwise required to obtain an alarm installation license, to knowingly
install an alarm system without obtaining such a license. (Ord. 2021, 12-7-
2010)
3-22-3: TESTING, GRACE PERIOD, FALSE ALARM FEES, FAILURE TO PAY FALSE ALARM
FEES:
   (A)   Testing Notification: Prior to any maintenance or testing of any alarm
system, the responsible party and/or alarm company representative shall call
the public safety communications center and advise such work is being
performed. Immediately upon completion of such tests or maintenance another
call will be made to the public safety communications center advising
completion of said tests or maintenance. Failure to make such notification
shall result in any subsequent alarm received during such test as a false alarm
and subject to the response fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
   (B)   Grace Period For Initial Installation: Upon the installation of a new
alarm system, the responsible party shall have a thirty (30) day grace period
from the date of installation before any alarm is counted toward the three (3)
allowable false alarms. Initial installation of a new alarm system does not
include any reconditioning, additions or changes made to an already existing
alarm system on a premises. To the extent the date of installation cannot be
determined, the date the alarm license was issued will be issued to determine
the expiration of the grace period.
   (C)   Fee For False Alarm: An alarm user shall be charged a response fee of
one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each false alarm in excess of three (3) in
any year and a fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each false alarm in
excess of ten (10) in any year. Facilities such as nursing homes and assisted
living facilities devoted to the care of the elderly and mentally and/or
physically handicapped shall be exempt from this subsection only on accidental
alarms not mechanical error.
   (D)   Failure To Pay Fee: The refusal to pay any fee prescribed in this
chapter within thirty (30) days of notification shall be a violation of this
chapter. Such notice shall be considered delivered when deposited postage
prepaid in any U.S. mailbox addressed to the responsible party at the address
listed on the license application. If no application has been made, notice
shall be considered delivered when deposited postage prepaid in any U.S.
mailbox addressed to the party at its most recent mailing address. (Ord. 2021,
12-7-2010)
3-22-4: LIABILITY FOR FUNCTIONING OF ALARM SYSTEMS:
   (A)   The city, the police department, the fire department and/or their
agents shall not be held responsible for the installation, maintenance or
malfunctioning of any alarm system. (Ord. 2021, 12-7-2010)
3-22-5: PENALTY:
   (A)   Violation of any section of this chapter is punishable by a fine of
not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00). (Ord. 2021, 12-7-2010)
CHAPTER 23
HOTEL/MOTEL TAX
SECTION:
3-23-1: Purpose And Authorization
3-23-2: Definitions
3-23-3: Tax Imposed
3-23-4: Exemptions
3-23-5: Collection And Payment Of Tax
3-23-6: Penalties
3-23-7: Use Of Proceeds From Tax
3-23-8: Violations
3-23-9: Lien Imposed
3-23-10: Partial Invalidity
3-23-1: PURPOSE AND AUTHORIZATION:
The purpose of this chapter is to generate revenue to be placed in a fund to
generate tourism through the promotion of lodging, restaurants, attractions,
conventions, expositions and theatrical, sport, cultural and other similar
activities. This tax is authorized by section 8-3-14 of the Illinois municipal
code 1 . (Ord. 1767, 9-16-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-3-14.
3-23-2: DEFINITIONS:
All terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings as defined in the hotel
operators' occupational tax act 1  and in the Illinois municipal code 2  as
applicable, and the same shall be in force and effect, and amended from time to
time. (Ord. 1767, 9-16-2003)
 
Notes
1 2. 35 ILCS 145/1 et seq., as amended.
2 3. 65 ILCS 5/8-3-14.
3-23-3: TAX IMPOSED:
There is hereby levied and imposed a tax upon all persons engaged within the
city in the business of renting, leasing or letting rooms in a hotel, as
defined in the hotel operators' occupation tax act, 35 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 145/1 et seq., at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross rental
receipts from such renting, leasing or letting, said tax to be administered and
collected, beginning November 1, 2003, in accordance with the following
sections. (Ord. 1767, 9-16-2003)
3-23-4: EXEMPTIONS:
This tax shall not be imposed upon nor collected from any permanent resident of
any hotel. A "permanent resident" is defined as any man or woman who occupies
or has the right to occupy any room or rooms in a hotel for at least thirty
(30) consecutive days for his or her own personal use unrelated to the
conducting of any business or occupation. (Ord. 1767, 9-16-2003)
3-23-5: COLLECTION AND PAYMENT OF TAX:
   (A)   The ultimate incidents of and liability for payment of the tax levied
herein is upon the person engaged in the business of leasing, renting or
letting such rooms. Such hotel owners and operators may reimburse themselves
for their tax liability for this tax by separately stating such tax as an
additional charge to the lessee or renter, which charge may be stated in
combination as a single amount, with the state tax imposed under "the hotel
operator's occupation tax" 1 .
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, on or before the last
day of each calendar month, every person engaged in the business of renting,
leasing or letting rooms in a hotel within the city during the preceding
calendar month shall file a return with the treasurer, on forms to be supplied
by the treasurer, stating:
      1.   The name of the operator and of the hotel;
      2.   His residence address and the address of the principal place of
business from which he engages in the business of renting, leasing or letting
rooms in a hotel in the city;
      3.   Total amount of rental receipts received by him during the preceding
calendar month from the renting, leasing or letting rooms during such preceding
calendar month;
      4.   Total amount of rental receipts received by him during the preceding
calendar month from renting, leasing or letting rooms to permanent residents
during the preceding calendar month;
      5.   Total amount of other exclusions from gross rental receipts as
allowed by this chapter;
      6.   Gross rental receipts which were received by him during the
preceding calendar month and upon the basis of which the tax is imposed;
      7.   The amount of tax due;
      8.   The amount of penalty due, if any;
      9.   Such other reasonable information as may from time to time be
required by the treasurer.
The person subject to tax shall also remit to the treasurer with the return the
amount of tax and penalties, if any, due as shown by such return along with a
copy of the return filed with the state for such period.
   (C)   Any person engaged in the business of renting, leasing or letting of
hotel rooms shall maintain complete and accurate books and records, including a
daily sheet showing the gross receipts for the hotel rentals for the day
reported.
   (D)   For the purposes of enforcing and administering this chapter, the
treasurer or such agents as are designated by the treasurer shall, after
providing reasonable notice, have access during normal business hours to the
books and records of persons and businesses subject to this chapter. The
treasurer or such agents as are designated by the treasurer shall at least
annually inspect such books and records and shall file a written report of his
or her findings with the city council no later than April 1 of each year. (Ord.
1767, 9-16-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. 35 ILCS 145/1 et seq., as amended.
3-23-6: PENALTIES:
   (A)   If the tax due pursuant to this chapter is not paid on or before the
due date of the return required to be filed by the person responsible for the
payment of the tax, such person shall, in addition to the tax, be liable for a
penalty equal to five percent (5%) of the tax due for each month or part
thereof until such tax and penalty is paid in full. The penalty imposed hereby
shall be assessed and collected in the same manner as the tax imposed under
this chapter.
   (B)   Any person responsible for filing a tax return and paying tax pursuant
to this chapter who shall fail to file the required tax return on or before the
due date thereof, whether or not the tax is paid therewith, shall be liable for
penalty in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) per day for each day that such
tax return is late, and each day shall constitute a separate offense for
purposes hereof. (Ord. 1767, 9-16-2003)
3-23-7: USE OF PROCEEDS FROM TAX:
The city shall expend the tax collected pursuant to this chapter solely to
promote tourism and conventions within the city, and otherwise to attract
nonresident, overnight visitors to the city or such other purposes as may be
authorized by statute from time to time. No tax collected pursuant to this
chapter shall be used to advertise for or to otherwise promote new competition
in the hotel business within the city. (Ord. 1767, 9-16-2003)
3-23-8: VIOLATIONS:
Any person violating the foregoing provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00)
nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, except as
otherwise expressly provided herein, and each day or part thereof upon which
such offense continues, shall constitute a separate offense hereunder. (Ord.
1767, 9-16-2003)
3-23-9: LIEN IMPOSED:
At any time after an assessment and demand for payment of any tax interest and/
or penalty due pursuant to this chapter is made against any person, the city
may file a notice of lien for said tax in the office of the recorder of deeds
of Fulton County, or any other county in which the person responsible for the
payment of tax resides or has property and a lien shall attach to all property
owned by such person in said county and shall continue in effect for a period
of seven (7) years after filing and may be foreclosed in the manner of a
judicial lien. The remedy of imposing a lien hereunder shall be in addition to
all other remedies available to the city to collect the tax, interest and
penalty due, including civil actions. (Ord. 1767, 9-16-2003)
3-23-10: PARTIAL INVALIDITY:
In the event any term or provision of this chapter is determined to be invalid
or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalid or
unenforceable provision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
provisions of this chapter and the provisions hereof declared to be severable.
(Ord. 1767, 9-16-2003)
CHAPTER 24
MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX
SECTION:
3-24-1: Tax Imposed; Rate
3-24-2: Collection Of Tax By Retailers
3-24-3: Severability
3-24-4: Effective Date
3-24-1: TAX IMPOSED; RATE:
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling cannabis, other than cannabis purchased under the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, at retail in the City at the rate of three
percent (3%) of the gross receipts from these sales made in the course of that
business.
   (B)   The imposition of this tax is in accordance with the provisions of
section
8-11-22, of the Illinois Municipal Code 1 . (Ord. 4156, 8-20-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-22.
3-24-2: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS:
   (A)   The tax imposed by this chapter shall be remitted by such retailer to
the Illinois Department of Revenue (department). Any tax required to be
collected pursuant to or as authorized by this chapter and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the department shall
constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the State. Retailers may reimburse
themselves for their seller's tax liability hereunder by separately stating
that tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in
a single amount, with any State tax that sellers are required to collect.
   (B)   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed
as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the department. The
department shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 4156, 8-20-2019)
3-24-3: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter, or the application of any provision of this
chapter, is held unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such occurrence shall
not affect other provisions of this chapter, or their application, that can be
given effect without the unconstitutional or invalid provision or its
application. Each unconstitutional or invalid provision, or application of such
provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by this chapter. (Ord. 4156,
8-20-2019)
3-24-4: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and
approval and publication as required by law, provided, however, that the tax
provided for herein shall take effect for all sales on or after the first day
of January, 2020. Copies of this chapter shall be certified and sent to the
Illinois Department of Revenue prior to September 30, 2019. (Ord. 4156, 8-20-
2019)
TITLE 4
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODES
SECTION:
4-1-1: Codes Adopted
4-1-1: CODES ADOPTED:
   (A)   Building Code: The following listed codes, along with all appendix
chapters for all listed codes and the 2004 supplement, are hereby adopted,
collectively and individually, as the building codes for the city of Canton.
The provisions of any supplement to the listed codes and the 2004 supplement
shall be included in any reference made to "the code", and shall have the same
force and effect as the original code:
      1.   2003 international building code.
      2.   2003 international fire code.
      3.   2003 international residential code.
      4.   2003 international mechanical code.
      5.   2003 international plumbing code and Illinois state plumbing code of
1998.
      6.   2003 international private sewage disposal code.
      7.   2003 international fuel gas code.
      8.   2003 international energy conservation code.
      9.   2003 international property maintenance code.
      10.   2003 international zoning code.
      11.   2003 ICC electrical code.
      12.   2003 international existing building code.
   (B)   Codes Adopted And Published: The various codes herein listed, the
appendix chapters thereto and the 2004 supplement, as they now exist in book or
printed form are hereby declared published for purposes of this chapter and are
permanently on file and available for public use, inspection and examination at
the office of the Canton city zoning officer or Canton city fire chief.
   (C)   Code Variances: Variances from specific provisions of the codes herein
adopted may be permitted on appeal to the appropriate board of appeals
appointed by the city council. Should such board of appeals, after hearing,
determine that a variance is necessary to alleviate undue hardship and will not
adversely affect the health, safety and welfare of the occupant of the
applicable building or of any other person, is hereby authorized to grant said
variance.
   (D)   Building Permit Fee Schedule: In accordance with section 114.31.1, fee
schedule, contained in the BOCA national building code, the following fee
schedule has been adopted as the fee schedule for building permits, issued by
the city of Canton:
 
$1.00 to $500.00          $10.00
                          $10.00 for the first $500.00 plus $1.50 for each
$501.00 to $2,000.00      additional $100.00 or fraction thereof, to and
                          including $2,000.00
                          $32.50 for the first $2,000.00 plus $6.00 for each
$2,001.00 to $25,000.00   additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and
                          including $25,000.00
                          $170.50 for the first $25,000.00 plus $4.50 for each
$25,001.00 to $50,000.00  additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and
                          including $50,000.00
                          $283.00 for the first $50,000.00 plus $3.00 for each
$50,001.00 to $100,000.00 additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and
                          including $100,000.00
$100,001.00 and up        $433.00 for the first $100,000.00 plus $2.50 for each
                          additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof
 
(Ord. 1864, 5-2-2006)
CHAPTER 2
PLUMBING INSPECTOR
(Rep. by Ord. 921, 3-2-1982)
CHAPTER 3
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS
SECTION:
4-3-1: Installation
4-3-2: Definition
4-3-3: Construction Requirements
4-3-4: Fence
4-3-5: Electrical Requirements
4-3-6: Other Regulations
4-3-7: Maintenance
4-3-8: Compliance
4-3-9: Penalty
4-3-1: INSTALLATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, or enlarge a
residential swimming pool not enclosed in a permanent building in the city
except in accordance with the following regulations. (Ord. 1139, 4-8-1987)
4-3-2: DEFINITION:
A swimming pool, within the meaning of this chapter, shall be any depression in
the ground, either temporary or permanent, or a container of water, either
temporary or permanent, and either above or below the ground in which water of
more than twenty four inches (24") in depth is contained and which is used
primarily for the purpose of bathing and swimming. (Ord. 1139, 4-8-1987)
4-3-3: CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   No pool shall be located, erected, constructed or maintained closer to
any side or rear lot line than allowed by the city zoning ordinance for
permitted accessory building uses, and in no case shall the water line of any
pool be less than four feet (4') from any lot line.
   (B)   No direct connection shall be made to the sanitary sewer or septic
system.
   (C)   Gaseous chlorination system will not be made use of as a disinfection
method for pool waters. (Ord. 1139, 4-8-1987)
4-3-4: FENCE:
Pools within the scope of this section or not enclosed within a permanent
building shall be completely enclosed by a fence of sufficient strength to
prevent access to the pool and shall be not less than four feet (4') in height,
so constructed as not to have voids, holes or openings larger than four inches
(4") in any one dimension. Gates or doors shall be equipped with a self-
closing and self-latching device for keeping the gate or door securely closed
at all times when not in actual use.
Aboveground pools with self-providing fencing to prevent unguarded entry will
be allowed without a separate additional fencing, providing the self-provided
fence is of minimum required height and design as heretofore specified.
Permanent access from grade to aboveground pools having stationary ladders,
stairs or ramps shall have not less than equal safeguard fencing and gates.
Location of fencing required shall be subject to all other applicable
ordinances.
No fence shall be located, erected, constructed, or maintained closer to a pool
than three feet (3').
The wall of the house or building faced to a pool may be incorporated as a
portion of such fence. (Ord. 1139, 4-8-1987)
4-3-5: ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS:
All electrical installations provided for, installed, and used in conjunction
with a private swimming pool shall be in conformance with the state laws and
city ordinances regulating electric installations.
If overhead flood or other artificial lights are used to illuminate the pool at
night, such lights shall be shielded to direct light only on the pool. (Ord.
1139, 4-8-1987)
4-3-6: OTHER REGULATIONS:
No pool shall be so operated or maintained as to create a nuisance, a hazard,
an eyesore, or otherwise to result in a substantial adverse effect on
neighboring properties, or to be in any other way detrimental to public health,
safety, and welfare. (Ord. 1139, 4-8-1987)
4-3-7: MAINTENANCE:
A swimming pool or swimming pools shall be maintained in a sanitary manner. The
city may inspect or cause to be inspected each private swimming pool maintained
in the city. (Ord. 1139, 4-8-1987)
4-3-8: COMPLIANCE:
   (A)   Every owner, contractor, or any other person desiring to erect, set,
place, or construct a swimming pool of a capacity of five hundred (500) gallons
or more shall, prior to the erection, setting, placing, or construction start,
make application to the city for a compliance certificate.
   (B)   Such application shall be in sufficient detail to affirmatively
demonstrate to appropriate city officials prima facie compliance with this
chapter and with all other applicable ordinances, laws, rules, or regulations
by the applicant. Upon such showing a compliance certificate shall issue.
   (C)   Any person who proceeds to erect, set, place, or start construction on
any swimming pool without first obtaining a compliance certificate shall, in
addition to any other penalty provision provided for in this chapter, be
subject to summary abatement of the erection, setting, placing, construction,
or use of any such swimming pool in conformity with legal or equitable
doctrines and/or other city ordinances.
   (D)   An applicant for a compliance certificate shall, in the case of an
application for an inground pool, pay at the time application is made, a
nonrefundable application fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00); in the case of
an application for other than an inground pool, pay at the time application is
made, a nonrefundable application fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00). (Ord. 1139,
4-8-1987)
4-3-9: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than
one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 1139, 4-8-1987)
CHAPTER 4
DEMOLITION
SECTION:
4-4-1: Definitions
4-4-2: Powers And Duties Of Director
4-4-3: Regulation Of Demolition Contractors
4-4-4: Regulation Of Property Owners
4-4-5: Permits; Fees
4-4-6: Demolition Inspections
4-4-7: Demolition Requirements
4-4-8: Violations; Penalties
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter:
DEMOLITION: The removal, in whole or in part, of any structure or building, the
removal of demolition debris, or the installation of fill material and final
grading in connection with such removal.
DEMOLITION CONTRACTOR: Any person or firm engaged in the business of demolition
of buildings or structures by contract.
DIRECTOR: The director of planning and zoning for the city or his authorized
agent. (Ord. 1923, 3-4-2008)
4-4-2: POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR:
In addition to the other powers and duties prescribed in this chapter, the
director shall have the right during reasonable hours, or at any time when an
extreme danger exists, to enter any premises for which a demolition permit has
been issued or applied for to determine the progress of work or to determine if
a safety hazard exists. He shall have the authority to order the
discontinuation or modification of any demolition work when he determines that
a hazardous condition may result from continued work. He shall approve or
disapprove all applications for demolition permits. He shall approve all bonds
required under this chapter. He shall submit an accounting of all fees
collected to the city clerk. (Ord. 1923, 3-4-2008)
4-4-3: REGULATION OF DEMOLITION CONTRACTORS:
Prior to the issuance of any demolition permit, a demolition contractor shall
provide the director with the following:
   (A)   License And Permit Bond: A license and permit bond specifically
covering demolition work and conditioned upon compliance with the provisions of
this chapter, such bond to be in the amount of twenty thousand dollars
($20,000.00).
   (B)   Insurance: A certificate of liability insurance containing general
liability coverage of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). If it would
be necessary for the demolition contractor to place any equipment for the
demolition and/or removal of demolition debris and/or installation of fill
material and/or final grading on public right of way, the city of Canton will
be listed as an additional insured under the general liability policy. (Ord.
1923, 3-4-2008)
4-4-4: REGULATION OF PROPERTY OWNERS:
Owners of real property may demolish their own buildings or structures.
However, the director shall not issue a demolition permit until the owner has
provided the following:
   (A)   Bond: A cash bond equal to fifty cents ($0.50) per one square foot of
ground floor area of all buildings named in the application for a demolition
permit. Such bond shall be conditioned upon compliance with this chapter. Such
bond shall be canceled and all monies returned to the owner upon completion of
the demolition to the reasonable satisfaction of the director.
   (B)   Entry Agreement: An agreement signed by the owner granting permission
to employees or agents of the city to enter the named property to complete all
work required under this chapter if such work is uncompleted on the date of
expiration of the demolition permit. Any expenses incurred by the city as a
result of such entry and work shall be deducted from the bond. (Ord. 1923, 3-4-
2008)
4-4-5: PERMITS; FEES:
   (A)   Permits Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to demolish any
building or structure, or any structural part thereof, that is over four
hundred (400) square feet, or connected to electric, gas, water, or sewer
lines, or has one or more party walls, without having first obtained a
demolition permit from the director. Application for a permit shall be made on
a form prescribed by the director.
   (B)   Expiration Of Permits: Permits for demolition shall expire thirty (30)
days after issuance. The director may, upon good cause shown, extend such date
of expiration for a successive fifteen (15) day period.
   (C)   Denial Of Permit: The director may refuse to issue a demolition permit
when the requirements of this chapter are not met or where a permit has already
been issued for a specific property and no significant progress has been made
toward complete demolition.
   (D)   Drawings Required: Applicants for a demolition permit shall provide
drawings indicating the height and location of buildings on the site, distance
from property lines and adjacent buildings, final grading, party walls,
protective canopies and such other information as may be reasonably requested
by the director. The director may, if he determines that the safety of persons
or property will not be adversely affected, waive the requirements of this
subsection.
   (E)   Permit Fees: The director shall collect fees for all demolition
permits according to the following schedule:
 
Estimated Cost            Fee
$1.00 to $500.00          $10.00
$500.01 to $2,000.00      $10.00 for first $500.00 plus $1.50 each additional
                          $100.00 or fraction of, to and including $2,000.00
$2,000.01 to $25,000.00   $32.50 for first $2,000.00 plus $6.00 each additional
                          $1,000.00 or fraction of, to and including $25,000.00
                          $170.00 for first $25,000.00 plus $4.50 each
$25,000.01 to $50,000.00  additional $1,000.00 or fraction of, to and including
                          $50,000.00
                          $283.00 for first $50,000.00 plus $3.00 each
$50,000.01 to $100,000.00 additional $1,000.00 or fraction of, to and including
                          $100,000.00
$100,000.01 and up        $433.00 for first $100,000.00 plus $2.50 each
                          additional $1,000.00 or fraction of
 
(Ord. 1923, 3-4-2008)
4-4-6: DEMOLITION INSPECTIONS:
   (A)   Inspections Required: The director shall cause an inspection to be
made of all demolitions upon the completion of work and at such other stages of
work as he may determine to be necessary.
   (B)   Notification For Inspection: The person carrying out a demolition
shall notify the director that the site is ready for final inspection. The
director shall cause an inspection within twenty four (24) hours of such
notification, nonworking days excluded.
   (C)   Discontinuance Of Demolition For Safety Reasons: If, after inspection,
the director finds continued demolition will create a hazard to the public, he
shall order demolition discontinued and recommend a safer method of demolition
to be used. (Ord. 1923, 3-4-2008)
4-4-7: DEMOLITION REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   General: All demolition work shall be carried out in a safe and
workmanlike manner to minimize hazard to adjacent property and the public.
   (B)   Subterranean Walls, Floors, Footings: All subterranean walls, floors
and footings shall be removed.
   (C)   Fill Material: All depressions, cavities, cisterns or wells shall be
filled with approved granular material to within six inches (6") of final
grade.
   (D)   Site Restoration: The final grading shall be such that no depressions
or cavities exist and storm water cannot stand on the demolition site. Six
inches (6") of earth shall be installed over any depression, cavity, cistern or
well filled with fill material.
   (E)   Removal Of Debris: All debris resulting from demolition shall be
removed from the site where demolition occurs in a timely manner. In no event
shall debris be used for fill material.
   (F)   Barricades, Fencing And Canopies: Where necessary to protect public
health and safety, the director may require the erection of fencing, barricades
or protective canopies around the perimeter of the demolition site.
   (G)   Working Hours: No demolition work shall be conducted between the hours
of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. unless previously
approved by the director.
   (H)   Closing Of Streets: Streets, roadways and alleys adjacent to a
demolition site may be closed only after approval by the director. The director
shall, prior to approval of such closing, consult with the fire chief, police
chief and director of public works.
   (I)   Disconnection Of Utilities: It is the responsibility of the owner or
his agent to arrange the disconnection of all utilities to a demolition site
prior to demolition. All water, sewer and gas lines shall be properly capped
and sealed.
   (J)   Notice: Notice to adjoining owners must be given at least ten (10)
days prior to the beginning of the proposed demolition. Only when written
notice has been given by the applicant to the owners of adjoining lots, and to
the owners of wired or other facilities of which the temporary removal is
necessitated by the proposed work, shall a permit be granted for the removal of
the building or structure. Said notice shall contain the address of the
structure to be demolished as well as the date demolition is scheduled to
begin. Said notice shall also include the demolition contractor's name,
address, and phone number.
   (K)   Party Walls: In the event the structure to be demolished has one or
more party walls, the applicant shall provide drawings sealed by a registered
architect or structural engineer indicating the measures to be taken to support
the adjacent structures after demolition. In the event adjacent structures do
not require additional support, the architect or engineer shall provide a
written statement stating such conclusion. The written consent of owners of
adjacent buildings to install necessary shoring or bracing shall be provided.
(Ord. 1923, 3-4-2008)
4-4-8: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   (A)   Violation Defined: It is a violation of this chapter for any person to
cause or allow demolition to occur on any property under his ownership or
control except in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Penalty For Violation: Any person who violates, neglects or refuses to
comply with or who resists or opposes the enforcement of any provision of this
chapter or who shall proceed to engage in the demolition of any structure
without having first obtained a demolition permit therefor shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed for each day any violation of any provision of this chapter
shall continue.
   (C)   Penalty Does Not Excuse Violation: The imposition of a penalty
hereunder shall not excuse the violation nor shall it permit the continuance of
any such violation. (Ord. 1923, 3-4-2008)
CHAPTER 5
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS OF WAY
SECTION:
4-5-1: Purpose And Scope
4-5-2: Definitions
4-5-3: Annual Registration Required
4-5-4: Permit Required; Applications And Fees
4-5-5: Action On Permit Applications
4-5-6: Effect Of Permit
4-5-7: Revised Permit Drawings
4-5-8: Insurance
4-5-9: Indemnification
4-5-10: Security
4-5-11: Permit Suspension And Revocation
4-5-12: Change Of Ownership Or Owner's Identity Or Legal Status
4-5-13: General Construction Standards
4-5-14: Traffic Control
4-5-15: Location Of Facilities
4-5-16: Construction Methods And Materials
4-5-17: Vegetation Control
4-5-18: Removal, Relocation, Or Modifications Of Utility Facilities
4-5-19: Cleanup And Restoration
4-5-20: Maintenance And Emergency Maintenance
4-5-21: Variances
4-5-22: Penalties
4-5-23: Enforcement
4-5-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   (A)   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, installing, and
operating facilities on rights of way within the city's jurisdiction, which
will provide public benefit consistent with the preservation of the integrity,
safe usage, and visual qualities of the city's rights of way and the city as a
whole.
   (B)   Intent: In enacting this chapter, the city intends to exercise its
authority over the rights of way in the city and, in particular, the use of the
public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to
address issues presented by utility facilities, including, without limitation:
      1.   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
      2.   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      3.   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
city's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights of way or
public property;
      4.   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees,
from the installation of utility facilities;
      5.   Protect against increased stormwater runoff due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
      6.   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
      7.   Preserve open space, particularly the tree lined parkways that
characterize the city's residential neighborhoods;
      8.   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the
rights of way; and
      9.   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to utility facilities locations.
   (C)   Facilities Subject To This Chapter: This chapter applies to all
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of
way within the jurisdiction of the city. A facility lawfully established prior
to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be maintained, repaired
and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located, except as may
be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar
agreement.
   (D)   Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: The city, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the city
rights of way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the city enter into such an agreement. In such an
agreement, the city may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this
chapter.
   (E)   Effect Of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements:
      1.   Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that
a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or
similar agreement with the city, such franchise, license or similar agreement
shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful
renewal or extension thereof.
      2.   Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the city and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   (F)   Conflicts With Other Chapters: This chapter supersedes all chapters or
parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict.
   (G)   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the
maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
   (H)   Sound Engineering Judgment: The city shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when the city so
determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the city
to regulate its rights of way for the protection of the public health, safety
and welfare. (Ord. 1936, 7-2-2008)
4-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the
words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed
to it in 92 Illinois administrative code section 530.30, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials.
APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench
or pit.
BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion
of a pipe or electrical conductor.
CABLE OPERATOR: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(5).
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(6).
CABLE SYSTEM: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(7).
CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as:
carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
CITY: The city of Canton.
CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear run out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO "Roadside
Design Guide".
COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
CODE: The municipal code of the city of Canton.
CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of
facilities.
COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right of way lines of a
right of way.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: The city's director of public works or his or her
designee.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT OF WAY: For the purposes of this chapter, any work that
obstructs the right of way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of
the right of way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage
to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include
the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially
obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of
the public using or in the vicinity of the right of way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
ENGINEER: The city's engineer or his or her designee.
EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to
facilitate construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare
by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not
limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults,
boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates,
covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way under this chapter. For
purposes of this chapter, the term "facility" shall not include any facility
owned or operated by the city.
FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel
facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to
the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the
city engineer and/or director of public works to pose an unreasonable and
imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the
ecological balance of the environment, including, but not limited to,
explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases,
poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance
determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or
regulation.
HIGHWAY: A specific type of right of way used for vehicular traffic including
rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land and
improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage
structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois highway code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101
et seq., as amended from time to time.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide
cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois cable and video
competition law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
ICC: Illinois commerce commission.
IDOT: Illinois department of transportation.
JULIE: The joint utility locating information for excavators utility
notification program.
JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with
or without boring.
JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create
a cavity ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or
more utilities.
MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial
highways.
OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under right of way.
PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the
centerline of a right of way.
PARKWAY: Any portion of the right of way not improved by street or sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to a facility or
for the construction of a facility.
PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to sections
4-5-4 and
4-5-5 of this chapter.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal slurry.
PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that
which is simply convenient.
PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the city. If no
time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.
PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at local, state or federal level.
RESTORATION: The repair of a right of way, highway, roadway, or other area
disrupted by the construction of a facility.
RIGHT OF WAY OR RIGHTS OF WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway,
dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar
purposes, including utility easements, in which the city has the right and
authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other
than those of the city. "Right of way" or "rights of way" shall not include any
real or personal city property that is not specifically described in the
previous two (2) sentences and shall not include city buildings, fixtures and
other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in
the right of way.
ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to section
4-5-10 of this chapter.
SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted
engineering principles, practices and experience.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer
exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile
telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any
other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. "Private line" means a dedicated nontraffic
sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive
or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from
one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations.
"Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer
processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol
of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications"
shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications
service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such
provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end
to end communications. "Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of
cable services through a cable system as defined in the cable communications
act of 1984 (47 USC section 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or
cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable
to the city through an open video system as defined in the rules of the federal
communications commission (47 CFR section 76.1500 and following), as now or
hereafter amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person that installs, owns, operates or
controls facilities in the right of way used or designed to be used to transmit
telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in making
sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any "facility" as defined
in this chapter.
VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
VIDEO SERVICE: That term as defined in section 21-201(v) of the Illinois cable
and video competition law of 2007, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 21-201(v).
WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. (Ord. 1936, 7-2-
2008)
4-5-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
   (A)   Registration Required: Every utility that occupies right of way within
the city shall register on January 1 of each year with the engineer and/or
director of public works, on a form provided by the city, providing the
utility's name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers,
the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in
connection with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right of
way and a twenty four (24) hour telephone number for each such person, and
evidence of insurance as required in section
4-5-8 of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance.
   (B)   Registration Fee: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or
similar agreement, all annual registrations pursuant to this chapter shall be
accompanied by a fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). No annual
registration fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is
paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the
electricity infrastructure maintenance fee act. (Ord. 1936, 7-2-2008)
4-5-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
   (A)   Permit Required: No person shall construct (as defined in this
chapter) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within
any city right of way which: 1) changes the location of the facility, 2) adds a
new facility, 3) disrupts the right of way (as defined in this chapter), or 4)
materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on,
over, above, along, under, across or within the right of way, without first
filing an application with the city engineer and/or director of public works
and obtaining a permit from the city therefor, except as otherwise provided in
this chapter. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of
service connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of
the right of way.
   (B)   Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the city and shall be filed in
triplicate, with copies to the city clerk, public works director, and engineer.
The applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it
reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as
"proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials
accordingly.
   (C)   Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be
made by the applicant or its duly authorized representative and shall contain,
at a minimum, the following:
      1.   The applicant's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers,
e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
      2.   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
      3.   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      4.   Evidence that the applicant has placed on file with the city:
         (a)   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the "Illinois Manual
On Uniform Traffic Control Devices", to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
         (b)   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the city and shall promote
protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC
regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this
section unless the city finds that additional information or assurances are
needed;
      5.   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed. The
certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and specifications
comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations may be required per the
opinion of the city engineer and/or public works director;
      6.   Evidence of insurance as required in section
4-5-8 of this chapter;
      7.   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in section
4-5-10 of this chapter;
      8.   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
chapter (see section
4-5-21 of this chapter); and
      9.   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
city.
   (D)   Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Utilities:
In addition to the requirements of subsection (C) of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific
utility that is the subject of the permit application:
      1.   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or
natural gas distribution system, evidence that any "certificate of public
convenience and necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant
is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has
been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
      2.   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class, and operating pressures;
      3.   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois environmental protection agency, division of public water supplies,
have been satisfied;
      4.   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency,
division of water pollution control or other local or state entities with
jurisdiction, have been satisfied; or
      5.   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types
of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design
standard to be followed.
   (E)   Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the applicant in writing to the city within thirty (30) days after
the change necessitating the amendment.
   (F)   Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall
be accompanied by a fee in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00). No
application fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is
paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the
electricity infrastructure maintenance fee act. (Ord. 1936, 7-2-2008)
4-5-5: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
   (A)   City Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the city engineer
and director of public works within a reasonable time after filing. If the
application does not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances,
codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the city engineer and/or director of
public works shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons
therefor. If the city engineer and director of public works are satisfied that
the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter and applicable
ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the city engineer or director
of public works shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all
instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the
satisfaction of the city engineer and director of public works that the
construction proposed under the application shall be in full compliance with
the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Additional City Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications
Retailers:
      1.   Pursuant to section 4 of the telephone company act, 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the city
that it intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for
the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of
plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the
purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the city not less than ten (10) days prior to
the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than forty five
(45) days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The city
engineer or director of public works shall specify the portion of the right of
way upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed.
      2.   In the event that the city engineer or director of public works
fails to provide such specification of location to the telecommunications
retailer within either: a) ten (10) days after service of notice to the city by
the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation
for new construction or b) twenty five (25) days after service of notice by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new
construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without
obtaining a permit under this chapter.
      3.   Upon the provision of such specification by the city, where a permit
is required for work pursuant to section
4-5-4 of this chapter the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the city
an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such
application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection (A) of this
section.
   (C)   Additional City Review Of Applications Of Holders Of State
Authorization Under The Cable And Video Competition Law Of 2007: Applications
by a utility that is a holder of a state issued authorization under the cable
and video competition law of 2007 shall be deemed granted sixty (60) days after
submission to the city unless otherwise acted upon by the city, provided the
holder has complied with applicable city codes, ordinances, and regulations.
(Ord. 1936, 7-2-2008)
4-5-6: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
   (A)   Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A
permit from the city authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this chapter on city rights of way, and does not
create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the
rights of others who may have an interest in the rights of way.
   (B)   Duration: No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for a
period longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually begun within
that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion. If construction
takes longer than six (6) months, a permit extension must be sought from the
public works director or city engineer.
   (C)   Preconstruction Meeting Required: No construction shall begin pursuant
to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the permittee and
all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the
permit at a preconstruction meeting. The preconstruction meeting shall be held
at a date, time and place designated by the city with such city representatives
in attendance as the city deems necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose
of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing special considerations
necessary in the areas where work will occur, including, without limitation,
presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area and their
locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of rights of
way by the public during construction, and access and egress by adjacent
property owners.
   (D)   Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the
city does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the city and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
(Ord. 1936, 7-2-2008)
4-5-7: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS:
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the city within ninety (90) days
after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall
specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from
the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also
deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated as a
request for variance in accordance with section
4-5-21 of this chapter. If the city denies the request for a variance, then the
permittee shall either remove the facility from the right of way or modify the
facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans
therefor. (Ord. 1936, 7-2-2008)
4-5-8: INSURANCE:
   (A)   Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license, or similar agreement or the process of section
4-5-21 of this chapter, each permittee occupying right of way or constructing
any facility in the right of way shall secure and maintain, at a minimum, the
following liability insurance policies insuring the permittee as named insured
and naming the city, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents,
and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in subsections (A)1
and (A)2 of this section:
      1.   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to
as "X", "C", and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with
limits not less than:
         (a)   One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for bodily injury or
death to each person or one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per
accident; and
         (b)   One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage
resulting from any one accident; or
         (c)   One hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for a combined single
limit including bodily injury and property damage for each accident.
      2.   Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a
combined single limit of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for
personal injury and property damage for each accident;
      3.   Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
      4.   Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per employee and per accident.
If the permittee is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and
subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and subcontractors
shall comply with this section.
   (B)   Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section
may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   (C)   Copies Required: The permittee shall provide copies of any of the
policies required by this section to the city within ten (10) days following
receipt of a written request therefor from the city.
   (D)   Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages: The insurance policies
required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the
intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by the
City, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of
written notices addressed to the City Mayor and the City Engineer of such
intent to cancel or not to renew.
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the city of said notice, and in no event
later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain
and furnish to the city evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the
requirements of this section.
   (E)   Self-Insurance: A permittee may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection (A) of this
section. A permittee that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such
self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional
insureds under subsection (A) of this section, or the requirements of
subsections (B), (C) and (D) of this section. A permittee that elects to self-
insure shall provide to the city evidence sufficient to demonstrate its
financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements
required under subsection (A) of this section, such as evidence that the
permittee is a "private self-insurer" under the workers' compensation act.
   (F)   Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Permittee's Liability: The
legal liability of the permittee to the city and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or
self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
   (G)   Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this section
shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the state of Illinois.
All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better
and of a class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company. (Ord. 1936, 7-2-2008)
4-5-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right of way, a permittee shall
be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the city and its elected and
appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives
harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and costs of
suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or
result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to
act or misconduct of the permittee or its affiliates, officers, employees,
agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or
occupancy of the rights of way, and in providing or offering service over the
facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or
prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement;
provided, however, that the permittee's indemnity obligations hereunder shall
not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or
expenses arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach
of this chapter by the city, its officials, officers, employees, agents or
representatives. (Ord. 1936, 7-2-2008)
4-5-10: SECURITY:
   (A)   Purpose: The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and
in an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be
continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole
cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit.
The security fund shall serve as security for:
      1.   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of
this chapter;
      2.   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the city occasioned by
the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders,
permits and other directives of the city issued pursuant to this chapter; and
      3.   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs, or expenses that the city may pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this chapter to perform that the city must perform itself or have
completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the city from the permittee pursuant to
this chapter or any other applicable law.
   (B)   Form: The permittee shall provide the security fund to the city in the
form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a certified check, a surety bond in
a form acceptable to the city, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form
acceptable to the city. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant
to this subsection shall, at a minimum:
      1.   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
city and the permittee;
      2.   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the city of any amounts covered by it; and
      3.   Shall provide a location convenient to the city and within the state
of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
   (C)   Amount: The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right of way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the city engineer or director of public works, and may
also include reasonable, directly related costs that the city estimates are
likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. At a
minimum, the security fund shall be no less than twenty thousand dollars
($20,000.00). Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit
will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the city, with each phase
consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a related group of
locations, and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior
to substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the
city engineer or director of public works may, in the exercise of sound
discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount of security which shall
be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of
the security fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount
that would have been required under the provisions of this subsection (C) for
any single phase.
   (D)   Withdrawals: The city, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written notice
clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights
under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the security fund, provided
that the permittee has not reimbursed the city for such amount within the
fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
      1.   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      2.   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      3.   Fails to reimburse the city for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the city has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
      4.   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the city
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the security fund.
   (E)   Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written
notice from the city that any amount has been withdrawn from the security fund,
the permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in
subsection (C) of this section.
   (F)   Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the city,
upon written request for said withdrawal to the city, provided that any such
withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum balance required
in subsection (C) of this section.
   (G)   Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the city for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the city to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the city as a result of said revocation, provided
that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.
   (H)   Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the city with respect to
the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether
reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall affect
any other right the city may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city
shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its
rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. 1936, 7-2-2008)
4-5-11: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
   (A)   City Right To Revoke Permit: The city may revoke or suspend a permit
issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following reasons:
      1.   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      2.   Noncompliance with this chapter;
      3.   Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;
or
      4.   Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit, approved plans and city requirements.
   (B)   Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The city shall send written notice
of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter
stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this section.
   (C)   Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or
Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the city, the permittee shall have the following options:
      1.   Immediately provide the city with evidence that no cause exists for
the revocation or suspension;
      2.   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the city, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the city within five (5) working days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation; or
      3.   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within the rights of way and restore the rights of way
to the satisfaction of the city providing written proof of such removal to the
city within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice of revocation.
The city may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods
provided in this subsection.
   (D)   Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the city engineer or director of public works may issue a stop
work order immediately upon discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set
forth within subsection (A) of this section.
   (E)   Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails
to comply with the provisions of subsection (C) of this section, the city or
its designee may, at the option of the city: 1) correct the deficiencies; 2)
upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or 3) after not less than thirty (30) days'
notice to the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem them
abandoned and property of the city. The permittee shall be liable in all events
to the city for all costs of removal. (Ord. 1936, 7-2-2008)
4-5-12: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
   (A)   Notification Of Change: A permittee shall notify the city no less than
thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the
right of way or change in identity of the permittee. The new owner or the
permittee of the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed
by the former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and
facilities in the right of way.
   (B)   Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the city's right of
way.
   (C)   Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. 1936, 7-2-
2008)
4-5-13: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   (A)   Standards And Principles: All construction in the right of way shall
be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations,
and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction
principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles
and standards set forth in the "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer
Main Construction In Illinois", latest edition, and the principles and
standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from time to
time:
      1.   "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction";
      2.   "Supplemental Specifications And Recurring Special Provisions";
      3.   "Highway Design Manual";
      4.   "Highway Standards Manual";
      5.   "Standard Specifications For Traffic Control Items";
      6.   "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (92 Ill. adm.
code section 545);
      7.   "Flagger's Handbook"; and
      8.   "Work Site Protection Manual For Daylight Maintenance Operations".
   (B)   Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the city engineer shall determine, in the exercise of sound
engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be final.
If requested, the city engineer shall state which standard or principle will
apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the
future. (Ord. 1936, 7-2-2008)
4-5-14: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
   (A)   Minimum Requirements: The city's minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT's "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices" and this code.
   (B)   Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The permittee is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and local
requirements for protection of the public and the permittee's workers when
performing any work on the rights of way.
   (C)   Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   (D)   Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior
to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any
residence, business or institution, the permittee shall notify the resident,
business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such
work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to
section
4-5-20 of this chapter, the permittee shall provide such notice as is
practicable under the circumstances.
   (E)   Compliance: The permittee shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
permittee's attention by the city. (Ord. 1936, 7-2-2008)
4-5-15: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
   (A)   General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of
type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this subsection.
      1.   No Interference With City Facilities: No utility facilities shall be
placed in any location if the city engineer or director of public works
determines that the proposed location will require the relocation or
displacement of any of the city's utility facilities or will otherwise
interfere with the operation or maintenance of any of the city's utility
facilities.
      2.   Minimum Interference And Impact: The proposed location shall cause
only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right of way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right of
way.
      3.   No Interference With Travel: No utility facility shall be placed in
any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right of way.
      4.   No Limitations On Visibility: No utility facility shall be placed in
any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right of way.
      5.   Size Of Utility Facilities: The proposed installation shall use the
smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the
particular application.
   (B)   Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
      1.   Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right of way
line and as nearly parallel to the right of way line as reasonable pole
alignment will permit;
         (b)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable
from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') (0.6 m) behind the face
of the curb, where available;
         (c)   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4') (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         (d)   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         (e)   Any ground mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1')
(0.3 m) of the right of way line or as near as possible to the right of way
line.
      2.   Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   The facility is located as near the right of way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (8') (2.4 m) from and parallel to the
right of way line;
         (b)   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         (c)   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near the right of way line as practicable and not
more than five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the right of way line and any above
grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the
right of way line or as near as practicable.
   (C)   Facilities Crossing Highways:
      1.   No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of city highways may
require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or
additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      2.   Cattle Passes, Culverts, Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities
shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
      3.   Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at
or as near to a ninety degree (90°) angle to the centerline as practicable.
      4.   Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's
rules entitled, "construction of electric power and communication lines" (83
Ill. adm. code 305);
         (b)   Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of
way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         (c)   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      5.   Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance free service life; and
         (b)   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      6.   Utility Marking: The city may require the permittee to install
tracer wire where an underground facility is located in the right of way.
Tracer wire shall be a continuous, one strand, 10-gauge, solid THHN copper wire
insulated by a thin, high grade PVC or nylon jacket. The copper conductor shall
meet the requirements of ASTM B-3. Tracer wire shall be brought up at all
valves, hydrants and utility facilities.
The city may require the permittee to install nondetector type marking tape
where an underground facility is located within the right of way. The
nondetector type underground marking tape shall be installed approximately
three feet (3') below, if applicable, the finished surface and in the center of
all excavated trenches. Marking tape manufacturers shall be approved by the
city and shall be color coded as per JULIE standards.
The city may require the utility to provide a marker at each right of way line
where an underground facility other than a power or communication facility
crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type of facility, the
utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be eliminated as
provided in current federal regulations (49 CFR section 192.707 (1989)).
   (D)   Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights Of Way: The city may
require that facilities be located within particular rights of way that are not
highways, rather than within particular highways.
   (E)   Freestanding Facilities:
      1.   The city may restrict the location and size of any freestanding
facility located within a right of way.
      2.   The city may require any freestanding facility located within a
right of way to be screened from view.
   (F)   Facilities Installed Aboveground: Aboveground facilities may be
installed only if:
      1.   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      2.   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
      3.   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever
practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly
discouraged.
   (G)   Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
      1.   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the permittee has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not
permitted.
      2.   A permittee shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         (a)   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         (b)   The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         (c)   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         (d)   The proposed method of attachment;
         (e)   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         (f)   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         (g)   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         (h)   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved.
   (H)   Appearance Standards:
      1.   The city may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular
locations in order to preserve visual quality.
      2.   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the right of way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it
does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed. (Ord. 1936,
7-2-2008)
4-5-16: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
   (A)   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction
Methods:
      1.   Boring Or Jacking: Boring or jacking installation shall be done in
accordance with the applicable sections of the "Standard Specifications For
Water And Sewer Construction In Illinois", latest edition or as approved by the
city.
         (a)   Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights of way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the city
engineer from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be
excavated no more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of boring or jacking
operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after boring or jacking
operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and
protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced,
and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads
that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
         (b)   Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         (c)   Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six
inches (6") (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside
diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1") (25 mm).
         (d)   Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches
(6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with
auger, or auger and following pipe method.
         (e)   Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the city to be preserved or protected shall be bored
under or around the root system.
      2.   Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or
maintenance on rights of way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction",
latest edition, and the "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main
Construction In Illinois", latest edition.
         (a)   Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe/line testing. Only
one-half (1/2) of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless
special permission is obtained from the city engineer.
         (b)   Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the "Illinois
Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices". Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right of way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off road location.
         (c)   Drip Line Of Trees: The utility shall not trench within the drip
line of any tree designated by the city to be preserved.
      3.   Backfilling:
         (a)   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation
of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications For
Road And Bridge Construction", or the "Standard Specifications For Water And
Sewer Main Construction In Illinois", latest edition. When excavated material
is hauled away or is unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall
be used. In roadway areas, backfill shall be flowable fill in accordance with
the IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction".
         (b)   For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility/permittee shall be responsible to remove and
restore any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the
facility. If so ordered by the engineer, the utility/permittee, at its expense,
shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed
facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new
pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by
the engineer.
      4.   Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection (A)4
is permitted under section
4-5-21 of this chapter, the following requirements shall apply:
         (a)   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled with flowable
fill. If allowed by the city, the excavation shall be backfilled and compacted
as soon as practicable with select granular material of CA-6, CA-7, CA-9, CA-
11, CA-13, CA-16, FA-1, FA-5, FA-6, or FA-10 gradation, as designated by the
engineer.
         (b)   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the city.
         (c)   All saw cuts shall be full depth and shall not extend beyond the
limits of the patch.
         (d)   For all rights of way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last
three (3) years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to
be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before
the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
JULIE locate.
      5.   Encasement:
         (a)   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
city.
         (b)   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of
the highway.
         (c)   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or city approved jointed
pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed
prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical
joints are of a type approved by the city. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be
encased regardless of installation method.
         (d)   In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less,
encasement may be eliminated.
         (e)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines
with installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated
only if: 1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or
repair and 2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
         (f)   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right of way.
      6.   Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and
maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum
cover for the type of facility:
 
Type Of Facility                         Minimum Cover
Electric lines                           30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication, cable or video service    18 to 24 inches (0.46 m to 0.6 m, as
lines                                    determined by city)
Gas or petroleum products                30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line                               Sufficient cover to provide freeze
                                         protection (48 inches, minimum)
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage Sufficient cover to provide freeze
line                                     protection (36 inches, minimum)
 
   (B)   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
      1.   Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
         (a)   Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities
within city rights of way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois administrative code part 305
(formerly general order 160 of the Illinois commerce commission) entitled
"rules for construction of electric power and communication lines", and the
national electrical safety code.
         (b)   Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the
installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guywires are equipped with guy guards
for maximum visibility.
         (c)   Underground Facilities:
            (1)   Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that
special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
            (2)   If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if: a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles", "whip augers", or
other approved methods which compress the earth to make the opening for cable
installation or b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only
permitted prior to roadway construction.
            (3)   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the national
electrical safety code.
         (d)   Burial Of Drops: All temporary service drops placed between
November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snow drops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting,
unless otherwise permitted by the city. Weather permitting, utilities shall
bury all temporary drops, excluding snow drops, within ten (10) business days
after placement.
      2.   Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication
Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         (a)   The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         (b)   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         (c)   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         (d)   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is
not possible by other means.
      3.   Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within
rights of way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a city approved
manner and in conformance with the federal code of the office of pipeline
safety operations, department of transportation, part 192 - transportation of
natural and other gas by pipeline: minimum federal safety standards (49 CFR
section 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      4.   Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within
rights of way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI standard code
for pressure piping (liquid petroleum transportation piping systems ANSI-
B 31.4).
      5.   Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Stormwater Sewer Lines Or
Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and
drainage lines within rights of way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of
the current "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In
Illinois".
      6.   Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right of way, shall
be provided with a vegetation free area extending one foot (1') (305 mm) in
width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation free area may
be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or
similar material approved by the engineer. With the approval of the engineer,
shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation free
area. The housing for ground mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral
color to blend with the surroundings.
   (C)   Materials:
      1.   General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights of way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standard
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", the requirements of the
Illinois commerce commission, the applicable portions of the current "Standard
Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois", or the
standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate
industry.
      2.   Material Storage On Right Of Way: No material shall be stored on the
right of way without the prior written approval of the city engineer or public
works director. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles,
cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right of way
prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public
or an obstacle to right of way maintenance or damage to the right of way and
other property. If material is to be stored on right of way, prior approval
must be obtained from the city.
      3.   Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the permittee to the
city shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the
construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   (D)   Operational Restrictions:
      1.   Construction operations on rights of way may, at the discretion of
the city, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right of way or other
property.
      2.   These restrictions may be waived by the engineer or public works
director when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
      3.   Unless otherwise permitted by the city, the hours of construction
are seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.
   (E)   Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct
facilities in the city shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and
location of existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights
of way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The city will make its permit
records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible
facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the city or by
JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities
within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance
with the Illinois underground facilities damage prevention act 1 . (Ord. 1936,
7-2-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. 220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.
4-5-17: VEGETATION CONTROL:
   (A)   Electric Utilities; Compliance With State Laws And Regulations: An
electric utility shall conduct all tree trimming and vegetation control
activities in the right of way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and
regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement
with the city as permitted by law. (Ord. 1936, 7-2-2008)
4-5-18: REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES:
   (A)   Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the
city, a permittee shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or
permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
utility facilities within the rights of way whenever the corporate authorities
have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is
reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation
of any city improvement in or upon, or the operations of the city in or upon,
the rights of way.
   (B)   Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following
written notice from the city, any permittee that owns, controls, or maintains
any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights of way
shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or
appurtenances from the rights of way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to
removal in the following circumstances:
      1.   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      2.   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant
of a license or franchise, if required;
      3.   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
      4.   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
   (C)   Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The city retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights of
way of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary, appropriate or
useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances
permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior
to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after
cutting or removing a facility.
   (D)   Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility within the
rights of way of the city, the permittee shall notify the city within ninety
(90) days. Following receipt of such notice the city may direct the permittee
to remove all or any portion of the facility if the city engineer determines
that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and
welfare. In the event that the city does not direct the permittee that
abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the
city, the abandoning permittee shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or
removal of all or any portion of the facility by another permittee or person.
(Ord. 1936, 7-2-2008)
4-5-19: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
The permittee shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain
and other property within ten (10) days after any portion of the rights of way
are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the
permittee, all to the satisfaction of the city. This includes restoration of
entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using
materials and methods approved by the city engineer. Such cleanup and repair
may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or
any other requirement to restore the right of way to a condition substantially
equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The
time period provided in this section may be extended by the city engineer for
good cause shown.
Cleanup and surface restoration shall be completed in accordance with IDOT's
"Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction" and the "Standard
Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois".
Roadway restoration shall meet the following requirements unless otherwise
allowed by the city engineer or public works director:
Concrete roadways: Patch thickness will match existing pavement thickness
except that all patches shall have six inch (6") minimum thickness. Portland
cement concrete mix used shall be an IDOT approved pavement patch mix design.
If existing pavement is reinforced, reinforcement or dowel bars (as
appropriate) shall be installed in accordance with IDOT's "Standard
Specifications And Standard Details". Edges of concrete pavement patches shall
have joint filler installed and be sealed in accordance with IDOT's "Standard
Specifications And Standard Details".
Bituminous roadway: Flowable backfill or select granular backfill, if allowed,
shall be primed and receive a minimum of three inches (3") up to the existing
thickness of hot mix surface coarse having the following minimum designation:
IL 9.5 or IL 12.5, mixture C, N30; RAP=0 percent; DAV=4.2 percent; PG 58-22. If
select granular backfill is allowed, it shall be compacted in lifts not to
exceed eight inches (8") loose measure and be brought to within six inches (6")
of the surface. The patch shall be capped with a temporary CA-6 white rock
surface patch. The temporary surface patch shall be left in place a minimum of
two (2) weeks (but not more than 4 weeks) to allow for settlement. At the end
of the settlement period, the temporary white rock shall be partially removed
and replaced with bituminous patch. (Ord. 1936, 7-2-2008)
4-5-20: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
   (A)   General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within rights of way are to be maintained by or for the permittee in a manner
satisfactory to the city and at the permittee's expense.
   (B)   Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify
noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      1.   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right of way, the permittee shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right of way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does
not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
      2.   In an emergency, the permittee shall, as soon as possible, notify
the city engineer or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency,
informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the
traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If
the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of
traffic, the city police shall be notified immediately.
      3.   In an emergency, the permittee shall use all means at hand to
complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to
the traveling public.
   (C)   Emergency Repairs: The permittee must file in writing with the city a
description of the repairs undertaken in the right of way within forty eight
(48) hours after an emergency repair. (Ord. 1936, 7-2-2008)
4-5-21: VARIANCES:
   (A)   Request For Variance: A permittee requesting a variance from one or
more of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the city
engineer as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each
provision of this chapter from which a variance is requested and the reasons
why a variance should be granted.
   (B)   Authority To Grant Variances: The city engineer shall decide whether a
variance is authorized for each provision of this chapter identified in the
variance request on an individual basis.
   (C)   Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The city engineer may authorize a
variance only if the permittee requesting the variance has demonstrated that:
      1.   One or more conditions not under the control of the permittee (such
as terrain features or an irregular right of way line) create a special
hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the
public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      2.   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   (D)   Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the city engineer may require the permittee requesting
the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be
expressly contained within this chapter but which carry out the purposes of
this chapter. (Ord. 1936, 7-2-2008)
   (E)   Right To Appeal: Any permittee aggrieved by any order, requirement,
decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the city
engineer under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to appeal to
the joint planning and zoning commission. The application for appeal shall be
submitted in writing to the city clerk within thirty (30) days after the date
of such order, requirement, decision or determination. The joint planning and
zoning commission shall commence its consideration of the appeal at the
commission's next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least seven (7) days
after the filing of the appeal. The joint planning and zoning commission shall
timely decide the appeal. (Ord. 1936, 7-2-2008; amd. Ord. 3041, 12-3-2013)
4-5-22: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in accordance
with the penalty provisions of this code. There may be times when the city will
incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the permittee
will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this chapter. Unless
the permittee shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the
requested action is appropriate, the permittee shall bear the city's costs of
damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or
removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other
administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related
cost apportionment of the city. Sanctions may be imposed upon a permittee that
does not pay the costs apportioned to it. (Ord. 1936, 7-2-2008)
4-5-23: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the city may have for enforcement of this chapter. (Ord.
1936, 7-2-2008)
TITLE 5
FIRE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
FIRE DEPARTMENT; ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
5-1-1: Department Established
5-1-2: Chief Of Fire Department
5-1-3: Assistant Fire Chief, Firefighters
5-1-4: Funds Of Fire Department
5-1-5: Training Fires
5-1-1: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established an executive department of the municipal government
of the city which shall be known as the fire department, and may consist of up
to the fire chief, three (3) assistant chiefs, three (3) lieutenants and ten
(10) firefighters. (Ord. 4020, 1-5-2016)
5-1-2: CHIEF OF FIRE DEPARTMENT:
   (A)   Office Created, Term: There is hereby created the office of chief of
the fire department, who shall be the head of said fire department, and shall
hold office until a successor shall be appointed and qualified.
   (B)   Oath And Bond: The chief of the fire department shall, before entering
upon the duties of office, take the oath of office prescribed by law for city
officers, and shall execute a bond to the city in the penal sum of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00), with sureties to be approved by the council, conditioned
for the faithful performance of the duties of the office.
   (C)   Head Of The Fire Department: Said chief of the fire department shall
be the head of the fire department and shall have full control over the same
and over all members thereof, while in the line of their duty subject to the
control and supervision of the council, and shall make and establish rules and
regulations for the government of said department, and not inconsistent with
the provisions of this title. And it shall be the duty of said chief of the
fire department to see that the organization of said department is efficiently
preserved, its records properly kept, and its rules and regulations duly
observed by its members.
   (D)   Custodian Of Apparatus: The chief of the fire department shall have
the custody, subject to the direction of the mayor and council, of the engines,
trucks, hoses, ladders and all property and equipment belonging to the fire
department.
   (E)   Duty To Attend Fires: It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire
department, if possible, to attend all fires happening in the city, and take
command of the fire department at such fire, and see that the several members
of the department perform their respective duties.
   (F)   Investigate Fires, Keep Record: The chief of the fire department shall
inquire into and investigate causes of all fires which may occur in the city,
as soon as may be after they occur, and keep a record of the proceedings and
the circumstances of each case, including name of the owner of property
destroyed, the cause of fire, if known, the loss incurred thereby, the amount
of insurance, and such other information as may be deemed important to the city
by said chief.
   (G)   Annual Reports: Said chief of the fire department shall, annually at
the close of each calendar year, make a written report to the council, showing
the condition of the department under the chief's management. In lieu of the
annual report the monthly reports may be compiled to satisfy this requirement.
   (H)   Powers At Fires, Destroy Buildings: The chief of the fire department,
or in the chief's absence, the officer in command at any fire, or in case of
the absence of such officers, the mayor or any two (2) members of the council,
may direct the members of the fire department to cut down and remove any
building, erection or fence, for the purpose of checking the progress of any
fire; and the chief of the fire department, or other officer in command, shall
have the power to blow up or cause to be blown up with powder or otherwise, any
building or erection, during the progress of any fire, for the purpose of
extinguishing or checking the same.
   (I)   Bystanders To Obey Orders: Every person who shall be present at any
fire shall be subject and obedient to the orders of the chief of the fire
department, the assistant chief or lieutenants of the fire department, in
extinguishing the fire and the removal and protection of property and in case
any person shall refuse to obey such orders, he shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00), nor more than
two hundred dollars ($200.00), for each offense; provided that, no person not a
member of the fire department shall be bound to obey any of said officers
unless said officers shall bear their respective badges of office or their
official character shall be known to him, and said officers shall have the
power to arrest any person or persons so refusing to obey such lawful orders as
aforesaid. (Ord. 1653, 4-18-2000)
   (J)   Enforcement: It shall be the duty of said chief of the fire department
to cause all provisions of this code for the prevention of fires, and statutes,
and all other regulations in reference to the fire department, to be strictly
enforced. The fire chief or his designees shall have the power to issue
citations, notices to appear, sign complaints and do all other acts and deeds
reasonably necessary to effectuate the requirements of this title. (Ord. 1790,
3-2-2004)
   (K)   Repair Of Apparatus: The fire chief shall, whenever any of the fire
engines, hoses, trucks, hooks and ladders or other fire apparatus shall require
repair, cause the same to be repaired under the direction and supervision of
said chief.
   (L)   Deliver Property And Records To Successors: Upon the expiration of the
term of office, or the resignation thereof, or removal therefrom, the chief of
the fire department shall, on demand, deliver to the successor in office, all
books, records, apparatus, equipment and property of every description, in said
chief's possession, belonging to the city, or appertaining to said office.
(Ord. 1653, 4-18-2000)
5-1-3: ASSISTANT FIRE CHIEF, FIREFIGHTERS:
   (A)   Qualifications: No person shall be appointed to the fire department
who is under twenty one (21) years of age or over thirty five (35) years of
age, nor unless he or she is a person of good moral character and temperate,
steady habits.
   (B)   Members Shall Wear Badges: Each member of the fire department, when on
duty, shall wear an appropriate badge to be furnished by the city and if it
shall be destroyed or lost, he/she shall be responsible for the expense of
replacing the same. Whenever any member of said department shall cease to be
connected therewith, he or she shall immediately deliver his or her badge and
any other effects in his or her possession belonging to the city, into the
hands of the chief of the fire department.
   (C)   Employed Firefighters, Duties: The several employed firefighters shall
be on duty at all such hours of day and night as shall be prescribed by the
rules and regulations of said department, except when otherwise ordered by the
chief of the fire department. And in addition to their general duties, they
shall keep their engines, ladders, and other fire apparatus in first class
condition for actual service, and not expose them to unnecessary hazard, and to
work and use them with skill and judgment.
   (D)   Assistant Fire Chief To Command When: It shall be the duty of an
assistant chief of the fire department, if he or she be on duty, to attend all
fires happening in the city, and in the absence of the chief of the fire
department it shall be his/her duty to take charge of the work of the
department and he or she shall have and exercise the duties and powers of the
chief of the fire department. In the absence of the chief and the assistant
chief, the lieutenant for that shift shall assume command.
   (E)   Prescribed Uniform To Be Worn, Badges: The council shall prescribe a
suitable uniform for members of the fire department, to be worn by them as
directed by the council, and all members of the fire department shall be
required to provide themselves with such uniform as may be prescribed for which
such amount as from time to time shall be established and paid by the city. The
council shall also prescribe and provide for all officers and members of the
fire department suitable badges by which, in case of fire and at other times,
the authority and relations of such officers and firefighters may be known.
   (F)   Rules, Copies To Members: Each member of the fire department shall be
furnished by the chief of the fire department with a copy of the rules and
regulations adopted and prescribed for the government of the department and the
members thereof. (Ord. 1653, 4-18-2000)
5-1-4: FUNDS OF FIRE DEPARTMENT:
   (A)   Firefighters Shall Organize, Elect Officers: The several members of
the fire department shall, on a date selected by the fire chief in the months
of April, May or June, organize by electing two (2) officers to be known as
secretary and treasurer (the treasurer shall be that member elected pursuant to
section
5-4-5 of this title) respectively, of the fire department, and such other
officers as they may deem expedient, who shall hold office for the term of one
year, and until their successors are elected and qualified. Such officers shall
serve in this capacity without extra compensation.
   (B)   Chief Of The Fire Department Ex Officio Chairman: The chief of the
fire department shall be ex officio chairman of the fire department and shall
preside at all meetings, and in the chief's absence an assistant chief or if no
assistant chief, then a senior lieutenant shall preside.
   (C)   Secretary, Duties: The administrative secretary of the fire department
shall keep the minutes and records of all the meetings of the fire department.
The secretary elected by the members of the department together with the
elected treasurer shall be responsible for maintaining the books and records of
the foreign fire insurance fund (the "2% fund"), pop fund and the rescue fund
(established in 1979). However the rescue funds themselves shall be held by the
city treasurer until disbursed as hereinafter provided. The minutes maintained
by the administrative secretary shall be considered prima facie correct and are
not subject to approval, at a subsequent meeting.
   (D)   Treasurer, Bond: The treasurer of the fire department shall, before
entering upon official duties, give bond to the city in the penal sum of two
thousand dollars ($2,000.00) with sureties to be approved by the mayor of the
city, conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of office under
the provisions of this section, and the payment of all money received according
to law.
   (E)   Treasurer, Duties: It shall be the duty of the treasurer to receive
and receipt for all monies from the foreign fire insurance fund (the "2%
fund"), the pop fund and the rescue fund and to render a monthly report of all
receipts and expenditures which shall be a part of the monthly report to the
city council by the fire chief. Upon the completion of the treasurer's term of
office, all records and funds under control of the treasurer shall be turned
over to the successor in the office of treasurer.
   (F)   Meetings: The fire chief may, in his or her discretion, hold a meeting
of the members of the department at a time and place established by the chief.
The members shall adopt such rules and order of business, as they may deem
necessary for the conduct of such meeting, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this subsection or any provision of this code unless the chief specifies
otherwise. It shall not be mandatory for firefighters to attend these meetings,
unless otherwise ordered by the chief. All members, except the chief of the
fire department, present at any meeting shall be entitled to vote on any
question, and a majority of those present shall decide, provided, that in case
of a tie the chief of the fire department shall cast the deciding vote. A
majority of the members shall constitute a quorum to do business, but a smaller
number may adjourn from time to time.
   (G)   For What Purpose Funds Shall Be Used: All money turned over to the
treasurer of the fire department by the city treasurer, which has been
collected as a license or tax upon foreign fire insurance companies as
elsewhere provided, and all other revenues belonging to said department, except
such as may be personal to the members thereof, or as shall belong to the
firemen's pension fund, shall be carefully and economically handled by said
department, and shall be expended solely for the purpose of the maintenance,
use and benefit of such department. None of such funds shall be expended purely
for social purposes or for the personal benefit of any member thereof. No
warrant shall be drawn by the secretary on such funds, except it be for the
purposes herein provided. The rescue fund monies shall be turned over to the
city treasurer and expenditures therefrom shall be authorized by the city
council. (Ord. 1653, 4-18-2000)
5-1-5: TRAINING FIRES:
   (A)   The city fire department shall not conduct or in any manner
participate in any training fires until or unless written approval therefor is
first received by the Illinois environmental protection agency (IEPA) and/or
the federal environmental protection agency (EPA), as applicable. This
provision shall be interpreted as prohibiting the involvement of individual
commissioned members of the fire department and of the various paid on call
firefighters in such training exercises except in conformity with this section.
(Ord. 1653, 4-18-2000)
CHAPTER 2
FIRE DEPARTMENT; GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
5-2-1: Purchase Of Supplies
5-2-2: Exclusion Of Nonemployees
5-2-3: Resignation
5-2-4: Cordon Around Emergency Scene
5-2-5: Power Of Arrest
5-2-6: Impersonating Firefighters
5-2-7: Property Saved
5-2-8: False Alarm
5-2-9: Obstructing Department; Driving Over Hose
5-2-10: Following Firetruck
5-2-11: Obstructing Hydrant
5-2-12: International Fire Code Application
5-2-13: Penalty
5-2-1: PURCHASE OF SUPPLIES:
All expenditures by the fire department shall be in accordance with the budget
adopted for the department including discretionary matters within established
guidelines. Any other expenditure shall be made only if authorized by city
council. (Ord. 1653, 4-18-2000)
5-2-2: EXCLUSION OF NONEMPLOYEES:
The central station shall not be used as a place of general resort or
rendezvous except by members of the department, nor shall any intoxicating
liquors be brought to or drunk upon any of the premises thereof; and it shall
be the duty of all members of the said department to prevent all persons not
belonging to the department from entering any house, or handling any apparatus
belonging to the department without permission. (Ord. 1653, 4-18-2000)
5-2-3: RESIGNATION:
Under normal circumstances, a notice of resignation of not less than two (2)
weeks shall be given to the fire chief by an officer or firefighter unless
otherwise provided in the collective bargaining agreement. (Ord. 1653, 4-18-
2000)
5-2-4: CORDON AROUND EMERGENCY SCENE:
The chief of the fire department, an assistant chief or any member in command,
may prescribe limits in the vicinity of any fire, or other emergency incident
within which no person excepting firefighters and policemen and those admitted
by order of any officer of the fire department, shall be permitted to come.
(Ord. 1653, 4-18-2000)
5-2-5: POWER OF ARREST:
As provided for the statutes of the state as the same have been implemented by
the city, certain designated officers may be authorized to have the power of
arrest providing they meet the requirements established by law. (Ord. 1653, 4-
18-2000)
5-2-6: IMPERSONATING FIREFIGHTERS:
No person not a member of the fire department shall impersonate a firefighter
or officer of the fire department under a penalty of not less than seventy five
dollars ($75.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense.
(Ord. 1653, 4-18-2000)
5-2-7: PROPERTY SAVED:
No person shall be entitled to take away any property in the possession of the
fire department saved from any fire until he shall make satisfactory proof of
ownership thereof. (Ord. 1653, 4-18-2000)
5-2-8: FALSE ALARM:
Any person who shall intentionally in the city give or make a false alarm of
fire, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, be
fined not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 1653, 4-18-2000)
5-2-9: OBSTRUCTING DEPARTMENT; DRIVING OVER HOSE:
Any person who shall wilfully resist, obstruct or hinder or interfere with any
member of the fire department in the performance of his or her duty connected
with the fire department, or shall wilfully or negligently in any manner
injure, break or deface any engine, hose, truck, or other fire apparatus or
equipment belonging to the city, or shall wilfully or negligently drive any
vehicle across or upon any hose, shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not
less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 1653, 4-18-2000)
5-2-10: FOLLOWING FIRETRUCK:
No person driving a motor vehicle of any kind, shall follow within two hundred
fifty feet (250') any fire engine, firetruck, or other fire apparatus while
said engine, truck, or apparatus is proceeding to a fire, and any person
violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be fined not
less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 1653, 4-18-2000)
5-2-11: OBSTRUCTING HYDRANT:
No person shall in any manner obstruct the use of any fire hydrant, or place
any material, including shrubs or bushes, in front thereof or within five feet
(5') of either side thereof, under a penalty of seventy five dollars ($75.00)
for each offense, and any and all material forming such an obstruction may be
summarily removed by any member of the fire department or other city services
such as the street department or water department without notice to the owner
or occupant of the property and at the risk, cost and expense of the owner or
claimant thereof. (Ord. 1653, 4-18-2000)
5-2-12: INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE APPLICATION:
The city reemphasizes those provisions of the 2003 international fire code, the
appendix chapters thereof and the 2004 supplement pertaining to installation of
combustion devices and other instrumentalities capable of initiating combustion
by contact. The city has previously adopted the 2003 international fire code,
along with the appendix chapters thereof and the 2004 supplement, and said
supplements shall have the same force and effect of the 2003 international fire
code, and shall be included in any reference made to "the code". The Canton
fire department shall have the authority to enforce the 2003 international fire
code, its appendix chapters and the 2004 supplement. The fire chief, or his
designees, shall have the authority to issue a citation to the owner, operator,
occupant or other person responsible for the condition which constitutes a
violation of said code. Further, storage of combustible or flammable material
shall be in accordance with the said code. Any person violating any 2003
international fire code provisions of this nature shall be fined not less than
seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(Ord. 1864, 5-2-2006)
5-2-13: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, or failing to
comply with the same, where no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to a
fine of not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 1653, 4-18-2000)
CHAPTER 3
PAID ON CALL FIREFIGHTERS
SECTION:
5-3-1: Title
5-3-2: Organization Created
5-3-3: Requirements Of Firefighters
5-3-4: Course Of Training
5-3-5: Personal Data Required; Identification Card
5-3-6: Equipment
5-3-7: Discipline Of Firefighters
5-3-8: Duties
5-3-9: Monthly Training Required
5-3-10: Pay For Services Rendered
5-3-11: Insurance Coverage
5-3-1: TITLE:
This chapter may be referred to as the PAID ON CALL FIREFIGHTER ORDINANCE.
(Ord. 1653, 4-18-2000)
5-3-2: ORGANIZATION CREATED:
A paid on call firefighter organization for the city is hereby created and
established. The organization shall consist of not more than six (6) "paid on
call" firefighters each of whom shall have been appointed by the mayor upon the
recommendation of the fire chief with the advice and consent of the city
council. (Ord. 1653, 4-18-2000)
5-3-3: REQUIREMENTS OF FIREFIGHTERS:
Paid on call firefighters shall meet the following minimum requirements: each
of them shall be a citizen, eighteen (18) years or older, meeting the residency
requirements established for regular members of the fire department of this
city, shall not be members of the regular fire department, shall be of good
moral character, and shall not have ever been convicted of a felony or any
crime involving moral turpitude. (Ord. 1653, 4-18-2000)
5-3-4: COURSE OF TRAINING:
Prior to entering upon any of their duties, each paid on call firefighter shall
receive a course of training in the use of equipment and such firefighting
procedures as shall be appropriate for the performance of their duties as
contemplated by this chapter and as shall be determined and provided by the
corporate authorities of this city from time to time. Such training shall be to
not less than the firefighter II level if that person is to be engaged in
interior structural firefighting. (Ord. 1653, 4-18-2000)
5-3-5: PERSONAL DATA REQUIRED; IDENTIFICATION CARD:
A candidate for appointment to the paid on call firefighters force of this
city, as a condition to appointment, shall be fingerprinted and shall provide
such other personal data as may be requested by the fire chief of this city,
such prints and data to be maintained by said fire chief. Each paid on call
firefighter, at the expense of the city will be provided with a suitable
identification card which, among other personal data, shall contain and display
a suitable picture of the applicable paid on call firefighter. (Ord. 1653, 4-
18-2000)
5-3-6: EQUIPMENT:
Paid on call firefighters shall be provided with appropriate firefighting gear
and equipment as determined by and at the expense of this city. Such gear or
equipment as is worn may be similar or identical to that worn by the members of
the regular fire department of this city excepting, however, helmets worn by
paid on call firefighters shall be sharply and conspicuously distinctive from
those worn by members of the regular fire department of this city. Such gear
and equipment shall remain the property of the city and shall be returned to
the fire chief of this city upon termination of the services of any paid on
call firefighter. Such gear and equipment shall be maintained in the condition
and at the place or places, as may from time to time be determined by the fire
chief of this city. Appropriate records delineating the disposition of all gear
and equipment shall be kept current by the fire chief of this city. (Ord. 1653,
4-18-2000)
5-3-7: DISCIPLINE OF FIREFIGHTERS:
Paid on call firefighters shall at all times during the performance of their
duties be subject to the following discipline: they shall be subject to the
direction and control of the fire chief of this city. (Ord. 1653, 4-18-2000)
5-3-8: DUTIES:
Paid on call firefighters shall be assigned to perform the following duties of
this city and none other: paid on call firefighters shall assist the regular
fire department of this city in the performance of their duties when called
upon. Paid on call firefighters may be called to perform such duties by any one
of the following:
   (A)   The fire chief of this city;
   (B)   Any assistant fire chief of this city;
   (C)   Any lieutenant of the fire department. (Ord. 1653, 4-18-2000)
5-3-9: MONTHLY TRAINING REQUIRED:
Paid on call firefighters shall receive training not less than three (3) hours
in each calendar month or in accordance with the department of labor standards
whichever is greater. The course of training in terms of context and direction
shall be as from time to time prescribed by the fire chief of this city. Any
paid on call firefighter who misses more than two (2) training sessions in any
six (6) month period shall, upon recommendation of the fire chief, made in
writing to the mayor of this city, be removed from his or her position as a
paid on call firefighter. The fire chief shall have the authority to establish
requirements and rules for paid on call firefighters. (Ord. 1653, 4-18-2000)
5-3-10: PAY FOR SERVICES RENDERED:
Each paid on call firefighter shall receive pay for services rendered to this
city as determined from time to time by the city council.
The fire chief shall be personally responsible for certifying pay entitlements
of paid on call firefighters on a weekly basis to the appropriate officials of
this city, the same to be in his or her monthly report. Payment for services
rendered shall be made to each paid on call firefighter on the regularly
scheduled pay period. (Ord. 1653, 4-18-2000)
5-3-11: INSURANCE COVERAGE:
No paid on call firefighter shall be appointed or enter upon his or her duties
as such unless and until insurance coverage (as contemplated by the cities and
villages act of the state of Illinois and as set forth under division 5 of the
municipal code of 1961) has been procured and declared fully operative and
effective in writing by an insurance carrier pursuant to a policy carried by
and with this city. (Ord. 1653, 4-18-2000)
CHAPTER 4
FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES
SECTION:
5-4-1: Tax Imposed
5-4-2: Report Receipts
5-4-3: Payment
5-4-4: Failure To Report
5-4-5: Fire Department Foreign Fire Insurance Board; Election; Officers; Duties
5-4-6: Treasurer's Bond; Use Of Funds
5-4-7: Audit Of Funds
5-4-8: Disbursement Of Funds
5-4-9: Penalty
5-4-1: TAX IMPOSED:
All corporations, companies and associations not incorporated under the laws of
the state of Illinois, and which are engaged in the city in effecting or
soliciting fire insurance, shall pay to the city treasurer, on or before July
15 of each and every year, a sum equal to two percent (2%) of the gross
receipts of premiums received by such corporation, company or association, or
their agency or agents, for business effected or transacted for fire insurance
within the city, for the year ending July 1 next preceding. The sum above named
shall be a tax or license fee upon all such corporations, companies or
associations transacting said business within the city. (Ord. 1653, 4-18-2000)
5-4-2: REPORT RECEIPTS:
Every person, acting as agent or otherwise, for or upon behalf of any such
corporation, company or association, shall on or before July 15 of each and
every year render to the clerk of the city a full, true and just account,
verified by oath, of all the premiums which during the year ending on July 1
next preceding, shall have been received by him, or any other person for him,
in behalf of any such corporation, company or association, and shall fully and
specifically set out in said report, the amount or amounts received as premiums
for fire insurance. (Ord. 1653, 4-18-2000)
5-4-3: PAYMENT:
The said agent or agents shall also, at the time of the making of the above
mentioned report, pay to the city treasurer the said sum of two percent (2%)
upon the gross receipts of such corporation, company or association, obtained
as premiums for effecting fire insurance in the city, as is specified in
section
5-4-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 1653, 4-18-2000)
5-4-4: FAILURE TO REPORT:
If such account be not rendered on or before the day herein designated for that
purpose, or if the above mentioned rates for the said tax or license fee shall
remain unpaid after that day, it shall be unlawful for any such corporation,
company or association to transact any business of fire insurance in the city,
until the requirements hereof have been fully complied with; nevertheless, this
provision shall in no way affect the validity of any risk that may be taken in
violation hereof, between such corporation, company or association, and the
person so insured. (Ord. 1653, 4-18-2000)
5-4-5: FIRE DEPARTMENT FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE BOARD; ELECTION; OFFICERS;
DUTIES:
The members of the Canton fire department shall elect officers of the
department foreign fire insurance board. These officers shall be a chairperson,
secretary and a treasurer. The board shall consist of these three (3) persons.
It shall develop and maintain a listing of items which it feels are appropriate
expenditures of the fund. The corporate authorities of the city shall annually
appropriate all of the money paid to the municipal treasurer per section
5-4-1 of this chapter to the department foreign fire insurance board. (Ord.
1653, 4-18-2000)
5-4-6: TREASURER'S BOND; USE OF FUNDS:
The treasurer of the department foreign fire insurance board shall give a
sufficient bond to the municipality which shall be approved by the mayor,
conditioned upon the faithful performance by the treasurer of his or her duties
under the ordinance and as provided by law. He or she shall pay out the money
upon the order of the department foreign fire insurance board for the
maintenance, use and benefit of the department. (Ord. 1653, 4-18-2000)
5-4-7: AUDIT OF FUNDS:
As part of the annual municipal audit, the funds described in this chapter
shall be audited to verify that the purchases made with the funds are for the
maintenance, use and benefit of the department. (Ord. 1653, 4-18-2000)
5-4-8: DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS:
The amount so collected shall be paid by the city treasurer to the treasurer of
the foreign fire insurance board who shall receive and pay out the same upon
the order of said board for the purposes of maintenance, use and benefit of
such department, as provided in section
5-1-4 of this title. (Ord. 1653, 4-18-2000)
5-4-9: PENALTY:
Any person, corporation, company or association which violates any of the
provisions of this chapter is guilty of a class B misdemeanor as provided by
the Illinois Compiled Statutes. (Ord. 1653, 4-18-2000)
CHAPTER 5
FIREMEN'S PENSION FUND
SECTION:
5-5-1: Board Of Trustees, Established
5-5-2: Pension Fund Created
5-5-3: Treasurer Of Fund
5-5-4: Management Of Fund
5-5-5: Rewards, Gifts; Permanent Fund
5-5-6: Sell Assets, Draw Fund
5-5-7: Interest From Investment Of Fund
5-5-8: Retirement; Physical Or Mental Disability
5-5-9: Recall To Active Duty
5-5-10: Death While In Service
5-5-11: Retirement; Twenty Years' Service
5-5-12: Custodian Of Fund
5-5-13: Mayor To Draw Warrants
5-5-14: Warrants Signed
5-5-15: Report Condition Of Fund
5-5-16: Fund Not Subject To Levy
5-5-1: BOARD OF TRUSTEES, ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a Board of Trustees of the Firemen's Pension Fund.
Said board shall consist of five (5) members. Two (2) members of the board
shall be appointed by the Mayor of the Municipality. Two (2) members of the
board shall be active participants of the Pension Fund who are elected from the
active participants of the fund. One member of the board shall be a person who
is retired under the Firemen's Pension Fund Act of 1919 who was elected from
persons retired under the Firemen's Pension Fund Act of 1919. The member to be
chosen from the active and retired firefighters shall be elected by ballot at
elections to be held on the third Monday in April of the applicable years under
the Australian ballot system, at such place or places, in the Municipality, and
under such regulations that shall be prescribed by the board. No person shall
cast more than one vote for each candidate for whom he or she is eligible to
vote. In the elections for board members to be chosen from the active
firefighters, all active firefighters and no others may vote. In the elections
for board members to be chosen from retired firefighters, the retired
firefighters and no others may vote. In the event of a failure, resignation or
inability to act of any board member, a successor shall be elected for the
unexpired term at a special election called by the board and shall be conducted
in the same manner as a regular election. The board shall select annually from
its members a President and a Secretary. Board members shall not receive or
have any right to receive any salary from a Pension Fund for services performed
as board members.
Each member of the board so elected shall hold his position as such for a term
of three (3) years and until his or her successor shall have been duly elected
and qualified. (Ord. 4086, 10-17-2017)
5-5-2: PENSION FUND CREATED:
There is hereby created a special fund to be known as the "Firemen's Pension
Fund", which said fund shall be raised and created in the following manner: One
percent (1%) of all revenues collected or received by the City, authorizing
persons or corporations to engage in any business or occupation or profession,
except in that of public utilities, also all fines imposed for violation of
fire regulations, the enforcement or correction of which may be charged to and
be under the supervision of the Chief Officer or subordinate officers of the
Fire Department of the City, also seventy five percent (75%) of all monies
collected as a license or tax upon foreign fire insurance companies doing
business in the City, shall be set apart by the Treasurer of the City to whom
the same shall be paid as a fund for the pensioning of disabled and
superannuated members of the Fire Department, and of the widowers and orphans
and dependent parents of deceased members of the Fire Department of the City.
(1959 Code § 20-7-2)
5-5-3: TREASURER OF FUND:
The City Treasurer of the City shall be Ex Officio Treasurer of said Firemen's
Pension Fund. (1959 Code § 20-7-3)
5-5-4: MANAGEMENT OF FUND:
The said board shall have exclusive control and management of the fund
mentioned in section
5-5-1 of this chapter, and of all monies donated, paid or assessed for the
relief or pensioning of disabled, superannuated and retired members of the Fire
Department, their widows, minor children and dependent parents, and shall
assess each member of the Fire Department eligible to participate in said
Pension Fund not to exceed five percent (5%) of the salary of such member, to
be deducted and withheld from the monthly pay of each member so assessed, the
same to be placed by the treasurer of the city, who shall be ex officio
treasurer of such board. The said board shall make all needful rules and
regulations for its government in the discharge of its duties and shall hear
and decide all applications for relief or pensions under this chapter, and its
decisions on such applications shall be final and conclusive, and not subject
to review or reversal except by the board. The board shall cause to be kept a
record of all its meetings and proceedings. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 20, Art. 7, Sec. 4)
5-5-5: REWARDS, GIFTS; PERMANENT FUND:
All rewards in monies, fees, gifts and emoluments that may be paid or given for
on account of extraordinary services by said fire department or any member
thereof (except when allowed to be retained by competitive award), shall be
paid into said pension fund. The said board of trustees may take by gift,
grant, devise or bequest, any money, real estate, personal property, right of
property or any valuable thing; and such money, real estate, personal property,
right of property or other valuable thing so obtained, also all fines and
penalties imposed upon members of such fire department, shall in like manner be
paid into said pension fund and treated as a part thereof, for the use of such
pension fund; provided, that when the sum of fifteen thousand dollars
($15,000.00) shall be received and accumulated, it shall be, together with all
other sums in excess of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) when so received
and accumulated, retained as a permanent fund, and any excess thereof, in each
such case, shall be available for the uses and purposes of such pension fund.
(R.O. 1959, Ch. 20, Art. 7, Sec. 5)
5-5-6: SELL ASSETS, DRAW FUND:
   (A)   Power Of Board To Sell Assets: The board of trustees created herein
shall have power to take and may sell or dispose of, in any manner that the
said board in its judgment deems proper, any or all assets of any kind which
are in its possession or under the control of the board of trustees of the
firemen's pension fund, existing at the time of the passage of this chapter,
and all monies and funds realized from the sale of such assets, together with
all other money or funds received or taken over shall become a part of the fund
herein created for the purpose of payment of pensions, under the provisions of
this chapter. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 20, Art. 7, Sec. 6)
   (B)   Power Of Board To Draw Fund, Investing Same, Deposit Of Securities:
The said board of trustees shall have power to draw such pension fund from the
treasurer of the city, and may invest such fund, or any part thereof, in the
name of the "board of trustees of the firemen's pension fund", in interest
bearing bonds of the United States, of the state of Illinois, of any county of
this state, or of any township or of any municipal corporation of the state of
Illinois as well as in tax anticipation warrants of the city. And all such
securities shall be deposited with the treasurer of the city, as ex officio
treasurer of said board and shall be subject to the order of said board. (R.O.
1959, Ch. 20, Art. 7, Sec. 7)
5-5-7: INTEREST FROM INVESTMENT OF FUND:
The interest received from any such investment of said fund, after said fund
shall have reached the sum of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00), shall be
applicable to the payment of pensions under this chapter. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 20,
Art. 7, Sec. 8)
5-5-8: RETIREMENT; PHYSICAL OR MENTAL DISABILITY:
If any member of the fire department of the city shall, while in the
performance of his duty, become and be found, upon examination of a medical
officer ordered by said board of trustees to be physically or mentally
permanently disabled, by reason of service in the fire department, so as to
render necessary his retirement from service in said fire department, said
board of trustees shall retire such disabled member from service in said
department; provided, no such retirement on account of disability shall occur
unless such member has contracted said disability while in the service of said
fire department. Upon such retirement the said board of trustees shall order
the payment to such disabled member of the fire department monthly, from said
pension fund, such sums as provided for by statutes of state of Illinois. (R.O.
1959, Ch. 20, Art. 7, Sec. 9)
5-5-9: RECALL TO ACTIVE DUTY:
If, however, after placing a fireman on the pension roll, satisfactory proof is
made to the pension board that such retired fireman has recovered from such
physical or mental disability, the board shall order that his pension cease,
and the fireman shall report back to the chief of fire department of the city,
who shall thereupon order the reinstatement in active service, in the same
grade or rank which such fireman held at the time of his retirement. (R.O.
1959, Ch. 20, Art. 7, Sec. 10)
5-5-10: DEATH WHILE IN SERVICE:
If any member of the fire department shall die while in the fire service as a
result of any illness or accident to him which had its inception while he was
in such service with pay, or if any fireman shall die from any cause during the
retirement on account of disability, or during the retirement after twenty (20)
years' service, and while in good standing, as provided for herein, and shall
leave a widow, minor natural child or children, or dependent natural father or
mother surviving, said board of trustees shall direct the payment from said
pension fund the following sums of money monthly: Such sums as provided for by
statutes of Illinois. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 20, Art. 7, Sec. 11)
5-5-11: RETIREMENT; TWENTY YEARS' SERVICE:
Any fireman after having served twenty (20) years as a fireman, of which the
last five (5) shall be continuous, may retire from active service, and when
such retired fireman shall have reached the age of fifty (50) years the board
shall order and direct that such fireman shall be paid a monthly pension as
provided for by statutes of Illinois. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 20, Art. 7, Sec. 12)
5-5-12: CUSTODIAN OF FUND:
The treasurer of the board shall be custodian of the pension fund and shall
secure and safely keep the same, subject to the control and directions of the
board, and shall keep his books and accounts concerning said fund in such a
manner as may be prescribed by the board, and the said books and accounts shall
always be subject to the inspection of the board or any member thereof. The
treasurer shall, within ten (10) days after his election, execute a bond to the
city, with good and sufficient securities, in such penal sum as the board shall
direct, to be approved by the board, conditioned for the faithful performance
of the duties of his office, and that he will safely keep and well and truly
account for all monies and property which may come into his hands as such
treasurer, and that on the expiration of his term of office, he will surrender
and deliver over to his successor all unexpended monies and all property which
may have come into his hands as treasurer of such fund. Such bond shall be
filed in the office of the city clerk, and in case of breach of the same, or
the conditions thereof, suit may be brought on the same in the name of the
city, for the use of said board, or of any person or persons injured by such
breach. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 20, Art. 7, Sec. 13)
5-5-13: MAYOR TO DRAW WARRANTS:
It shall be the duty of the mayor and the city clerk, upon request made in
writing by said board, to draw warrants upon the treasurer of the city, payable
to the treasurer of the board for all funds in the hands of the treasurer of
the city, belonging to said pension fund. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 20, Art. 7, Sec. 14)
5-5-14: WARRANTS SIGNED:
All monies ordered to be paid from said pension fund to any person or persons,
shall be paid by the treasurer of the board only upon warrants signed by the
president of the board and countersigned by the secretary thereof, and no
warrants shall be drawn except by order of the board duly entered in the
records of the proceedings of the board. In case the said pension fund or any
part thereof, shall, by order of said board or otherwise, be deposited in any
bank, or loaned, all interest or money which may be paid or agreed to be paid
on account of any such loan or deposit, shall belong to and constitute a part
of said fund; provided, that nothing herein contained shall be construed as
authorizing said treasurer to loan or deposit said fund or any part thereof,
unless so authorized by the board. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 20, Art. 7, Sec. 15)
5-5-15: REPORT CONDITION OF FUND:
The board of trustees shall make report to the council of the city, of the
condition of said pension fund on January 1 in each and every year. (R.O. 1959,
Ch. 20, Art. 7, Sec. 16)
5-5-16: FUND NOT SUBJECT TO LEVY:
No portion of said pension fund shall, either before or after its order of
distribution by said board to any retired member of said fire department, or to
the widow or guardian of such minor child or children, or to the dependent
parent or parents, of a deceased or retired member of the fire department, be
held, seized, taken, subject to, or detained or levied on by virtue of any
attachment, execution, injunction, writ, interlocutory or other order or
decree, or any process of proceeding whatever issued out of or by any court of
this state for the payment or satisfaction in whole or in part of any debt,
damages, claim, demand or judgment against any such member or his said widow,
or the guardian of said minor child or children, or dependent parent or
parents, of any deceased member, but said fund shall be sacredly held, kept,
secured and distributed for the purposes of pensioning the persons named in
this chapter. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 20, Art. 7, Sec. 17)
CHAPTER 6
FIRE CODE
SECTION:
5-6-1: Code Adopted
5-6-2: Permit Fees
5-6-3: Amendments
5-6-4: Enforcement
5-6-5: Penalty
5-6-1: CODE ADOPTED:
The 2003 international fire code, the appendix chapters and the 2004 supplement
shall be, and the same are hereby adopted as the fire code of the city of
Canton. (Ord. 1864, 5-2-2006)
5-6-2: PERMIT FEES:
   (A)   The Canton fire department shall issue permits pursuant to the
international fire code, 2003 edition, the appendix chapters and the 2004
supplement, hereafter called "code". The fee shall be paid to the city
treasurer. No permit is valid until the applicable fee, if any, is paid in
full.
   (B)   Other governmental entities, located within the corporate limits of
the city of Canton, shall be exempt from the permit fees, but shall be required
to obtain a permit for any of the applicable categories listed herein.
   (C)   Permits for each individual category shall be required to be paid by
the owner/occupant at a cost of twenty five dollars ($25.00) each, with a
maximum of one hundred dollars ($100.00). The maximum of one hundred dollars
($100.00), annually, shall apply even if more than four (4) permits are
required. The following is a list of the applicable categories for which
permits are required, as outlined in the 2003 international fire code:
Category             Code Reference Fee
Operational Permits:
Category                                               Code Reference Fee
Operational Permits:
Recreational fires; bonfires, wiener roasts, and leaf  n/a            n/c
burning
Aerosol products                                       105.6.1        $25.00
Amusement buildings                                    105.6.2        25.00
Aviation facilities                                    105.6.3        25.00
Battery systems                                        105.6.5        25.00
Carnivals and fairs                                    105.6.4        25.00
Cellulose nitrate film                                 105.6.6        25.00
Combustible dust producing operations                  105.6.7        25.00
Combustible fibers                                     105.6.8        25.00
Compressed gases                                       105.6.9        25.00
Covered mall buildings                                 105.6.10       25.00
Cryogenic fluids                                       105.6.11       25.00
Cutting and welding                                    105.6.12       25.00
Dry cleaning plants                                    105.6.13       25.00
Exhibits and trade shows                               105.6.14       25.00
Explosives                                             105.6.15       25.00
Fire hydrants and valves                               105.6.16       25.00
Flammable and combustible liquids                      105.6.17       25.00
Floor finishing                                        105.6.18       25.00
Fruit and crop ripening                                105.6.19       25.00
Fumigation and thermal insecticide fogging             105.6.20       25.00
Hazardous materials                                    105.6.21       25.00
Hazardous production materials facility                105.6.22       25.00
High pile storage                                      105.6.23       25.00
Hot work operations                                    105.6.24       25.00
Industrial ovens                                       105.6.25       25.00
LP gas                                                 105.6.28       25.00
Liquid or gas fueled vehicles or equipment in assembly 105.6.27       25.00
buildings
Lumberyards and woodworking plants                     105.6.26       25.00
Magnesium                                              105.6.29       25.00
Miscellaneous combustible storage                      105.6.30       25.00
Open burning (exempt)                                  105.6.31       n/c
Open flames and candles                                105.6.33       25.00
Open flames and torches                                105.6.32       25.00
Organic coatings                                       105.6.34       25.00
Places of assembly (structures)                        105.6.35       25.00
Private fire hydrants                                  105.6.36       25.00
Proxylin plastics                                      105.6.38       25.00
Pyrotechnic special effects materials                  105.6.37       25.00
Refrigeration equipment                                105.6.39       25.00
Repair garages and service stations                    105.6.40       25.00
Rooftop heliports                                      105.6.41       25.00
Spraying or dipping                                    105.6.42       25.00
Storage of scrap tires and tire byproducts             105.6.43       25.00
Temporary membrane structures, tents and canopies      105.6.44       25.00
Tire rebuilding plants                                 105.6.45       25.00
Waste handling                                         105.6.46       25.00
Wood products                                          105.6.47       25.00
Construction Permits:
Automatic fire extinguishing systems                   105.7.1        25.00
Compressed gases                                       105.7.2        25.00
Fire alarm and detection systems and related equipment 105.7.3        25.00
Fire pumps and related equipment                       105.7.4        25.00
Flammable and combustible liquids                      105.7.5        25.00
Hazardous materials                                    105.7.6        25.00
Industrial ovens                                       105.7.7        25.00
LP gas                                                 105.7.8        25.00
Private fire hydrants                                  105.7.9        25.00
Spraying or dipping                                    105.7.10       25.00
Standpipe systems                                      105.7.11       25.00
Temporary membrane structures, tents and canopies      105.7.12       25.00
 
   (Ord. 1864, 5-2-2006)
5-6-3: AMENDMENTS:
Section 103.2 of the fire prevention code shall be, and the same hereby is,
amended by deleting the words "building code official" therefrom, and inserting
in their place the words "fire prevention code official".
(Ord. 1716, 12-4-2001)
5-6-4: ENFORCEMENT:
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the police chief, the fire
chief or the zoning administrator (as defined in section
10-17-2 of this code) or their designees. The fire chief or the zoning
administrator or their designees shall have the power to issue citations,
notices to appear, sign complaints and do all other acts and deeds reasonably
necessary to effectuate the requirements of this chapter. The police chief or
his or her designee shall have all powers granted to them by state statutes and
the provisions of this code.
Whenever the police chief, fire chief or the code enforcement officer or their
designees have personal knowledge or probable cause to believe that a violation
of this chapter has occurred, he or she shall issue a citation to the owner,
operator, occupant or other person responsible for the condition or violation,
either by personal service, mail or by delivering the same to, and leaving it
with, some person of responsibility upon the premises. For unattended or
abandoned locations, a copy of such notice of violation shall be posted on the
premises in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to such premises and
the notice of violation shall be mailed by certified mail with return receipt
requested or a certificate of mailing, to the last known address of the owner,
the occupant or both. (Ord. 1790, 3-2-2004)
5-6-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating this chapter or who fails to comply with any requirement
hereof shall be fined not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 1790, 3-2-2004)
CHAPTER 7
EXPLOSIVES; COMBUSTIBLES
SECTION:
5-7-1: Storing Of Explosives
5-7-2: License Required
5-7-3: Keep Up Signs
5-7-4: Concealing Explosives
5-7-5: Burning Building Containing Explosives
5-7-6: Conveying Explosives
5-7-7: Permit For Conveying
5-7-8: Manufacture Of Explosives
5-7-9: Blasting
5-7-10: Gasoline Kept In Storage Tanks
5-7-11: Vent Pipes On Tanks
5-7-12: Filling Pipes
5-7-13: Pumping Devices
5-7-14: Openings For Storage Tanks
5-7-15: Tank Wagons
5-7-16: Permission To Locate Tanks, Pumps
5-7-17: Erection Prohibited
5-7-18: Further Prohibition
5-7-19: Penalty
5-7-1: STORING OF EXPLOSIVES:
No person shall store any gunpowder or nitroglycerine or any of the products
thereof, within the limits of the city without a license so to do; provided,
that this section shall not apply to retail dealers who keep said articles in
small quantities for retail trade. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 17, Sec. 1)
5-7-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
The selling or keeping for sale of gunpowder or nitroglycerine in the city
without a license is hereby prohibited; and no license shall be issued allowing
the keeping in store of more than twenty five (25) pounds of gunpowder or more
than five (5) pounds of nitroglycerine at any one time, unless kept in some
secure magazine or fireproof powder house, situated at least three hundred feet
(300') from any other occupied building, and when kept in a store or other
place for retail, it shall be kept in tin or other metallic canisters or cases
and in a part of the building remote from any fire, lamp, candle or burning
matter liable to produce explosion. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 17, Sec. 2)
5-7-3: KEEP UP SIGNS:
Every person licensed to sell gunpowder or nitroglycerine in the city shall
keep a sign with the words "Gunpowder for Sale" or "Nitroglycerine for Sale",
as the case may be, in plain letters in some conspicuous place in front of the
building where such gunpowder or nitroglycerine is kept, and no sales of
gunpowder or nitroglycerine or any delivery thereof shall be made in the
nighttime except in unopened metallic cans. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 17, Sec. 3)
5-7-4: CONCEALING EXPLOSIVES:
No person shall bring or cause to be brought into the city any gunpowder,
nitroglycerine or other explosive substance in any box or other package marked
as containing other articles. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 17, Sec. 4)
5-7-5: BURNING BUILDING CONTAINING EXPLOSIVES:
In case any building in the city containing gunpowder or nitroglycerine shall
be on fire, the occupant or keeper thereof shall at once remove the same to
some safe place, or, if unable so to do, he shall at once notify the chief of
fire department or person in command at the fire of the location and quantity
of explosive. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 17, Sec. 5)
5-7-6: CONVEYING EXPLOSIVES:
No person shall carry gunpowder or nitroglycerine through the streets of the
city in a careless or negligent manner, or remain with such gunpowder or
nitroglycerine in any public place longer than is necessary for the
transportation of the same from one place to another. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 17, Sec.
6)
5-7-7: PERMIT FOR CONVEYING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to convey through any street, alley or
public place in the city any dynamite, nitroglycerine or other explosive
material or compound, other than gunpowder, unless a permit for such purpose be
first obtained from the mayor. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 17, Sec. 7)
5-7-8: MANUFACTURE OF EXPLOSIVES:
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to manufacture within the limits
of the city any explosive material or compound, to be used for any purpose, the
manufacture of which will be dangerous to life or property, under a penalty of
one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense, and a further penalty of fifty
dollars ($50.00) for each and every day that such explosive material or
compound may be manufactured after written notification for discontinuance
thereof by the chief of the fire department. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 17, Sec. 8)
5-7-9: BLASTING:
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to blast rock or stone for any
purpose within the corporate limits of the city, except as hereinafter
provided. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 17, Sec. 9)
5-7-10: GASOLINE KEPT IN STORAGE TANKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit to be kept within the
city limits a greater amount than ten (10) gallons of crude petroleum, benzine,
benzol, gasoline, naphtha, ether or like volatile combustible, or their
compounds, except in a storage tank constructed of steel and coated on the
outside with tar, or other rust resisting material, buried under the ground to
a depth of not less than two feet (2') if without any building, and if in the
basement of any building, to a depth of not less than two feet (2') below the
surface of the basement floor. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 17, Sec. 10)
5-7-11: VENT PIPES ON TANKS:
All storage tanks shall be provided with a vent pipe, made of at least one inch
(1") wrought iron or galvanized steel, connected with the top of the tank and
carried up to the outer air; all vent pipes shall be provided at the top with
screening and gooseneck attachment. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 17, Sec. 11)
5-7-12: FILLING PIPES:
All storage tanks shall be provided with at least a two inch (2") filling pipe
of wrought iron or galvanized steel, which shall connect with the top and
extend down to the bottom of the tank; the filling pipe shall be closed at the
intake by a filling cock or valve and be closed by a screw cap when not in use.
The intake end of the filling pipe shall not terminate within any building, but
in a metal box with a cover that is flush with the surface of the ground or
sidewalk, and kept locked when not in use. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 17, Sec. 12)
5-7-13: PUMPING DEVICES:
All storage tanks shall be provided with an off take pipe, shall connect with
the top of the tank, and shall be so placed that no part of the pipe will be
lower than the drawing off point. To the outlet end of the off take pipe shall
be attached an approved pumping device, constructed so that no vapor will be
permitted to escape from said pipe or pump. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 17, Sec. 13)
5-7-14: OPENINGS FOR STORAGE TANKS:
No storage tank shall have any openings or connections other than those
provided for the vent pipe, the filling pipe and the off take pipe. (R.O. 1959,
Ch. 17, Sec. 14)
5-7-15: TANK WAGONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the handling of the above
oils in what are commonly known or called tank wagons, provided that no such
tank wagon shall be permitted to remain within the fire limits of the city, for
any greater length of time than is necessary to transport such tank from one
part of the city to another, and to load and unload the contents thereof. (R.O.
1959, Ch. 17, Sec. 15)
5-7-16: PERMISSION TO LOCATE TANKS, PUMPS:
No storage tank for volatile combustibles or pump for the same shall be placed,
installed or maintained within the city limits, except in conformity with the
stipulations herein, and after written permission so to do shall have been
obtained from the building commissioner of the city. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 17, Sec.
16)
5-7-17: ERECTION PROHIBITED:
No storage tank for gasoline, petroleum or other volatile combustibles, or pump
for the same shall be erected, constructed or installed in or upon any street,
avenue, alley, sidewalk or space between the curb line and the inside line of
any sidewalk in the city. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 17, Sec. 17)
5-7-18: FURTHER PROHIBITION:
No storage tank for gasoline, petroleum or other volatile combustibles, or pump
for the same shall be erected, constructed or installed on or along any street
bordering upon any public park, in the city. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 17, Sec. 18)
5-7-19: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine
of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense; each twenty four (24) hours of maintenance after
the first conviction shall constitute a separate offense. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 17,
Sec. 19)
CHAPTER 8
BURNING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5-8-1: Burning Trash, Papers, Rubbish, Wire Or Garbage
5-8-2: Burning Of Yard Clippings
5-8-3: Recreational Burning
5-8-4: Penalty
5-8-1: BURNING TRASH, PAPERS, RUBBISH, WIRE OR GARBAGE:
   (A)   Outdoor Burning Prohibited: No person shall burn any processed wood,
trash, paper, rubbish, wire or garbage out of doors anywhere in the City.
   (B)   Other Burning Prohibited: No person shall burn any trash, paper,
rubbish, wire, or garbage indoors in the City except in an incinerator
complying with all applicable laws, ordinances, and EPA regulations.
   (C)   Heating And Cooking Stoves: Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to
prohibit the use of wood in stoves used for cooking, the use of wood in
fireplaces for decorative fire or the use of wood in fireplaces or stoves
designed for heating. (Ord. 1736, 10-15-2002)
5-8-2: BURNING OF YARD CLIPPINGS:
Open burning of leaves, grass cuttings, shrubbery cuttings, tree limbs, and
other materials accumulated as the result of the care of lawns, shrubbery,
vines and trees (hereinafter referred to as landscape waste). The open burning
of landscape waste is prohibited within the City limits except as follows:
   (A)   The open burning of landscape waste shall be permitted on Monday
through Sunday between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and sunset.
   (B)   The open burning of landscape waste shall be permitted on private
property, with the consent of the owner or person in charge of the property.
   (C)   The open burning of landscape waste is not permitted on lanes, parking
areas, alleys and all paved areas. The smoke emitted from such burning shall
not inhibit the flow of smooth and safe vehicular or pedestrian traffic
passage.
   (D)   No person shall burn any landscape waste unless such fire is at least
twenty feet (20') from any structure.
   (E)   Any fire resulting from the open burning of landscape waste shall be
constantly attended by a competent person until such fire is extinguished.
   (F)   The Fire Chief or his designee shall prohibit any open burning of
landscape waste when the atmospheric conditions or other conditions at the
location of the fire constitute a hazard, which include environmental, health
or safety hazards. (Ord. 4154, 8-6-2019)
5-8-3: RECREATIONAL BURNING:
   (A)   Recreational burning shall be permitted on private property, with the
consent of the owner or person in charge of the property.
   (B)   Recreational burning is not permitted on lanes, parking areas, alleys
and all paved areas. The smoke emitted from such burning shall not inhibit the
flow of smooth and safe vehicular or pedestrian traffic passage.
   (C)   No person shall have a recreational burning unless such fire is at
least twenty feet (20') from any structure.
   (D)   Recreational burning shall be permitted only if constantly attended by
a competent person until such fire is extinguished.
   (E)   Recreational burning may consist of only natural wood, limbs and logs.
   (F)   The Fire Chief or his designee shall prohibit any recreational burning
when the atmospheric conditions or other conditions at the location of the fire
constitute a hazard.
   (G)   If the Canton fire department deems the burning unsafe or an
infringement on others said burning shall be extinguished by a competent person
or the Canton fire department. (Ord. 1736, 10-15-2002)
5-8-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than
seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 1736, 10-15-2002)
CHAPTER 9
SMOKE DETECTORS REQUIRED FOR ALL RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES
SECTION:
5-9-1: Smoke Detectors Required
5-9-2: Smoke Detector Defined
5-9-3: Tenant Defined
5-9-4: Buildings Where Smoke Detectors Required
5-9-5: Location Of Required Smoke Detector Within Building
5-9-6: Responsibility For Installation And Maintenance
5-9-7: Penalty
5-9-8: Moratorium On Imposition Of Fines Authorized
5-9-1: SMOKE DETECTORS REQUIRED:
Smoke detectors are required to be placed in all residential structures located
within the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 1098, 1986)
5-9-2: SMOKE DETECTOR DEFINED:
For the purposes of this section, a smoke detector is defined as a device
which:
   (A)   Is designed for the purpose of sensing the presence of visible or
invisible particles or products of combustion; and
   (B)   Which emits a loud, audible alarm when visible or invisible products
or particles of combustion are sensed; and
   (C)   Is powered either by battery or by the electrical service which
supplies electrical power to the building where the smoke detector is located;
and
   (D)   Is listed by Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., 333 Pfingsten Road,
Northbrook, Illinois, as complying with Underwriters Laboratories standard no.
217 and bears the mark "UL". (Ord. 1098, 1986)
5-9-3: TENANT DEFINED:
Every person who has a possessory interest in but is not an owner of a dwelling
unit of a multi-family apartment house, a dwelling unit of a two-family
dwelling unit or a one-family dwelling. (Ord. 1098, 1986)
5-9-4: BUILDINGS WHERE SMOKE DETECTORS REQUIRED:
A smoke detector shall be installed and located in each of the following
locations within the city:
   (A)   In each sleeping room of every boarding house.
   (B)   In each sleeping room of every dormitory.
   (C)   In each guest or sleeping room of every hotel.
   (D)   In each dwelling unit of every multi-family apartment house.
   (E)   In each one-family dwelling.
   (F)   In each dwelling unit of every two-family dwelling. (Ord. 1098, 1986)
5-9-5: LOCATION OF REQUIRED SMOKE DETECTOR WITHIN BUILDING:
Detectors required under provisions of this section shall be mounted either on
a ceiling or on a wall within twelve inches (12") of but no closer than six
inches (6") to the ceiling. Within the dwelling units of multi-family apartment
houses, one- family dwellings or two-family dwellings, smoke detectors shall be
located in hall areas giving access to rooms used for sleeping but remotely
from any cooking area. (Ord. 1098, 1986)
5-9-6: RESPONSIBILITY FOR INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE:
The owner of the building where a smoke detector(s) is required by this section
to be installed shall install each and every smoke detector required by this
section and, in addition, shall continuously maintain every required smoke
detector in an operable condition. When a tenant occupies either a dwelling
unit of a multi-family apartment house, a one-family dwelling or a dwelling
unit of a two-family dwelling, the tenant is responsible for notifying the
owner in writing within forty eight (48) hours in the event any smoke detector
installed within the dwelling unit which he occupies becomes inoperable or
appears to be inoperable. (Ord. 1098, 1986)
5-9-7: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall, for
each such occurrence or violation, be fined a minimum of twenty five dollars
($25.00) but not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each occurrence.
For purposes of this chapter, each day, or portion thereof, during which a
violation is found to exist shall be a separate offense. (Ord. 1098, 1986)
5-9-8: MORATORIUM ON IMPOSITION OF FINES AUTHORIZED:
The city council may in its discretion authorize a moratorium of fines for
violation of the requirements imposed by section
5-9-7 of this chapter. The enaction of a moratorium on the imposition of fines
for violation of section
5-9-7 of this chapter shall not be construed to eliminate or diminish the
responsibility imposed upon owners and tenants pursuant to section
5-9-7 of this chapter. The existence of such a moratorium is an affirmative
defense which must be pleaded and proved by the alleged violator in order to
avoid the imposition of a fine. (Ord. 1098, 1986)
CHAPTER 10
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
SECTION:
5-10-1: Purpose Of Chapter
5-10-2: Definitions
5-10-3: General Prohibitions
5-10-4: Exceptions
5-10-5: Procedure For Being Assigned A Hazardous Materials Access Route
5-10-6: Penalties For Violating The Provisions Of This Chapter
5-10-7: Discharge Emergencies; Definitions
5-10-8: Discharge; Declaration Of Nuisance
5-10-9: Discharge; Liability For Abatement Of Nuisance
5-10-10: Disposal; Definitions
5-10-11: Prohibition
5-10-12: Disposal; Declaration Of Nuisance
5-10-13: Disposal; Liability For Abatement Of Nuisance
5-10-13-1: Expenses To City
5-10-14: Penalties And Fines
5-10-15: Right To Know; Definition
5-10-16: Disclosure Requirements
5-10-17: Storage Of Hazardous Materials
5-10-18: Penalties
5-10-19: Spills Prohibited
5-10-19-1: Definitions
5-10-19-2: Hazardous Material Responses; Cost Reimbursement; Expense
Reimbursement To The City Of Canton
5-10-19-3: Fault Not To Be Considered
5-10-19-4: Distribution Of Reimbursed Costs; Replacement Of Material(s) And/Or
Other Expenses
5-10-19-5: Regulation Or Remedies
5-10-1: PURPOSE OF CHAPTER:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish hazardous material transportation
routes within the city which will enable those who transport hazardous
materials to and from locations within the city to do so in compliance with the
requirements of 49 CFR 397 as they may from time to time be amended which are
hereby incorporated herein as if enacted by the city council. (Ord. 1187, 3-16-
1988)
5-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: A substance or material in a quantity and form which has
been determined by the United States department of transportation to be capable
of posing an unreasonable risk to health and safety or property when
transported in commerce.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS ACCESS ROUTE: Any street which has been designated pursuant
to this chapter for the purpose of providing vehicular access from the primary
hazardous material route to locations within the city where hazardous materials
are used, produced, or stored.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS PLACARD: The placard which a motor vehicle transporting
hazardous materials is required to display under regulations enacted by either
the United States or Illinois department of transportation pursuant to the
hazardous materials transportation act, 49 USC 1801 et seq.
PRIMARY HAZARDOUS MATERIALS ROUTE: When signs are posted giving notice thereof,
the system of streets composed of the following:
 
Street From To
 
(Ord. 1187, 3-16-1988)
5-10-3: GENERAL PROHIBITIONS:
   (A)   Every person who uses, produces, or stores hazardous materials at a
location within the city, shall request from the fire department a hazardous
materials access route to and from such location.
   (B)   Every motor vehicle which displays or is required to display a
hazardous materials placard, shall be operated within the city only on the
primary hazardous material route or upon a hazardous material access route
established pursuant to the provisions of this section.
   (C)   Every operator of a motor vehicle which displays or is required to
display a hazardous material placard, who does not know the primary hazardous
material route of the city or the hazardous material access route to and from
the location in the city from which he is coming or to which he is destined,
shall request directions concerning said routes from the Canton fire
department, before operating said vehicle in the city.
   (D)   No motor vehicle which displays or is required to display a hazardous
materials placard shall be operated on any street within the city other than
U.S. Route 20 unless such vehicle is coming from or destined for a location
within the city. (Ord. 1187, 3-16-1988)
5-10-4: EXCEPTIONS:
The following types of vehicles are exempt from the provisions of this section:
   (A)   Placarded vehicles making residential deliveries of home heating fuel.
   (B)   Placarded vehicles making residential deliveries of medical supplies.
   (C)   For purposes of picking up or delivering nonhazardous materials at a
location within the city which is not required under the provisions of this
chapter to request a hazardous materials access route, placarded vehicle may
use the most direct route to and close as possible to said location on the
primary hazardous materials transportation route or a hazardous materials
access route assigned to a business in the vicinity of said location. (Ord.
1187, 3-16-1988)
5-10-5: PROCEDURE FOR BEING ASSIGNED A HAZARDOUS MATERIALS ACCESS ROUTE:
Any person who uses, produces, or stores hazardous materials at a location
within the city shall be assigned a hazardous materials transportation route
after he has submitted a request for such a route to the city fire department
on a form provided by the fire department. Upon receipt of such a request, the
fire department shall assign to such person, a route which in the judgment of
the fire department and all other interested departments, is consistent with
and implements the purpose of this chapter. (Ord. 1187, 3-16-1988)
5-10-6: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATING THE PROVISIONS OF THIS CHAPTER:
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall upon
conviction be subject to a fine of no less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and no
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   (B)   Any person who uses, produces, or stores hazardous materials and who
fails to request a hazardous materials access route, shall be deemed in
violation of this chapter for each and every day after the effective date of
this chapter during which such person was engaged in such use, production, or
storage, until such time as he submits such a request to the fire department.
Each day that such a person is deemed in violation of this chapter shall
constitute a separate offense which upon conviction shall subject the person to
a fine of no less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and no more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00).
   (C)   Any operator of a motor vehicle which is required to display a
hazardous materials placard who violates any provision of this chapter while
operating said vehicle without said placard properly displayed, shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of no less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and no
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 1187, 3-16-1988)
5-10-7: DISCHARGE EMERGENCIES; DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise clearly requires, as used in this chapter
"discharge" means leakage, seepage, or other release.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL: A substance or material in a quantity and form determined
by the United States department of transportation to be capable of posing an
unreasonable risk to health and safety or property.
PERSON: Any natural person or individual, governmental body, firm, association,
partnership, copartnership, joint venture, company, corporation, joint stock
company, trust, estate, or any other legal entity, or their legal
representative, agent, or assigns. (Ord. 1187, 3-16-1988)
5-10-8: DISCHARGE; DECLARATION OF NUISANCE:
The actual or threatened discharge of hazardous materials within the city is
hereby declared a nuisance. (Ord. 1187, 3-16-1988)
5-10-9: DISCHARGE; LIABILITY FOR ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE:
Any person who owns, leases, operates, or controls any facility, equipment, or
vehicles from which a discharge of hazardous materials has occurred or is
threatened to occur, shall be liable to the city for any expenses incurred by
the city in connection with preventing, cleaning up, or disposing of or
attempting to prevent, clean up, or dispose of any such discharge or threatened
discharge. (Ord. 1187, 3-16-1988)
5-10-10: DISPOSAL; DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise clearly requires, as used in this chapter:
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL: A substance or material in a quantity and form determined
by the United States department of transportation to be capable of posing an
unreasonable risk to the health and safety or property.
PERSON: Any natural person or individual, governmental body, firm, association,
partnership, copartnership, joint venture, company, corporation, joint stock
company, trust, estate, or any other legal entity, or their legal
representative, agent, or assigns. (Ord. 1187, 3-16-1988)
5-10-11: PROHIBITION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of hazardous materials within
the city unless such disposal is conducted in accordance with applicable state
and federal rules and regulations pertaining to the disposal of such materials.
(Ord. 1187, 3-16-1988)
5-10-12: DISPOSAL; DECLARATION OF NUISANCE:
The unlawful disposal of hazardous materials within the city is hereby declared
a nuisance. (Ord. 1187, 3-16-1988)
5-10-13: DISPOSAL; LIABILITY FOR ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE:
Any person who engages in the unlawful disposal of hazardous materials shall be
liable to the city for any and all expenses incurred by the city of Canton in
connection with the cleaning up and lawfully disposing of said materials. (Ord.
1835, 5-2-2005)
5-10-13-1: EXPENSES TO CITY:
"Expenses to the city" shall mean all costs and expenses to the city incurred
in the cleanup or abatement of hazardous materials or the extinguishing of a
fire involving hazardous material, and shall include, without limitation, the
following:
   (A)   Actual labor costs of city personnel involved in the cleanup or
abatement of the discharge(s) including, without limitation, workers'
compensation benefits, fringe benefits and administrative overhead or any other
medical expenses, immediate or long term, or personnel exposed to the hazardous
materials;
   (B)   Cost of equipment operation, damage or loss as established by the
city;
   (C)   Cost of material ordered directly by the city;
   (D)   The cost of any labor or material(s) expended through the retention of
other parties to assist in cleanup or abatement and the repair of the property
in the area of the incident. (Ord. 1835, 5-3-2005)
5-10-14: PENALTIES AND FINES:
In addition to the liability imposed by the preceding section, any person who
unlawfully disposes of hazardous materials within the city shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of no less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and no
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 1187, 3-16-1988)
5-10-15: RIGHT TO KNOW; DEFINITION:
Unless the context otherwise clearly requires, as used in this chapter:
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL: A substance or material in a quantity and form determined
by the United States department of transportation to be capable of posing an
unreasonable risk to the health and safety or property.
PERSON: Any natural person or individual, governmental body, firm, association,
partnership, copartnership, joint venture, company, corporation, joint stock
company, trust, estate, or any other legal entity, or their legal
representative, agent, or assigns.
TOXIC SUBSTANCE: Any substance, mixture, or compound containing a substance
which is listed in:
   (A)   The code of federal regulations, 29 CFR 1910.1000 through 1910.1500,
inclusive.
   (B)   The Illinois Compiled Statutes.
   (C)   The United States department of health and human services, public
health service national toxicology program, "Second Annual Report On
Carcinogens", December 1981, and its periodic updates.
   (D)   A list of toxic substances promulgated by the director of the Illinois
department of labor pursuant to Illinois Compiled Statutes. (Ord. 1187, 3-16-
1988)
5-10-16: DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS:
Every person who uses, produces, or stores hazardous materials or toxic
substances at a location within the city shall provide the fire department of
the city with all information concerning the use, production, and storage of
such materials which such a person is required to provide a local fire
department under all governing laws and regulations enacted or promulgated from
time to time by either the state or the United States of America and
departments thereof. (Ord. 1187, 3-16-1988)
5-10-17: STORAGE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS:
Every person who stores hazardous materials at any location within the city
shall store such materials in accordance with the requirements established for
such storage by the fire prevention code of the city as adopted and amended in
chapter 6 of this title. (Ord. 1187, 3-16-1988)
5-10-18: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction be
subject to a fine of no less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and no more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day that a person is deemed in violation of
this chapter shall constitute a separate offense which upon conviction shall
subject the person to a fine of no less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and no more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each such offense. (Ord. 1187, 3-16-
1988)
5-10-19: SPILLS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful, whether intentional or unintentional, for any person,
firm or corporation to release, emit, spill or leak any hazardous material. It
shall also be unlawful to create or permit any situation which constitutes a
hazardous material incident. (Ord. 1835, 5-3-2005)
5-10-19-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this section
5-10-19, the following definitions apply:
CITY: Any department or division of the city.
EXPENSES TO THE CITY: All costs and expenses to the city incurred in the
cleanup or abatement of hazardous materials or the extinguishing of a fire
involving hazardous material, and shall include, without limitation, the
following:
   (A)   Actual labor costs of city personnel involved in the cleanup or
abatement of the discharge(s) including, without limitation, workers'
compensation benefits, fringe benefits and administrative overhead or any other
medical expenses, immediate or long term, or personnel exposed to the hazardous
materials;
   (B)   Cost of equipment operation, damage or loss as established by the
city;
   (C)   Cost of material ordered directly by the city;
   (D)   The cost of any labor or material(s) expended through the retention of
other parties to assist in cleanup or abatement and the repair of the property
in the area of the incident.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INCIDENT: The leakage, release, seepage, or other emission
of any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form, concentration,
location or other characteristics, is determined by the fire chief or his
authorized representative to be a hazardous waste, based upon a reasonable
degree of scientific certainty, to pose an unreasonable and inordinate risk to
the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance
or the environment, including, without limitation, explosives, compressed
gases, flammable and combustible liquids, flammable and water reactive solids,
oxidizers and peroxides, poisons, radioactive materials, corrosives or
otherwise regulated materials, or any substance determined to be hazardous,
toxic or a special waste under any federal or state law, statute or regulation.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity, form,
concentration, location or other characteristics, is determined by the fire
chief or his authorized representative to be a hazardous waste, based upon a
reasonable degree of scientific certainty, to pose an unreasonable and
inordinate risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the
ecologic balance or the environment, including, without limitation, explosives,
compressed gases, flammable and combustible liquids, flammable and water
reactive solids, oxidizers and peroxides, poisons, radioactive materials,
corrosives or otherwise regulated materials, or any substance determined to be
hazardous, toxic or a special waste under any federal or state law, statute or
regulation. (Ord. 1835, 5-3-2005)
5-10-19-2: HAZARDOUS MATERIAL RESPONSES; COST REIMBURSEMENT; EXPENSE
REIMBURSEMENT TO THE CITY OF CANTON:
The person in immediate control or possession of the hazardous material(s) at a
hazardous materials incident, to which a department or division of the city has
responded, shall be responsible for reimbursement to the city for all expenses
incurred by the city related in any way to the response, the handling or the
cleanup of the material(s). There shall be joint and several liability for
reimbursement including, but not limited to, the person(s) or entities in
immediate control of the hazardous material(s), the shipper, the manufacturer,
the distributor, the transporter of the material(s) involved, or third parties
having caused or contributed to the cause of the release of the hazardous
material(s). (Ord. 1835, 5-3-2005)
5-10-19-3: FAULT NOT TO BE CONSIDERED:
The person or company in immediate control or possession of the hazardous
material at a hazardous materials incident shall be liable for any other costs,
fees or expenses of whatever kind or nature which are incurred by the city or
its agent in the abatement, cleanup or repair. The fault of the entity in
immediate control or possession shall not be an issue in the attachment of any
liability created by, arising out of, or related to this section. For the
purpose of this section, "repair" shall mean, without exception, the return of
the property to the condition that existed immediately prior to the incident.
(Ord. 1835, 5-3-2005)
5-10-19-4: DISTRIBUTION OF REIMBURSED COSTS; REPLACEMENT OF MATERIAL(S) AND/OR
OTHER EXPENSES:
Any reimbursement funds generated pursuant to this section, or otherwise, may
be used to replenish the supplies used by the city at the scene of the
hazardous material(s) incident. Such supplies may include, without limitation,
protective clothing, absorbents, neutralizing chemicals, detection monitoring
equipment, firefighting foams and chemicals, overtime personnel expenses,
laboratory analysis, medical treatment, immediate and long term, or exposed or
injured personnel, or equipment or supplies damaged or destroyed by exposure to
the hazardous material(s) at the incident. (Ord. 1835, 5-3-2005)
5-10-19-5: REGULATION OR REMEDIES:
Nothing in this section shall be deemed to relieve any party from any other
obligation or responsibilities that it might otherwise have under law to any
person or other agency. (Ord. 1835, 5-3-2005)
CHAPTER 11
CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTORS REQUIRED
SECTION:
5-11-1: Definitions
5-11-2: Carbon Monoxide Detector
5-11-3: Violation; Penalty
5-11-4: Exemptions
5-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
APPROVED CARBON MONOXIDE ALARM OR ALARM: A carbon monoxide alarm that complies
with all the requirements of the rules and regulations of the Illinois state
fire marshal, bears the label of a nationally recognized testing laboratory,
complies with the most recognized testing laboratory, and complies with the
most recent standards of the Underwriters Laboratories or the Canadian Standard
Association.
DWELLING UNIT: A room or suite of rooms used for human habitation, and includes
a single-family residence as well as each living unit of a multiple-family
residence and each living unit in a mixed use building. (Ord. 1900, 3-6-2007)
5-11-2: CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTOR:
   (A)   Every dwelling unit shall be equipped with at least one approved
carbon monoxide alarm in an operating condition within fifteen feet (15') of
every room used for sleeping purposes. The carbon monoxide alarm may be
combined with smoke detecting devices provided that the combined unit complies
with the respective provision of the administrative code, reference standards
and departmental rules relating to both smoke detecting devices and carbon
monoxide alarms and provided that the combined unit emits an alarm in a manner
that clearly differentiates the hazard.
   (B)   Every structure that contains more than one dwelling unit shall
contain at least one approved carbon monoxide alarm in operating condition
within fifteen feet (15') of every room used for sleeping purposes.
   (C)   It is the responsibility of the owner of the structure to supply and
install all required alarms. It is the responsibility of the tenant to test and
to provide general maintenance for the alarms within the tenant's dwelling unit
or rooming unit, and to notify the owner or the authorized agent of the owner
in writing of any deficiencies that the tenant cannot correct. The owner is
responsible for providing one tenant per dwelling unit with written information
regarding alarm testing and maintenance.
The tenant is responsible for replacement of any required batteries in the
carbon monoxide alarms in the tenant's dwelling unit, except that the owner
shall ensure that the batteries are in operating condition at the time the
tenant takes possession of the dwelling unit. The tenant shall provide the
owner or the authorized agent of the owner with access to the dwelling unit to
correct any deficiencies in the carbon monoxide alarm that have been reported
in writing to the owner or to the authorized agent of the owner.
   (D)   The carbon monoxide alarms required under this chapter may be either
battery powered, plug-in with battery backup, or wired into the structure's AC
power line with secondary battery backup. (Ord. 1900, 3-6-2007)
5-11-3: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   (A)   Wilful failure to install or maintain in operating condition any
carbon monoxide alarm required by this chapter will result in a fine of a
minimum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) but not more than two hundred dollars
($200.00) for each occurrence. For purposes of this chapter, each day, in
portion thereof, during which a violation is found to exist shall be a separate
offense.
Tampering with, removing, destroying or disconnecting or removing the batteries
from any installed carbon monoxide alarm, except in the course of inspection,
maintenance or replacement of the alarm required by this chapter will result in
a fine of a minimum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) but not more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) for each occurrence. For purposes of this chapter,
each day, or portion thereof, during which a violation is found to exist shall
be a separate offense. (Ord. 1900, 3-6-2007)
5-11-4: EXEMPTIONS:
The following residential units shall not require carbon monoxide detectors:
   (A)   A residential unit in a building that: 1) does not rely on combustion
of fossil fuel for heat, ventilation, or hot water; 2) is not connected in any
way to a garage; and 3) is not sufficiently close to any ventilated source of
carbon monoxide, as determined by the local building or fire official, to
receive carbon monoxide from that source.
   (B)   A residential unit that is not sufficiently close to any source of
carbon monoxide so as to be at risk of receiving carbon monoxide from that
source, as determined by the local building or fire official. (Ord. 1900, 3-6-
2007)
CHAPTER 12
FIREWORKS USE ACT
SECTION:
5-12-1: Title
5-12-2: Definitions
5-12-3: Permit Required
5-12-4: Pyrotechnic Display Permit Requirement
5-12-5: Restricted Locations
5-12-6: Transportation Use
5-12-7: Forms
5-12-8: Violations And Penalties
5-12-1: TITLE:
This chapter may be cited as the FIREWORKS USE ACT. (Ord. 1926, 4-15-2008)
5-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:
CITY: The city of Canton, Illinois.
DISPLAY FIREWORKS: 1.3G or special effects fireworks or as further defined in
the pyrotechnic operator licensing act 1 .
FIRE CHIEF: The chief of the Canton fire department.
FLAME EFFECT: The detonation, ignition, or deflagration of flammable gasses,
liquids, or special materials to produce a thermal, physical, visual or audible
effect before the public, invitees, or licensees, regardless of whether
admission is charged, in accordance with National Fire Protection Association
160 guidelines, and as may be further defined in the pyrotechnic operator
licensing act 2 .
LEAD PYROTECHNIC OPERATOR: An individual who is responsible for the safety,
setup, and discharge of the pyrotechnic display and who is licensed pursuant to
the pyrotechnic operator licensing act 3 .
1.3G FIREWORKS: Those fireworks used as professional outdoor displays and
classified as fireworks UN0333, UN 0334, or UN0335 by the United States
department of transportation under 49 CFR 172.101.
PERSON: An individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, company,
consortium, joint venture or commercial entity.
PYROTECHNIC DISPLAY: The detonation, ignition, or deflagration of display
fireworks or flame effects to produce visible or audible effects of an
exhibitional nature before the public, invitees, or licensees regardless of
whether admission is charged, and as may be further defined in the pyrotechnic
operator licensing act 4 . (Ord. 1926, 4-15-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 227.
2 2. 225 ILCS 227.
3 3. 225 ILCS 227.
4 1. 225 ILCS 227.
5-12-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
copartnership, or corporation to knowingly use or explode any display fireworks
without having obtained a pyrotechnic display permit from the city. (Ord. 1926,
4-15-2008)
5-12-4: PYROTECHNIC DISPLAY PERMIT REQUIREMENT:
   (A)   Minimum Requirements: On behalf of the city, the Canton fire
department fire chief may issue a pyrotechnic display permit to any adult
applicant who meets the following minimum requirements:
      1.   State License: Any applicant must provide evidence that the proposed
pyrotechnic display services are provided by a licensed pyrotechnic distributor
and that the individual responsible for the setup and firing of the display is
a licensed lead pyrotechnic operator. Said licenses must be issued by the state
of Illinois and be current and in good standing.
      2.   Proof Of Insurance: The city shall require proof of liability
insurance in the sum of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). The
insurance shall be carried with an insurer authorized to do business in the
state of Illinois and shall insure the applicant against liability, judgments,
costs, damage, and expenses that may accrue against and be charged to or be
recovered from the applicant by reason of damage to property or injury to or
death of any person arising from the pyrotechnic display or flame effect
display. The insurance coverage shall be an occurrence based policy and shall
cover all periods of time when pyrotechnic materials, including flame effect
materials, are in the insured's actual or constructive possession, including
those times when the materials are being stored, transported, handled, used,
discharged and displayed.
      3.   Fee: An application for a pyrotechnic display permit shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable application of one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00).
      4.   Fire Chief Approval: The fire chief of the city of Canton or his/her
designee must have inspected the site and determined that the display can be
performed in full compliance with all state and local rules and that the
display shall not be hazardous to property or endanger any person or persons.
   (B)   Time Frame To Apply: The applicant must submit a written application
for a permit at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the date of the
pyrotechnic display, unless agreed to otherwise by the fire chief.
   (C)   No Permit Required: No permit shall be required for supervised public
displays by state or county fair associations.
   (D)   Age Of Assistants: The applicant must submit proof that all assistants
will be at least eighteen (18) years of age. Proof should be in the form of a
birth certificate or a state issued driver's license or identification card.
   (E)   Identification And Signature Required On The Permit: Each pyrotechnic
display permit must identify the lead pyrotechnic operator and must include the
signature of the fire chief.
   (F)   Purpose: After a permit has been granted, sales, possession, use, and
distribution of display fireworks for the display shall be lawful for that
purpose only.
   (G)   Transferability: No permit shall be transferable. (Ord. 1926, 4-15-
2008)
5-12-5: RESTRICTED LOCATIONS:
No firework shall be discharged, ignited, or exploded at any point within six
hundred feet (600') of any hospital. (Ord. 1926, 4-15-2008)
5-12-6: TRANSPORTATION USE:
Nothing in these regulations shall be construed as prohibiting the manufacture,
storage, or use of signals or fuses necessary for the safe operation of
railroads, trucks, aircraft, or other instrumentalities of transportation.
(Ord. 1926, 4-15-2008)
5-12-7: FORMS:
All applications, permits, and site inspection records shall be on forms
approved by the city. Incomplete applications will be considered null and void.
(Ord. 1926, 4-15-2008)
5-12-8: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person, firm, copartnership, or corporation violating the provisions of
this chapter shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and fined not less than
seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per
occurrence and/or revocation of license. (Ord. 1926, 4-15-2008)
TITLE 6
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
6-1-1: Department Established
6-1-2: Chief Of Police
6-1-3: Policemen
6-1-4: Deputy Chief
6-1-1: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established an executive department of the municipal government
of the city which shall be known as the police department, and may consist of
up to the police chief, a deputy chief, four (4) lieutenants, four (4) police
sergeants, and fifteen (15) patrolmen, up to seven (7) telecommunicators, one
(1) noncommissioned code enforcement officer, one (1) executive secretary, and
one (1) department secretary. When any officer of the police department, who
occupies the position of lieutenant, sergeant, or patrolman, becomes inactive
such that it appears that a full time appointment will be necessary so as to
fill an ongoing vacancy and/ or an anticipated requirement, then the police and
fire commission may, at its discretion, appoint an officer in a full time
capacity to fill such vacancy. The telecommunicators, executive secretary,
department secretary, and the noncommissioned code enforcement officer based
upon the recommendation of the police chief, shall be appointed by the mayor
with the approval of the city council. Part time noncommissioned personnel may
be used on an " as needed" basis to work as radio operators, but only to the
extent that the full time commissioned officers are inadequate to meet such
needs. (Ord. 4021, 1-5-2016; amd. Ord. 4467, 4-29-2025)
6-1-2: CHIEF OF POLICE:
   (A)   Term: The chief of police shall be chief of the police department, and
shall hold his office until his successor shall be appointed and qualified.
(1959 Code § 31-2-1)
   (B)   Appointment, Oath, Bond: The chief of police shall be appointed by the
mayor, with the consent and approval of the city council 1 . He shall take the
oath prescribed for other city officers, and enter into a bond in the penal sum
of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) with a surety company authorized to do
business in the state of Illinois, as surety, conditioned for the faithful
discharge of the duties of his office. (1959 Code § 31-2-2; amd. Ord. 826, 7-1-
1980)
   (C)   Devote Entire Time, Offenders: The chief of police, when on duty,
shall devote his entire time and energy to the discharge of the duties of his
office, and shall see that the laws and provisions of this code are enforced as
far as possible, and that all offenders are reported to some proper tribunal
for punishment. (Ord. 829, 7-15-1980)
   (D)   Control Of Police Force, Absence: The chief of police shall be the
commanding officer of the entire police force of the city, subject to the mayor
and the rules and regulations prescribed by the council. He shall assign all
policemen or patrolmen under him their different beats or districts, and their
respective hours of service, and shall see that they are on duty during the
whole time of their watch. The chief of police shall in no case absent himself
from the city without notifying the mayor of his intended absence, when the
same is practicable. (1959 Code § 31-2-4)
   (E)   Report To Mayor Derelict Members, Suspension: It shall be the duty of
the chief of police to promptly report to the mayor any member of the police
force who may be guilty of drunkenness, neglect of duty, disobedience of
orders, or violations of the standing rules and regulations of the police
department. (1959 Code § 31-2-5)
   (F)   Attend Meetings Of Council, Etc.: He shall attend, either in person or
by deputy, all meetings of the council, and execute all its orders and warrants
or other legal process required to be executed by him under any provisions of
this code. (1959 Code § 31-2-6)
   (G)   Keep Police Record: Said chief of police shall keep, or cause to be
kept, books of record of the police department and of all persons arrested or
committed by the police, showing the time and place of each arrest, the offense
for which the same was made and the disposition of each case.
   (H)   Regular Report: The chief of police shall make an oral report to the
mayor on a regular basis of all business or matters connected with the police
department.
   (I)   Monthly Reports: The chief of police shall, each month, make a written
report to the council showing the number of arrests made by the police force
during the preceding month, the disposition of the case, the amount of the fine
imposed, if any, and the amount of such fine collected. (Ord. 829, 7-15-1980)
   (J)   Care Of Property: Said chief of police shall have care, custody and
control of all books, records, equipment and other property belonging to the
police department and of all stolen goods seized and retained by police
authority. Upon the expiration of his term of office or his resignation or
removal therefrom, he shall, on demand, surrender to his successor in office,
all books, records, equipment and property in his possession belonging to the
city, or appertaining to said office. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 31, Art. 2, Sec. 10)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  2-1-3 of this code.
6-1-3: POLICEMEN:
   (A)   Appointment Of Policemen: The board of fire and police commissioners
shall appoint such members of the police department as required by the
provisions of this code 1 . (R.O. 1959, Ch. 31, Art. 3, Sec. 1; amd. Ord. 829,
7-1-1980)
   (B)   Taking Oath, Bond: Each policeman shall, before he enters upon the
duties of his office, take and subscribe the oath provided by law for city
officers, and shall give bond to the city in the penal sum of one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) with a surety company authorized to do business in the
state of Illinois, as surety, conditioned for the faithful performance of the
duties of the office. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 31, Art. 3, Sec. 2)
   (C)   Temporary Watchmen: (Rep. by Ord. 829, 7-15-1980)
   (D)   Special Policemen: The mayor and council may, on application being
made to them, appoint any suitable person in the employ of any corporation,
association or firm as special policeman in and for the city; or they may, if
they deem proper, appoint any person employed in any other branch of the city
service to be special policeman. Special policemen shall have all the
qualifications required in the case of regular policemen; they shall take and
subscribe the same oath, give like bond, exercise the same powers and be
subject to the rules and regulations of the police department so far as the
same are applicable to them; provided, however, that such special policemen
shall receive no pay from the city for their services. Said special policemen
shall be provided with stars by the person, firm or corporation asking their
appointment, each of which shall have engraved thereon the words "Special
Police". (R.O. 1959, Ch. 31, Art. 3, Sec. 4)
   (E)   Performance Of Duty: The several members of the police force, when on
duty, shall devote their entire time to the proper discharge of the duties of
their station, according to the laws and provisions of this code and the rules
and regulations of the police department. They shall be regular and prompt in
the discharge of their duties, and shall obey the orders of their superior, and
it shall be their special duty to preserve order, peace and quiet, and to
enforce the provisions of this code. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 31, Art. 3, Sec. 5)
   (F)   Report To Superior Officer: Every policeman shall report to his
commanding officer all persons known to be gamblers, receivers of stolen
property, thieves, burglars or disorderly persons, and also all unlawful or
disorderly houses or places within the city coming to their knowledge, as well
as all violators of the laws of state or the provisions of this code, reported
to him, or of which he may be cognizant; and when it shall come to the
knowledge of any member of the police force, that any provision of this code
has been violated, such member shall forthwith cause a complaint to be made
before a proper officer within the city, and the proper witnesses to be
subpoenaed, and evidence procured for the successful prosecution of the
offender. It shall also be the duty of the policemen to serve promptly all
warrants or other process issued in any cause pending under any law or
ordinance of the city before any proper officer thereof. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 31,
Art. 3, Sec. 6)
   (G)   Power Of Arrest: Every policeman, together with the chief of police,
and all other persons possessing the power and authority of policemen, shall
have the power to arrest all persons in the city found in the act of violating
any law or ordinance, or aiding or abetting in any such violations, and shall
arrest all persons found under suspicious circumstances and shall take all
persons so arrested to the city jail until they can be brought before the
proper officer or court for trial or examination. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 31, Art. 3,
Sec. 7)
   (H)   Serving Process Within City: They shall have power and authority,
within the corporate limits of the city, to serve and execute warrants and
other legal process for the apprehension and commitment of persons charged with
or held for the commission of any crime or misdemeanor, or the violation of any
law or provision of this code, and while serving or executing or assisting in
the service or execution of any such warrant or legal process, they shall be
vested with all the common law and statutory powers and authority of constables
for such purposes. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 31, Art. 3, Sec. 8)
   (I)   Serving Process Without The City: They shall also have power and
authority to execute city warrants, or other legal process, without the
corporate limits of the city, and within such distance therefrom as is
authorized by law, in all cases when any ordinance of the city council, made
pursuant to law, shall prescribe a penalty for violation of any of its
provisions by persons residing, acting or doing business without the limits of
the city. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 31, Art. 3, Sec. 9)
   (J)   Calling On Bystanders For Assistance: Any police officer of the city
may, at any time, call upon any able bodied male person, above the age of
eighteen (18) years, to aid him in arresting, retaking or holding in custody
any person guilty of having committed any unlawful act, or charged therewith,
or to aid such officer in preventing the commission of any unlawful act; and
whoever shall neglect or refuse to give such aid or assistance when so
required, shall incur a penalty of not less than three dollars ($3.00) nor more
than twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each offense. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 31, Art. 3,
Sec. 10)
   (K)   Aid Fire Department: It shall be the duty of the members of the police
force to aid the fire department by giving alarms in case of fire and in
clearing the streets and grounds in the immediate vicinity of any fire so that
the firemen shall not be hindered or obstructed in the performance of their
duties. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 31, Art. 3, Sec. 11)
   (L)   Neglect Or Violation Of Duty: Any member of the police department who
shall neglect or refuse to perform any duty required of him by the provisions
of this code, or the rules and regulations of said department, or who shall, in
the discharge of his official duties be guilty of fraud, favoritism, extortion,
oppression or wilful wrong or injustice, shall, in each case, be subject to a
fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than one hundred dollars
($100.00), and shall be subject to suspension or removal from office. (R.O.
1959, Ch. 31, Art. 3, Sec. 12)
   (M)   Uniform: The several members of the police force shall wear such
uniforms as may be prescribed by the rules and regulations of the department.
Said uniforms shall be furnished by each member of the force at his own
expense. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 31, Art. 3, Sec. 13)
   (N)   Extra Duties: Although certain hours shall be allotted to each member
for duty, all members must be prepared to act at a moment's notice, whenever
their services may be required, either on call by a superior officer or in view
of a violation, or threatened violation, of any law of the state or provisions
of this code. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 31, Art. 3, Sec. 14)
   (O)   Removal Or Suspension: Any member of the police department may be
removed or suspended by the board of fire and police commissioners as provided
for by the provisions of this code and statutes of Illinois 2 . (R.O. 1959, Ch.
31, Art. 3, Sec. 15; amd. Ord. 826, 7-1-1980)
   (P)   Deportment: Members shall be civil and respectful to the public and
upon all occasions perform their duty with good temper and discretion and shall
not at any time, while on duty, make use of violent, intemperate or abusive
language and no member shall communicate to any person any information which
may lead to the escape from arrest or punishment of persons accused of crime.
(R.O. 1959, Ch. 31, Art. 3, Sec. 16)
   (Q)   Memorandum Book: (Rep. by Ord. 829, 7-15-1980)
   (R)   Looking After Sidewalks And Property: It shall be the duty of the
chief of police and each policeman, whenever in their rounds they shall
discover any sidewalks out of repair, or any other property in any manner
needing attention to prevent danger to citizens or loss to the city, to report
the same at once to the proper committee of the council, or to the council
itself at its next meeting. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 31, Art. 3, Sec. 18)
   (S)   Care Of Streets And Alleys: The chief of police and policemen shall
see that the streets and alleys are kept free from rubbish, manure and all
kinds of filth, and if in their rounds they discover anything of the kind in
the streets or alleys they shall order the parties putting it there to remove
it, and if it is not removed at once they shall proceed against the party, as
provided by ordinance, with as little delay as possible. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 31,
Art. 3, Sec. 19)
   (T)   Supplied With Badge And Equipment: Each police officer or policeman
shall, upon his appointment, be supplied with a badge, and upon his resignation
or removal from office, he shall immediately deliver to the chief of police for
the use of the city, his badge and all papers and effects, in his possession,
belonging to the city or appertaining to his said office. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 31,
Art. 3, Sec. 20)
   (U)   Person Arrested In Nighttime: (Rep. by Ord. 829, 7-15-1980)
   (V)   Falsely Impersonating An Officer: Any person who shall falsely
impersonate any of the members of the police department of the city, or shall
maliciously or with intent to deceive, use or imitate any of the signs, signals
or devices used by such officer of said department or who, not being a police
officer, shall wear in public the police uniform or shall impersonate or
represent falsely that he is a member or officer of said department, shall be
subject to a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 31, Art. 3, Sec.
22)
   (W)   Officer Shall Display Star: All policemen and members of the police
department who are uniformed shall at all times, and on all occasions when on
duty, display their star or emblem of office, so that the entire surface
thereof may be easily and distinctly seen, except when otherwise ordered by
their superior officers. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 31, Art. 3, Sec. 23)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  2-1-3 of this code.
2 1. See section
  2-1-6 of this code.
6-1-4: DEPUTY CHIEF:
   (A)   The deputy chief may be referred to in the Canton Municipal Code as
“Deputy Chief,” “Deputy Police Chief,” or “Deputy Chief of Police.”
   (B)   Term: The Deputy Chief shall hold his or her office until his or her
successor shall be appointed and qualified, unless removed from office by the
Mayor. The Deputy Chief may removed from office with or without cause.by the
Mayor without the approval or consent of the City Council.
   (C)   Appointment, Oath: The Deputy Chief shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the approval of the city council. The Deputy Chief shall take the oath
prescribed for other city officers and shall execute a bond in accordance with
applicable law. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a Deputy Chief is not required
to be appointed by the Mayor, and the Mayor may choose not to appoint a Deputy
Chief, as he or she determines is in the best interests of the City.
   (D)   Devote Entire Time, Offenders: The Deputy Chief of Police, when on
duty, shall devote his entire time and energy to the discharge of the duties of
his office, and shall see that the laws and provisions of this code are
enforced as far as possible, and that all offenders are reported to some proper
tribunal for punishment.
   (E)   Police Powers: The Deputy Chief shall be considered an officer of the
City and part of the police force with all powers granted to police officers of
the City by ordinance or other applicable law.
   (F)   Reporting; Managerial and Supervisory Authority: The Deputy Chief
shall report to the Chief of Police. The Deputy Chief shall otherwise be a
commanding officer of the entire police force of the City, subject only to the
Chief of Police, the Mayor, and the rules and regulations prescribed by the
City Council. The Deputy Chief shall assist the Chief of Police with his or her
duties at the direction of the Police Chief. The Deputy Chief shall be engaged
predominantly in executive and management functions of the Police Department
and is charged with the responsibility of directing the effectuation of
management policies and practices with the Chief of Police. The Deputy Chief
shall have the authority to direct, reward, and/ or discipline the police force
in his or her independent judgment and subject to applicable laws, policies,
ordinances, and/ or collective bargaining agreements.
   (G)   Additional Job Duties: Additional job duties and/ or job descriptions
of the Deputy Chief of Police may be established by the Chief of Police.
   (H)   Acting Chief. Unless the Chief of Police makes an assignment of Acting
Chief of Police, on a temporary basis, of a commissioned officer of the Police
Department, the Deputy Chief of Police shall serve as Acting Chief of Police in
the event the Chief of Police is unable to perform his or her duties as Chief
or in the event the Chief of Police otherwise assigns the Deputy Chief as
Acting Chief of Police.
   (I)   Compensation: The compensation of the Deputy Chief shall be
established by the City Council. (Ord. 4467, 4-29-2025)
CHAPTER 2
POLICE PENSION FUND
SECTION:
6-2-1: Fund Created
6-2-2: Felony Conviction
6-2-3: Board Of Trustees
6-2-4: Who Pensioned
6-2-5: Pension; Physical Disability
6-2-6: File Certificate Of Disability
6-2-7: Payment To Widow, Dependents
6-2-8: Examination
6-2-9: Pensioners Outside State, Country
6-2-10: Meetings Of Board; Organization; Duties
6-2-11: Powers Of Board
6-2-12: Annual Report By Treasurer
6-2-13: Payment Of Benefits
6-2-14: Police Officer Separated
6-2-15: Application Of Chapter
6-2-16: Donations; Reserve Fund
6-2-17: Report By Board Of Trustees
6-2-18: Exemptions
6-2-1: FUND CREATED:
The council shall annually, hereafter, levy a tax upon all the taxable property
in the city at the rate on the dollar of all such taxable property which will
produce an amount which, when added to the deductions from the salaries or
wages of policemen and receipts available from all other sources as hereinafter
referred to, will equal a sufficient sum to meet the annual requirements of the
pension fund under the provisions of this chapter. Such tax shall be levied and
collected in like manner with general taxes of the city, and shall be in
addition to all other taxes now or hereafter authorized to be levied upon all
property within the city, and shall be in addition to the amount authorized to
be levied for general purposes. In the event that the pension fund in any year
over and above the reserve fund is sufficient to meet all demands of those
requiring payment therefrom in such year, the council may dispense with the
levy of such tax.
All monies derived from the taxes levied hereunder and the following monies
shall be set apart by the treasurer of the city to constitute the police
pension fund:
   (A)   Seven percent (7%) per month, which shall be paid or deducted from the
salary of each member of the police department of the city.
   (B)   All monies that may have been accumulated by the city in conformity
with any previous laws of the state of Illinois.
"Policeman", "policemen" or "member of the police force", as used in this
chapter, shall mean any person heretofore or hereafter appointed to the police
force of a police department, and sworn and commissioned to perform police
duties. This chapter shall not apply to, nor shall any of the following persons
be deemed eligible to participate in or benefit from a police pension fund
established in a city, village or incorporated town, namely:
   (A)   Any person appointed to the police force of the police department
before he has attained his twenty first birthday, or after he has attained his
thirty sixth birthday at the time of his first appointment, except in those
cities, villages or incorporated towns which first established a pension fund
pursuant to the provisions of the statutes of Illinois, in which event all
persons employed as policemen at the time such pension fund is first
established shall be deemed eligible to participate in such pension fund,
regardless of age at first appointment, and regardless of physical condition.
This subsection shall not be construed to make ineligible a person who is, was
or shall be reappointed to the police force of the police department after he
has attained and passed his thirty sixth birthday, provided such person is
otherwise qualified, and at the time of his first appointment to such police
department was either a participant in, or eligible to participate in, any
annuity or pension fund provided for by any existing annuity or pension statute
in force at the time of his first appointment.
   (B)   Any person who shall be found upon the examination of a duly licensed
physician or physicians selected by said board of trustees to be physically
unfit or mentally unfit to perform the duties of a policeman.
   (C)   Any policeman who, within three (3) months after receiving his first
appointment, and if reappointed, also within three (3) months after his
reappointment, fails or refuses to make written application to the board of
trustees hereinafter provided for to come under the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   Part time policemen, special policemen, night watchmen, temporary
employees, traffic guards or so called auxiliary policemen specially appointed
to aid or direct traffic at or near schools or public functions, or to aid in
civil defense, municipal parking lot attendants, clerks or other civilian
employees of the police department who perform clerical duties exclusively;
this chapter shall, however, apply to policemen serving initial probationary
periods, and such policemen, if otherwise eligible, shall make contributions in
the same manner as other policemen.
   (E)   Any policeman who fails or refuses to pay to the board of trustees the
salary or wage payment or deductions hereinabove defined, computed from the
date the city established a pension fund, or the date of a policeman's first
appointment (including an appointment on probation), whichever is the later,
and continuing during such policeman's entire service as a policeman. A
policeman who is reappointed shall, before being declared eligible to
participate in the pension fund, repay to the fund in the manner required by
section
6-2-14 of this chapter any refund received pursuant to the provisions of said
section
6-2-14 of this chapter. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 32, Sec. 1)
6-2-2: FELONY CONVICTION:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, none of the benefits
herein provided for shall be paid to any person who is convicted of any felony
relating to or arising out of or in connection with his service as a policeman.
This section shall not operate to impair any contract or vested right
heretofore acquired under this chapter to preclude the right to a refund.
All future entrants shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this
section as a condition of coverage. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 32, Sec. 2)
6-2-3: BOARD OF TRUSTEES:
A board, composed of five (5) members, residents of the city, to be chosen as
hereinafter provided, shall be and constitute a board of trustees to provide
for the disbursement of said fund and designate the beneficiaries thereof as
herein directed, which board shall be known as the board of trustees of the
police pension fund of the city. Two (2) of said board shall be appointed by
the mayor and shall serve for a period of two (2) years each, or until such
time as their successors are appointed and qualified. The third and fourth
members of the board shall be elected from the regular police force by the
active members. The fifth member shall be elected from the beneficiaries under
the provisions of this chapter by such beneficiaries. The members to be elected
shall be elected by ballot for a term of two (2) years, beginning on the second
Tuesday of May after said election, at a regular election, as aforesaid, at
which election all members of the regular police force shall be entitled to
vote for the police force members of the board and all beneficiaries of lawful
age shall be entitled to vote for the member chosen from among the
beneficiaries. The election provided for in this section shall be held
biennially on the third Monday in April, under the Australian ballot system, at
such place or places in the city, under such regulations as shall be prescribed
by the appointed members of said board; provided, however, that no person
entitled to vote, under the provisions of this chapter, shall cast more than
one ballot at any such election. In the event of the death, resignation or
inability to act of any member of said board, elected under the provisions of
this section, the successor of such member shall be elected for the unexpired
term at a special election, which shall be called by said board and shall be
conducted in the same manner as are the annual elections provided for above.
Suitable rooms for offices and meetings of such board shall be assigned by the
council. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 32, Sec. 3)
6-2-4: WHO PENSIONED:
Whenever any person, either male or female, who, at the time of the taking
effect of this chapter is a member of any regularly constituted police force in
the city, or hereafter becomes a member of such police force, has served for a
period of twenty (20) years or more upon the regularly constituted police force
of the city, the board shall, regardless of the fact that such person may not
have arrived at the age of fifty (50) years at that time, and subject to the
provisions of this chapter, order and direct that such person, after becoming
fifty (50) years of age and his or her service on such police force having
ceased, shall be paid from such fund a yearly pension equal to one-half (1/2)
of the amount of salary attached to the rank which he or she held on such
police force for one year immediately prior to such retirement provided that
the amount of such pension shall be increased by a sum equivalent to one
percent (1%) of the salary attached to such rank for each additional year over
twenty (20) years which such person has served upon such police force, until a
maximum payment of sixty percent (60%) of the annual salary attached to the
rank held by him for one year immediately preceding his retirement. After the
decease of such member, his widow or his or her minor child or children,
dependent because of physical or mental disability regardless of age, or
dependent because of age, who survive him or her, or dependent parent or
parents, if such there be, shall be entitled to the pension provided for in
this chapter, of such deceased husband, father, son, mother, or daughter. In
case of the death of any person who has completed a minimum of twenty (20)
years' service as a member of any such police force, whether his death occurs
before or after he attained the age of fifty (50) years, or before or after
application for retirement on pension has been made, the pension to which the
decedent would have been entitled, had he or she lived and made application for
retirement on pension as of the date of death, shall be paid to his dependents
as provided in the case of the death of a pensioner. No annuity shall be paid
to any widow, child or dependent parent of a deceased member after she or he
has married or remarried after the decease of such policeman. Nor shall any
part of this section or any other section of this chapter be construed to
necessitate the retirement of any capable policeman at the age of fifty (50)
years.
In computing the time for the purpose of determining whether a policeman has
served twenty (20) years, under the provisions of this section, no furloughs
without pay exceeding thirty (30) days shall be counted, but all leaves of
absence on account of any illness of or accident occurring to any such
policeman, regardless of the length thereof, as well as all periods of
disability retirement for which such policeman shall not have received any
disability pension payments under the provisions of section
6-2-5 of this chapter shall be counted. All periods of such policeman's service
in the military, naval or air forces of the United States of America when
entered upon when he was an active policeman of the city, either on account of
any war in which the United States of America was a belligerent party, or as
required by any act of congress, shall be included and counted as a part of
such policeman's twenty (20) years' period of police service, provided that
such policeman, upon applying for such permanent pension, and in accordance
with the rules of the said board, with reference thereto, shall pay into the
fund a sum equivalent to the amount he would have contributed if he has been a
regular contributor during such period or periods of military, naval or air
service, if and to the extent that the city in which he shall have been so
acting as a policeman shall not have made such contributions to the pension
fund. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 32, Sec. 4)
6-2-5: PENSION; PHYSICAL DISABILITY:
Whenever any member of a regularly constituted police force in the city becomes
physically disabled to such an extent as to necessitate the suspending of
performance of his duty on such police force, or retirement from the police
force, he shall be paid from the fund a pension of one-half (1/2) of the salary
attached to the rank he held on the police force for one year immediately prior
to the time of his so suspending performance of his duty or retirement.
Whenever such disability ceases and the policeman resumes the performance of
his duty on the police force such pension shall cease.
If the disability continues for a period of time which, if added to the period
of his active service equals twenty (20) years, the policeman shall, if he is
then of the age of fifty (50) years, if he elects to then retire from said
police force, be paid a regular pension in lieu of such disability pension.
(R.O. 1959, Ch. 32, Sec. 5)
6-2-6: FILE CERTIFICATE OF DISABILITY:
No person shall receive any benefits from said fund, unless there shall be
filed with said board, certificates of his disability, which certificates shall
be subscribed and sworn to by said person and by two (2) practicing physicians
of the city and such board may require other evidence of disability before
ordering such payment, as aforesaid. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 32, Sec. 6)
6-2-7: PAYMENT TO WIDOW, DEPENDENTS:
Whenever any member of the police force in the city shall lose his life while
in the performance of his duty or receive injuries from which he shall
thereafter die, leaving a widow, or child, or children under the age of sixteen
(16) years, or parent who is dependent upon such policeman for maintenance and
support, then, upon satisfactory proof of such facts made to it, such board
shall order and direct that a yearly pension equal to one-half (1/2) of the
amount of salary attached to the rank which said member may have held on such
police force one year immediately prior to the time of his death, shall be paid
to such widow during her life, or if there be no widow then to such child or
children until they shall be sixteen (16) years of age, or if there be no widow
or child under the age of sixteen (16) years, then to such parents if such
there be, as is dependent upon such policeman for their support; provided, if
such widow, child or children or dependent parent shall marry, then such person
so marrying shall thereafter receive no pension from this fund; and provided,
further, that whenever any member of the police force of the city shall have
retired or shall have been retired after twenty (20) years' service or on
account of being physically disabled, shall then marry, such wife or child or
children or dependent parent of such policeman, shall after his death, receive
no pension from said fund. Whenever any member of a police force shall die
after ten (10) years' service therein and while still in the service of the
city, leaving a widow or child or children under the age of sixteen (16) or
parent dependent upon such policeman for their maintenance and support, then
upon satisfactory proof of such fact made to it, said board shall order and
direct that a pension equal to one-half (1/2) of the amount of salary attached
to the rank which such policeman may have held on such police force for one
year immediately prior to his death, shall be paid to such widow, or, if there
be no widow, then to such child or children until they shall be sixteen (16)
years of age, or if there be no widow or child under the age of sixteen (16)
years, then to such parent or parents as is or are dependent upon such
policeman for their support, said pension to cease upon the marriage, as is
heretofore provided; provided, that in case any policeman on disability pension
dies while still disabled and unable to perform the duties of his office, his
disability pension shall continue to be paid to the widow of such policeman or
his or her minor child or children, or his parent or parents, dependent upon
him because of physical or mental disability or because of age. (R.O. 1959, Ch.
32, Sec. 7)
6-2-8: EXAMINATION:
Any policeman suspending the performance of his duty on account of disability
may be summoned to appear before the board, herein provided for, at any time
thereafter, and shall submit himself thereto for examination as to his fitness
for duty, and shall abide by the decision and order of such board with
reference thereto, and all members of the police force who may be retired under
the provisions of this chapter, except those who voluntarily retire after
twenty (20) years' service, shall report to the chief of police where so
retired on the second Tuesday of each and every month, and in case of emergency
may be assigned to and shall perform such duty as said chief of police may
direct; and such person shall have no claim against the city, for payment for
such duty so performed. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 32, Sec. 8)
6-2-9: PENSIONERS OUTSIDE STATE, COUNTRY:
If a pensioner under the provisions of this chapter resides outside of the
state of Illinois, such pensioner shall from time to time, furnish to the board
of trustees such proof and affidavits as the board may require that he is
complying with all the provisions of this chapter. No pension of any kind shall
be paid to any pensioner who resides outside the United States of America, its
territories or possessions. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 32, Sec. 9)
6-2-10: MEETINGS OF BOARD; ORGANIZATION; DUTIES:
The board herein provided for shall hold quarterly meetings on the second
Tuesday of July, October, January and April of each year, and special meetings
upon the call of the president of said board. On the second Tuesday of July of
each year, it shall select one of its members who shall act as the president of
such board for the period of one year or until such time as his successor is
elected and qualified. Said board shall on the same day also, select another of
its members who shall act as the secretary of said board, for the period of one
year or until such time as his successor is elected and qualified. The board
shall on the same day elect one of said members, who shall act as vice
president of said board, for the period of one year, or until such time as his
successor is elected and qualified, the said vice president to discharge and
perform the duties of president, during any vacancy in that office, or during
such time as the president is absent from the city, or for any reason is
disqualified or by reason of illness or other causes is unable to perform the
duties of his office. The board shall issue certificates signed by its
president and secretary to the persons entitled thereto of the amount of money
ordered paid to such persons from said fund by said board, which certificates
shall state for what purpose said payment is made. The board shall keep a
record of all its proceedings, which records shall be a public record. The
board shall submit annually to the council at the close of the fiscal year of
the city, a list of persons entitled to payments from the fund herein provided,
stating the amount of such payments, and for what granted, as ordered by such
board. And also there shall be stated therein the items of income which accrued
to or are payable to said fund during the fiscal year covered by said annual
list or statement so submitted, which list shall be signed and certified by the
secretary and president of such board, and attested by such secretary under
oath; provided, that no resolution shall be passed or order made for the
payment of money unless by the affirmative vote of a majority of the members of
said board, and any order for the payment of money shall be signed by the
president and secretary of said board. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 32, Sec. 10)
6-2-11: POWERS OF BOARD:
In addition to the other powers herein granted, the following further powers
and authority are hereby conferred upon the board:
   (A)   First: The exclusive control and management of the fund mentioned
herein, and of all monies donated, paid or assessed for the relief or
pensioning of disabled, superannuated and retired members of the police
department, their widows, minor children and dependent parents. All such monies
shall be placed by the treasurer of the city to the credit of the fund, subject
to the order of the board.
   (B)   Second: To draw such pension funds from the treasurer of the city and
invest such fund or any part thereof in the name of the board of trustees of
the police pension fund in interest bearing bonds or tax anticipation warrants
of the United States, of the state of Illinois or of any county of this state,
or of any township or municipal corporation of the state of Illinois and in
insured shares of state chartered building and loan associations and insured
shares of federal chartered federal savings and loan associations if the shares
are insured by the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation. All
securities shall be deposited with the city treasurer and be subject to the
order of the board. The interest received from such investment shall be
credited to the account of the pension fund.
   (C)   Third: To compel witnesses to attend and testify before it, upon all
matters connected with the operation of this chapter, in the same manner as is
or may be provided by law for the taking of testimony before masters in
chancery, and its president, or any member of said board may administer oaths
to such witnesses.
   (D)   Fourth: To appoint a clerk and define his duties; provided, however,
that no person drawing a pension under this chapter shall be employed by the
board as a clerk.
   (E)   Fifth: To provide for the payment from the fund of all its necessary
expenses, including clerk hire, printing and witness fees; provided that no
compensation or emolument shall be paid to any member of the board for any duty
required or performed under this chapter.
   (F)   Sixth: To make all necessary rules and regulations for its guidance in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter. Such rules and regulations
shall be published by the board and copies transmitted from time to time to all
pensioners and contributors. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 32, Sec. 11)
6-2-12: ANNUAL REPORT BY TREASURER:
On the second Tuesday in May of each year, the city treasurer and all other
officials of the city who have had the custody or possession of any such
pension funds herein provided, shall make a sworn statement to the board of
trustees of such police pension fund, and to the mayor and council of the city,
of all monies received and paid out by such official on account of said pension
fund during the year, and of the amount of said funds then on hand and owing to
said pension fund. All surplus then remaining in said official's hand shall be
paid by him to the city treasurer; and, provided, further, any official shall
at any and all times upon demand by said pension board, furnish to said board,
a statement or information of any kind relative to said official method of
collection or handling of said pension funds; and, provided, further, that all
books and records of such official shall be produced at any time by said
official for examination and inspection by said board of pension trustees for
the purpose herein provided. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 32, Sec. 12)
6-2-13: PAYMENT OF BENEFITS:
All members of the police force and any widow or child or children or dependent
parent of such members of the city who at the taking effect of this chapter are
entitled to receive any benefits under the provisions of this chapter, or who
hereafter become entitled to benefits under the provisions of this chapter and
to whom the board of trustees have ordered and directed such benefits to be
paid, shall receive in twelve (12) equal monthly installments each year, a sum
in all aggregating the amount to which they are entitled under the provisions
of this chapter. But, if at any time there are not sufficient monies belonging
to this fund to pay the allowances of the board to its beneficiaries, then the
council shall make every effort consistent with the laws of this state to
replenish the fund so that all beneficiaries may receive the amounts to which
they are respectively entitled, and if, after the council has made every effort
as aforesaid, there still remains a deficit in the fund, then the beneficiaries
shall be paid pro rata from the available funds, but no allowance or order of
the board of trustees of the pension fund shall be held to create any liability
against the city, except upon the fund so set apart as aforesaid for the
payment thereof. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 32, Sec. 13)
6-2-14: POLICE OFFICER SEPARATED:
In case any police officer is separated from the service of the city before he
has served twenty (20) years, all contributions made by him to the fund shall,
upon request of the police officer, be returned to him.
Acceptance of such refund shall bar such police officer and his dependents from
any further participation in the benefits accorded by this chapter, subject to
restoration upon reentry into service and payment of the amount of the refund,
plus interest at the rate of two percent (2%) from the date of the refund until
the date of repayment. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 32, Sec. 14)
6-2-15: APPLICATION OF CHAPTER:
The provisions of this chapter providing for a pension shall apply equally to
persons of both sexes who are members of a regularly constituted police force
of the city. In the construction of this chapter the word "policeman" shall
include the word "policewoman" and words importing the masculine gender shall
import the feminine gender, unless such construction would be inconsistent with
the manifest intention of the context.
In the construction of this chapter, the word "child" or "children", shall
include and mean both natural children and legally adopted children of a
policeman, provided that in the case of adopted children, such children shall
be eligible for benefits hereunder only if the judicial proceedings for
adoption shall have commenced at least one year prior to the death or
disability of the policeman and in any event prior to his attainment of the age
of fifty (50) years. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 32, Sec. 15)
6-2-16: DONATIONS; RESERVE FUND:
The board of trustees may take by gift, grant, transfer, devise or bequest, any
money, real estate, personal property or other valuable thing; and such money
and the proceeds from sale of or the income from such real estate, personal
property, right of property or other valuable thing so obtained shall be paid
into the pension fund.
The board of trustees of the pension fund shall establish and maintain a
reserve fund to ensure the payment of all obligations incurred in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter. Such fund shall not be less than ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for each policeman and each beneficiary in the
city provided that the board of trustees shall attempt to create and maintain a
minimum reserve fund which will be adequate to meet and provide for the
estimated actuarial requirements for each policeman, and for each beneficiary
of the fund, the attempt to keep the estimated actuarial deficiencies at a
minimum and ensure the solvency of the fund.
If the reserve fund is less than the minimum amount herein provided for, the
board of trustees of the pension fund in making its annual report, hereinafter
referred to, to the council shall designate the proportionate amount needed
annually to ensure the minimum amount herein provided for in such reserve fund
after a period of forty (40) years subsequent to this date and attempt to
improve said reserve fund in annual installments so that said minimum reserve
will be achieved in said period. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 32, Sec. 16)
6-2-17: REPORT BY BOARD OF TRUSTEES:
The board of trustees of the pension fund shall make a report to the council of
the condition of said pension fund. Said report shall be made prior to the
meeting of such council held for the purpose of levying of taxes for the year
for which such report is made. Said board shall certify to the council:
   (A)   The assets in their custody at such time.
   (B)   The estimated receipts during the next succeeding calendar year from
deductions from the salaries or wages of policemen as hereinbefore provided,
and from all other sources.
   (C)   The estimated amount required during said calendar year for: 1) paying
all pensions and other obligations provided for in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, and 2) establishing and maintaining the reserve
fund provided for in section
6-2-16 of this chapter. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 32, Sec. 17)
6-2-18: EXEMPTIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall apply to special police officers nor to police
officers appointed for temporary duty only, nor to temporary appointees, nor to
persons specially appointed as traffic guards, or for the purpose of aiding or
directing traffic at or near schools, even though such persons might be endowed
with certain police powers, but this chapter shall apply to officers serving
initial probationary periods, and such latter officers shall make contributions
in the same manner as other police officers. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 32, Sec. 18)
CHAPTER 3
MISDEMEANORS
SECTION:
6-3-1: Offenses Affecting The Public Peace And Quiet
6-3-1-1: Carrying Concealed Weapons
6-3-1-2: Public Drinking Or Possessing Of Alcohol
6-3-1-3: Advertising Devices
6-3-1-4: Keeping Dogs Tied
6-3-1-5: Disorderly Conduct
6-3-2: Offenses Affecting Public Safety And Convenience
6-3-2-1: Playing Ball In Streets
6-3-2-2: Dangerous Places Guarded
6-3-2-3: Playing About Railroad Tracks
6-3-2-4: Throwing Water
6-3-2-5: Throwing Of Stones
6-3-2-6: Fences, Walls, Barriers And Other Obstructions
6-3-3: Offenses Concerning Property
6-3-3-1: Trespassing
6-3-3-2: Billposting
6-3-4: Miscellaneous Offenses
6-3-4-1: Cruelty To Animals
6-3-4-2: Killing Birds
6-3-4-3: Poisonous Vines
6-3-5: Additional Offenses
6-3-5-1: Obscenity
6-3-5-2: Public Indecency
6-3-5-3: Harmful Material
6-3-1: OFFENSES AFFECTING THE PUBLIC PEACE AND QUIET:
6-3-1-1: CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS:
No person shall, within the city, wear or carry concealed about his person any
pistol, revolver, slingshot, metallic knuckles, bowie knife, dirk, razor or
other dangerous or deadly weapon without appropriate concealed carry license
from the state of Illinois or from any other state that acknowledges
reciprocating licenses. Additionally, no person shall display or flourish any
such weapon in a boisterous or threatening manner. Violations of this chapter
shall be governed by title 1, chapter 27, "General Penalty", of this code and
the fee schedule that is adopted by city council from time to time. This
section shall not apply to any policeman, constable, or other police officer
while in the discharge of his duty, nor to any person summoned by any officer
to aid him in making an arrest or preserving the peace. (Ord. 4034, 7-19-2016)
6-3-1-2: PUBLIC DRINKING OR POSSESSING OF ALCOHOL:
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to possess any intoxicating
liquor or consume any intoxicating liquor on any public street, highway,
sidewalk, alley, lane, avenue, public square, vacant lot or in any unoccupied
building within the city. Violations of this section shall be governed by title
1, chapter 27, "General Penalty", of this code and the fee schedule that is
adopted by city council from time to time. (Ord. 4034, 7-19-2016)
6-3-1-3: ADVERTISING DEVICES:
No person shall make, cause, permit or allow to be made, any noise of any kind
by means of any whistle, bell, rattle, gong, clapper, loudspeaker, hammer,
drum, horn, megaphone, amplifier, phonograph, graphophone or similar mechanical
device or devices, or by voice, at any time, for the purpose of advertising any
goods, wares or merchandise, or of attracting the attention of inviting the
patronage of any person to do any business whatsoever anywhere in the city with
the exception of: a) city sponsored events; b) not for profit charitable
activities/events; or c) part of an approved special event as allowed by the
city's special event permit.
Violations of this section shall be governed by title 1, chapter 27, "General
Penalty", of this code and the fee schedule that is adopted by city council
from time to time. (Ord. 4034, 7-19-2016)
6-3-1-4: KEEPING DOGS TIED:
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to keep any dog, whelp, bitch,
calf or other animal shut up or tied up in any yard, house or other place,
which, by barking, howling or by other noises shall disturb the peace and quiet
of any family, individual or neighborhood. Violations of this section shall be
governed by title 1, chapter 27, "General Penalty", of this code and the fee
schedule that is adopted by city council from time to time. (Ord. 4034, 7-19-
2016)
6-3-1-5: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
No person shall commit the offense of disorderly conduct.
   (A)   Specifically: A person commits disorderly conduct when he:
      1.   Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb
another and to provoke a breach of the peace; or
      2.   Transmits in any manner to the Canton fire department, or to any
officer or employee thereof, a false alarm of fire, knowing at the time of such
transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such fire
exists; or
      3.   Transmits in any manner to another a false alarm to the effect that
a bomb or other explosive of any nature is concealed in such place that its
explosion would endanger human life, knowing at the time of such transmission
that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such bomb or explosive is
concealed in such place; or
      4.   Transmits in any manner to the Canton police department, or to any
officer or employee thereof, or to any city municipal officer or employee, a
report to the effect that an offense has been committed knowing at the time of
such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such an
offense has been committed; or
      5.   Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful
purpose deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window
or other opening in it; or
      6.   While acting as a collection agency as defined in the "collection
agency act" 1  or as an employee of such collection agency, and while
attempting to collect an alleged debt, makes a telephone call to the alleged
debtor which is designed to harass, annoy or intimidate the alleged debtor.
(Ord. 936, 6-15-1982)
   (B)   Penalty: Violations of subsection (A) of this section shall be
governed by title 1, chapter 27, "General Penalty", of this code and the fee
schedule that is adopted by city council from time to time. (Ord. 4034, 7-19-
2016)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 425/1 et seq., as amended.
6-3-2: OFFENSES AFFECTING PUBLIC SAFETY AND CONVENIENCE:
6-3-2-1: PLAYING BALL IN STREETS:
No person shall play ball or raise or fly any kite in any part of the city
devoted to business purposes, under a penalty of not less than five dollars
($5.00) nor more than twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each offense. (Ord. 846,
10-21-1980)
6-3-2-2: DANGEROUS PLACES GUARDED:
Whoever shall leave open or insufficiently covered and protected, any cellar
window, door, vault, well, cistern, excavation, coal hole, ditch or other like
hole, upon or adjoining any street, alley or sidewalk, without securing or
protecting the same, so as to prevent the danger of persons or animals from
falling therein, shall be subject to a penalty of not less than ten dollars
($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense; and
every twenty four (24) hours which such place shall remain unprotected after
notice to protect the same by some officer of the city shall be deemed a
separate offense. (Ord. 846, 10-21-1980)
6-3-2-3: PLAYING ABOUT RAILROAD TRACKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to play upon or about any railroad track,
depot, locomotive or car within the city; or climb upon or jump from any car or
train of cars, or from one car to another while the same may be in motion and
every person violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less
than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each
offense. It is hereby made the duty of the several members of the police force
to vigorously enforce the several provisions of this section, and all railroad
employees shall be empowered to arrest all persons found violating the same.
(Ord. 846, 10-21-1980)
6-3-2-4: THROWING WATER:
Whoever shall wilfully turn a stream of water from any fire hose or hydrant
upon any person, or upon any private premises without the consent of the owner
thereof, or upon any person or premises upon the occasion of any exhibition or
tournament, or otherwise, except in case of a fire, shall be liable to a fine
of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars
($100.00) for each offense. (Ord. 846, 10-21-1980)
6-3-2-5: THROWING OF STONES:
No person shall purposely, maliciously or heedlessly cast or throw any stone,
brick or other missile from or into any public place, or at, or against or into
any building or shade or fruit tree, or other property, or shall in any way,
cut, mark, scratch, injure or deface any building, fence, gate or tree, or
shall meddle with or injure any public or private well, cistern, hydrant, or
pump, within the city, under a penalty, in each case, of not less than ten
dollars ($10.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 846, 10-21-
1980)
6-3-2-6: FENCES, WALLS, BARRIERS AND OTHER OBSTRUCTIONS:
All fences of any nature, type or description located in the city shall conform
to the following regulations:
It shall be unlawful to erect or construct or cause to be erected or
constructed any fence except in compliance with this section. As applicable,
the following minimum regulations shall apply:
   (A)   Residence districts:
      1.   Fences over four and one-half feet (41/2') in height except when
located within the side and rear yards of a lot are prohibited.
      2.   Fences of any height located within the areas adjoining a street
right of way closer to the street line than the minimum setbacks established
for buildings. No such fence shall exceed three feet (3') in height.
      3.   No fence located within residence districts shall be located closer
than twelve inches (12") from any alley, sidewalk, or driveway.
   (B)   Fences which are not specifically required to meet regulations for the
individual zoning districts, shall conform to the following requirements:
      1.   No fence in excess of six feet (6') in height above the fence lot
ground elevation shall hereafter be erected along the line dividing two (2)
lots or parcels of land or erected within any side or rear yard.
      2.   No fence shall hereafter be erected in the front yard more than six
feet (6') in height above the fence lot ground elevation; provided further,
that no fence shall be erected closer than twelve inches (12") to any public
sidewalk.
   (C)   All fences hereafter erected shall be of an ornamental nature. Barbed
wire, spikes, nails, or any other sharp point or instrument of any kind on top
or on the sides of any fence, or electric current or charge in said fence, are
prohibited. Barbed wire cradles may be placed on top of fences enclosing public
buildings or wherever deemed necessary by the zoning administrator in the
interest of public safety.
   (D)   No fence, wall, structure, or planting, sign or obstruction shall be
erected, established or maintained on any corner lot which will obstruct the
view of a driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection, excepting that
shade trees are permitted where all branches are not less than seven feet (7')
above the road level. Such "unobstructed corner" shall mean a triangular area
formed by the street curb lines or existing street edge if no curb line exists
and a line connecting them at points thirty feet (30') from the intersection of
the street lines, or in the case of a rounded corner, from the intersection of
the street lines, as extended.
   (E)   Fences in industrially zoned areas or as required by public safety may
exceed six feet (6') in height.
   (F)   With the exception of front yard and corner lot fence requirements,
variances from the requirements of this section may be requested and obtained
in conformity with variance procedures from time to time set forth in title 10,
"Zoning Regulations", of this code.
   (G)   A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less
than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
Each and every day, or portion thereof, during which a violation continues
shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (H)   Except as any existing fence, wall or other barrier may violate an
existing provision of this code, fences, walls and barriers in place as of the
effective date hereof shall be exempt from any provisions of this section which
are greater or more restrictive in nature than the provisions amended by this
section. (Ord. 1233, 4-5-1989)
6-3-3: OFFENSES CONCERNING PROPERTY:
6-3-3-1: TRESPASSING:
   (A)   Trespass to Land: Any person who enters upon the land or any part
thereof of another, after receiving, immediately prior to the entry, notice
from the owner or lawful occupant that an entry is forbidden, or remains upon
the land of another after receiving notice from the owner or lawful occupant to
depart, commits the offense of trespass to land. A person has received notice
from the owner or lawful occupant within the meaning of this subsection if he
or she has been notified personally, either orally or in writing, or if a
printed or written notice forbidding entry has been conspicuously posted or
exhibited at the main entrance to the land or the forbidden part thereof.
   (B)   Trespass to Building: Any person who enters the dwelling or any other
building of another, including an apartment, without. the consent of the owner
or lawful occupant of such building, commits the offense of trespass to land.
This subsection does not apply to emergency personnel or City officials,
employees, or other agents of the City if said entry is in furtherance of
official City business.
   (C)   Trespass to Vehicle: Any person who knowingly and without authority
enters into the vehicle of another, commits the offense of trespassing to
vehicle.
   (D)   Trespassing Upon School Property: For the purposes of this subsection
(D), “STUDENT" shall mean any person of school age, enrolled in the school and
in good standing, at which he or she is then present.
      1.   No person shall remain within any school building during normal
school hours without securing the written permission of the superintendent,
principal, dean of students, or other person who has been deemed to be in
charge of such school in their absence. This subsection does not apply to a
student or employee of any school located in the city or to the parent or
guardian of any student enrolled therein.
      2.   No person shall remain on any lands owned, occupied, or used by any
school within the city, without securing the written permission of the
superintendent, principal, dean of students, or other person who has been
deemed to be in charge of such school in their absence. This subsection does
not apply to a student or employee of any school located in the city or to the
parent or guardian of any student enrolled therein.
      3.   Notice.
         a.   No person shall willfully and without lawful authority enter upon
lands or premises or any part thereof, of any school within the city after
having been forbidden to do so, by notice from any person having authority with
respect to the presence of others upon such premises.
         b.   No person being upon the lands or premises or any part thereof of
any school within the city shall neglect or refuse to depart therefrom after
being notified to depart therefrom by any person having authority with respect
to the presence of others upon such premises.
         c.   A person has received notice to depart or forbidding entry,
within the meaning of subsection (3)(a) and (b) above, if he or she has been
notified personally, either orally or in writing, or if a printed or written
notice forbidding entry has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main
entrance to the land or the forbidden part thereof.
      4.   A person who violates the provisions of this subsection (D) commits
the offense of trespassing upon school property.
   (E)   Trespassing On Public Parks: No person shall injure nor in any manner
interfere with or disturb any tree, flower or shrub, or any other thing in any
park, nor injure, cut, break or deface any seat, tree, lamp, shrub, flower or
other thing in such park. No person shall enter Jones Park or remain therein
after the hours posted by the entranceways to the park or remain therein after
other hours established by this code. A person who violates the provisions of
this subsection (E) commits the offense of trespassing on public parks.
   (F)   Penalty: Violations of this section
6-3-3-1 shall be governed by Title 1, Chapter 27, “General Penalty," of this
code and the fee schedule that is adopted by the city council from time to
time. (Ord. 4034, 7-19-2016; amd. Ord. 4342, 5-16-2023)
6-3-3-2: BILLPOSTING:
   (A)   Where Prohibited; Penalty: It shall be unlawful for any person to
post, paste, print, paint, nail or otherwise fasten any handbill, sign, poster,
advertisement or notice of any kind whatsoever (other than legal notices
required to be posted by law, which may be posted upon telegraph, telephone or
electric light poles with the consent of the owners thereof), or cause the same
to be done, on any curbstone, flagstone, or any other portion or part of any
sidewalk or street, or upon any tree, lamppost, hitching post, telegraph pole,
telephone pole, electric light pole or pole used to support trolley wires or
other electrical conductors, hydrant bridge, public building, fountain or
bandstand or other public structure, within the limits of the city; except such
as may be required by the provisions of this code; and no person shall paste,
post, print, paint, nail or otherwise fasten any handbill, sign, poster,
advertisement or notice of any kind, or cause the same to be done, upon any
private wall, window, door, gate, fence, advertising board or sign, or on any
other private structure or building, unless he is the owner, agent or lessee
thereof, without the consent of the owner of such wall, window, door, gate,
fence, advertising board or sign, or other private building or structure. Any
person violating any of the provisions of this subsection shall be fined not
less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 849, 11-18-1980)
6-3-4: MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES:
6-3-4-1: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
Whoever shall be guilty of cruelty to any animal in any of the ways mentioned
in this section shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense:
   (A)   By overloading, overdriving, overworking, cruelly beating, torturing,
tormenting, mutilating or cruelly killing any animal, or causing or knowingly
allowing the same to be done.
   (B)   By cruelly working any old, maimed, infirm, sick, crippled or disabled
animal, or causing or knowingly allowing the same to be done.
   (C)   By unnecessarily failing to provide any animal in his charge of
custody, as owner or otherwise, with proper food, drink and shelter.
   (D)   By abandoning any old, maimed, infirm, sick or disabled animal.
   (E)   By carrying or driving, or causing to be carried or driven or kept,
any animal in an unnecessarily cruel manner.
   (F)   By inhumanely, unnecessarily or cruelly leaving tied out and exposed
to the elements or without proper blanket or covering, or without food and
drink, any animal, for an unreasonable length of time taking into consideration
the hours of the day or night and the nature of the temperature and weather.
(Ord. 849, 11-18-1980)
6-3-4-2: KILLING BIRDS:
It shall not be lawful for any person in the city, at any time, to kill or
attempt to kill, or to trap or attempt to trap, net, snare, harm or attempt to
harm any robin, bluebird, swallow, martin, mosquito hawk, whippoorwill, cuckoo,
woodpecker, catbird, brown thrasher, yellowhammer, redbird, finch, thrush,
lark, yellowbird, oriole, bobolink, or any songbird, nor shall it be lawful to
rob or destroy the nests of such birds, or of any or either of them; and any
person convicted of a violation of the provisions of this section shall forfeit
and pay a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. (Ord. 849, 11-18-1980)
6-3-4-3: POISONOUS VINES:
Whoever shall plant any poison ivy or other poisonous vine or plant within the
city so near any public sidewalk, street or alley as to injuriously affect
passersby, or whoever shall permit any such vine or plant to so grow in or upon
any premises owned or controlled by him, shall be fined not less than twenty
five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each
offense. (Ord. 849, 11-18-1980)
6-3-5: ADDITIONAL OFFENSES:
6-3-5-1: OBSCENITY:
It shall be unlawful to commit obscenity.
   (A)   Person, Defined: For purposes of this section "person" means an
individual, public or private corporation, government, partnership or
unincorporated association. Any reference to the masculine shall include the
feminine, and any reference to the singular shall include the plural.
   (B)   Elements Of The Offense: A person commits obscenity when, with
knowledge of the nature or content thereof, or recklessly failing to exercise
reasonable inspection which would have disclosed the nature or content thereof,
he:
      1.   Sells, delivers or provides, or offers or agrees to sell, deliver or
provide any obscene writing, picture, record or other representation or
embodiment of the obscene; or
      2.   Presents or directs an obscene play, dance or other performance or
participates directly in that portion thereof which makes it obscene; or
      3.   Publishes, exhibits or otherwise makes available anything obscene;
or
      4.   Performs an obscene act or otherwise presents an obscene exhibition
of his body for gain; or
      5.   Creates, buys, procures or possesses obscene matter or material with
intent to disseminate it in violation of this section, or of the penal laws or
regulations of any other jurisdiction; or
      6.   Advertises or otherwise promotes the sale of material represented or
held out by him to be obscene, whether or not it is obscene.
   (C)   Obscene, Defined: A thing is obscene if, considered as a whole, its
predominant appeal is to prurient interest, that is, a shameful or morbid
interest in nudity, sex or excretion, and if it goes substantially beyond
customary limits of candor in description or representation of such matters. A
thing is obscene even though the obscenity is latent, as in the case of
undeveloped photographs.
   (D)   Interpretation Of Evidence: Obscenity shall be judged with reference
to ordinary adults, except that it shall be judged with reference to children
or other specially susceptible audiences if it appears from the character of
the material or the circumstances of its dissemination to be specially designed
for or directed to such an audience.
Where circumstances of production, presentation, sale, dissemination,
distribution or publicity indicate that material is being commercially
exploited for the sake of its prurient appeal, such evidence is probative with
respect to the nature of the matter and can justify the conclusion that the
matter is utterly without redeeming social importance.
In any prosecution for an offense under this section evidence shall be
admissible to show:
      1.   The character of the audience for which the material was designed or
to which it was directed.
      2.   What the predominant appeal of the material would be for ordinary
adults or a special audience, and what effect, if any, it would probably have
on the behavior of such people.
      3.   The artistic, literary, scientific, educational or other merits of
the material, or absence thereof.
      4.   The degree, if any, of public acceptance of the material in this
state.
      5.   Appeal to prurient interest, or absence thereof, in advertising or
other promotion of the material.
      6.   Purpose of the author, creator, publisher or disseminator.
   (E)   Prima Facie Evidence: The creation, purchase, procurement or
possession of a mold, engraved plate or other embodiment of obscenity specially
adapted for reproducing multiple copies, or the possession of more than six (6)
copies of obscene material shall be prima facie evidence of an intent to
disseminate.
   (F)   Affirmative Defenses: It shall be an affirmative defense to obscenity
that the dissemination:
      1.   Was not for gain and was made to personal associates other than
children under eighteen (18) years of age.
      2.   Was to institutions or individuals having scientific or other
special justification for possession of such material.
   (G)   Severability Clause: If any section, subsection, subdivision,
paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase in this section, or any part thereof, or
application thereof to any person, firm, corporation, public agency or
circumstance, is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or
ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this section,
or any part hereof. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent of the
city council that this section would have been adopted had such
unconstitutional or invalid provision, clause, sentence, paragraph, section or
part thereof not then been included.
   (H)   Violation And Penalty: Any person who shall violate any of the
provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. A person who is
convicted shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). A second or subsequent
offense is punishable by a fine of not less than three hundred dollars
($300.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 904, 12-1-1981)
6-3-5-2: PUBLIC INDECENCY:
   (A)   Specific Acts: Any person of the age of seventeen (17) years and
upwards who performs any of the following acts in a public place commits a
public indecency:
      1.   An act of sexual intercourse, or
      2.   An act of deviate sexual conduct, or
      3.   A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or satisfy
the sexual desire of the person, or
      4.   A lewd fondling or caress of the body of another person of either
sex.
   (B)   Public Place, Defined: "Public place" for purposes of this section
means any place where the conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by
others.
   (C)   Sentence: The offense of public indecency is a misdemeanor. A person
who is convicted shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). A second or
subsequent offense is punishable by a fine of not less than three hundred
dollars ($300.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 908, 12-
1-1981)
6-3-5-3: HARMFUL MATERIAL:
   (A)   Elements Of The Offense: A person who with knowledge that a person is
a child, that is a person under eighteen (18) years of age, or who fails to
exercise reasonable care in ascertaining the true age of a child, knowingly
distributes to or sends or causes to be sent to, or exhibits to, or offers to
distribute or exhibit any harmful material to a child, is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   (B)   Definitions:
DISTRIBUTE: To transfer possession of, whether with or without consideration.
KNOWINGLY: As used in this section, means having knowledge of the contents of
the subject matter, or recklessly failing to exercise reasonable inspection
which would have disclosed the contents thereof.
MATERIAL: (A) Material is harmful if, to the average person, applying
contemporary standards, its predominant appeal, taken as a whole, is to
prurient interest, that is a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex or
excretion which goes substantially beyond customary limits of candor in
description or representation of such matters, and is material the redeeming
social importance of which is substantially less than its prurient appeal.
   (B)   "Material", as used in this section, means any writing, picture,
record or other representation or embodiment.
   (C)   Interpretation Of Evidence: The predominant appeal to prurient
interest of the material shall be judged with reference to average children of
the same general age of the child to whom such material was offered,
distributed, sent or exhibited, unless it appears from the nature of the matter
or the circumstances of its dissemination, distribution or exhibition that it
is designed for specially susceptible groups, in which case the predominant
appeal of the material shall be judged with reference to its intended or
probable recipient group.
In prosecutions under this section, where circumstances of production,
presentation, sale, dissemination, distribution or publicity indicate the
material is being commercially exploited for the sake of its prurient appeal,
such evidence is probative with respect to the nature of the material and can
justify the conclusion that the redeeming social importance of the material is
in fact substantially less than its prurient appeal.
   (D)   Sentence: The offense of harmful material is a misdemeanor. A person
who is convicted shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). A second or
subsequent offense is punishable by a fine of not less than three hundred
dollars ($300.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   (E)   Affirmative Defenses:
      1.   Nothing in this section shall prohibit any public library or any
library operated by an accredited institution of higher education from
circulating harmful material to any person under eighteen (18) years of age,
provided such circulation is in aid of a legitimate scientific or educational
purpose, and it shall be an affirmative defense in any prosecution for a
violation of this section that the act charged was committed in aid of
legitimate scientific or educational purposes.
      2.   Nothing in this section shall prohibit any parent from distributing
to his child any harmful material.
      3.   Proof that the defendant demanded, was shown and acted in reliance
upon any of the following documents as proof of the age of a child, shall be a
defense to any criminal prosecution under this section: a document issued by
the federal government or any state, county or municipal government or
subdivision or agency thereof, including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle
operator's license, a registration certificate issued under the federal
selective service act or an identification card issued to a member of the armed
forces.
   (F)   Child Falsifying Age: Any person under eighteen (18) years of age who
falsely states, either orally or in writing, that he is not under the age of
eighteen (18) years, or who presents or offers to any person any evidence of
age and identity which is false or not actually his own for the purpose of
ordering, obtaining, viewing or otherwise procuring or attempting to procure or
view any harmful material, is guilty of a misdemeanor. A person who is
convicted shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty five dollars
($25.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 905, 12-1-1981)
CHAPTER 4
ANIMALS
SECTION:
6-4-1: Definitions
6-4-2: General Regulations And Licensing
6-4-3: Animals In Heat
6-4-4: Leash For Dangerous Dog Or Other Animal; Exemptions; Injunction;
Nuisance
6-4-5: Exceptions
6-4-6: Penalty
6-4-7: Vicious Dogs
6-4-8: Keeping, Breeding, Caring For And Possessing Certain Birds And Animals
6-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words, terms and titles shall have the
following meanings:
ANIMAL: Any mammal, reptile or fowl, domestic or wild; or any living creature,
domestic or wild.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER: Any persons authorized by the Canton city council to
primarily catch strayed animals, care for impounded animals, and enforce this
chapter. The animal control officer shall have the power to issue citations,
notices to appear, sign complaints and do all other acts and deeds reasonably
necessary to effectuate the requirements of this chapter. Appointment of a
person as an animal control officer does not deny to any Canton police officer
the power to enforce this chapter.
ANIMAL IN HEAT: That period or duration of time when there is sexual excitement
in a female animal.
COMPETENT PERSON: A human being who is capable of controlling the animal in
question, and to whose commands the animal is obedient.
DANGEROUS ANIMAL; VICIOUS ANIMAL: Any wild mammal, reptile or fowl which is not
naturally tame and gentle but which is, as a breed or species of a wild nature
or disposition; or which, because of its size, vicious nature, or other
characteristics would constitute a danger to human life and safety or property
if not kept or maintained in a safe manner or in secure quarters. Also, any
domestic mammal, reptile or fowl which, because of its size or vicious
propensity or other characteristic, would constitute a danger to human life and
safety or property if not kept or maintained in a safe manner or in secure
quarters.
DOG: A domesticated carnivore, scientifically known as Canis familiaris, of
whatever breed, sex or variety.
FERAE NATURAE: Any animal which yet, as a species, retains its wild nature; any
nondomestic animal; any untamed animal.
HEALTH OFFICER: An officer of the Canton police department to whom the primary
responsibility of the city's various health codes has been delegated by the
chief of police.
INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES: The injection, subcutaneously or otherwise, as
approved by the Illinois department of agriculture, of antirabic vaccine
approved by said department.
LIVESTOCK: Any domestic animal.
OWNER: Any person having a right of property in an animal; or any person who
keeps or harbors such animal; or has an animal in his care; or who acts as such
animal's custodian; or who knowingly permits such animal to remain on or about
any premises occupied by such person. (Ord. 947, 9-7-1982)
6-4-2: GENERAL REGULATIONS AND LICENSING:
   (A)   Cruelty: No person shall cruelly treat any animal in the city in any
way; any person who inhumanely beats, underfeeds, overloads, abandons or
neglects any animal shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section.
(Ord. 947, 9-7-1982)
   (B)   Dangerous Animals: It shall be unlawful to keep any dangerous animal
or vicious animal of any kind within the corporate limits of the city. Whenever
any dangerous animal or any vicious animal bites or attacks any person or any
animal, the city attorney may petition any court of competent jurisdiction to
obtain a court order directing the dangerous animal or the vicious animal to be
destroyed. In addition to the foregoing acts, proof by a preponderance of the
evidence that any animal has caused annoyance to persons using the public
sidewalks, streets, or roads; or, has chased, worried, or molested any other
animal or child; or, has in any other manner caused damage or injury to
property or person, to include injury to other animals, shall be deemed, prima
facie, a dangerous animal or a vicious animal. (Ord. 1078, 8-20-1985)
   (C)   Noises: It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep any animals which
disturb the peace by loud noises at any time of the day or night.
Testimony of one or more persons residing or being in the neighborhood that
such animal disturbed their peace and quiet shall be prima facie proof that
such animal disturbed the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. (Ord. 947, 9-7-
1982)
   (D)   Strays: It shall be unlawful to permit, suffer, or allow any cattle,
horse, swine, sheep, goats, poultry or other animal, except as hereinafter
provided, to run at large in the city; any such animal running at large in any
public place or on property not owned or controlled by such animal's owner or
keeper, shall be impounded in the manner provided in this chapter. It shall be
unlawful to picket or tie any such animal in any of the streets or other public
places of the city for the purpose of grazing or feeding. This offense is malum
prohibitum in nature and no specific intent or special state of mind is
required to constitute an offense. (Ord. 1125, 12-2-1986)
   (E)   Killing Dangerous Animals: The members of the Canton police department
or any other person in the city, are authorized to kill any dangerous animal of
any kind when reasonably necessary for the protection of any person.
   (F)   Diseased Animals: No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious or
infectious disease shall be allowed to run at large, or to be exposed in any
public place whereby the health of man or beast may be affected; nor shall such
diseased animal be shipped or removed from the premises of the owner or keeper
thereof, except under the supervision of the chief of police or the health
officer.
It is hereby made the duty of the health officer to secure such disposition of
any diseased animal and such treatment of affected premises as to prevent the
communication and spread of the contagion or infection, except in cases where a
veterinarian licensed to practice in the state of Illinois has been hired or
retained by the owner or keeper of such diseased animal for the treatment of
such diseased animal and the affected premises. (Ord. 947, 9-7-1982)
   (G)   Housing: It shall be unlawful to keep or to have any goats, cattle,
rabbits, chickens or other barnyard or farm animals, within one hundred fifty
feet (150') of any residence, other than the residence of the person so keeping
or having such animals, within the city limits. It shall be unlawful to keep
any live swine or pigs within the city limits.
If housed within the city limits, no person shall cause or allow any stable,
coop, cage, or place where any animal is or may be housed, to become unclean or
a nuisance. (Ord. 3068, 6-17-2014)
   (H)   License Required: No dog or cat shall be permitted to be or remain in
the city without being licensed as hereinafter provided.
   (I)   License Fees: All dogs and/or cats kept in the city shall be
registered as to name and address of the owner and name, sex and breed of the
animal. At the time of such registration such owner shall obtain a license for
such animal and pay a fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each such animal so
licensed. It shall be the duty of said owner to cause such license tag to be
securely attached around the neck of such animal and kept there at all times
during the license period.
Each such license period shall run from the date of issuance and shall be valid
for three hundred sixty five (365) days. Licenses shall be purchased prior to
the beginning of the license period.
No dog license shall be issued unless a current certificate of inoculation for
rabies is presented. Licenses shall be issued by the city clerk and may be
issued by any licensed veterinarian having an office in the corporate limits.
Any veterinarian electing to issue city animal licenses shall be entitled to
keep one dollar ($1.00) for each license issued; the balance of four dollars
($4.00) shall be remitted to the city clerk on a periodic basis and shall be
remitted at least monthly. (Ord. 1768, 9-16-2003)
   (J)   Animals To Be Restrained: It is unlawful for any owner or keeper of
any animal to permit, suffer, or allow such animals to be off the premises of
such owner or keeper unless such animal is under restraint, or unless such
animal is upon the property of another with that property owner's consent. This
offense is malum prohibitum in nature and no specific intent or special state
of mind is required to constitute an offense. As used in this subsection,
"restraint" shall be taken to mean:
      1.   Under control by a line or leash not more than six feet (6') in
length, when said line or leash is held by a competent person; or
      2.   When within a vehicle or enclosure, to include pen or kennels; or
      3.   When not more than fifty feet (50') from a competent person, if such
animal is not annoying or worrying any person or domestic animal, or
trespassing on private property. (Ord. 1125, 12-2-1986)
   (K)   Animal Control Officer: The animal control officer is hereby charged
with the duty of impounding all strayed animals, all animals running at large,
and all animals alleged to be dangerous animals or vicious animals. The animal
control officer may declare an animal as dangerous or vicious based on the
definitions set forth in subsection
6-4-7(A) of this chapter. The animal control officer shall serve the owner or
keeper of the animal with notice that the animal has been preliminarily
declared dangerous or vicious and said notice will provide the opportunity to
object to such classification. Service of the notice can be effected by in
person delivery or by registered mail at the address where the animal was last
registered with the city of Canton. The owner or keeper of the animal has the
opportunity to object to the classification of the animal as dangerous or
vicious before a hearing officer within three (3) days of receipt of the notice
preliminarily declaring the animal to be vicious.
At a hearing before the hearing officer, the city and the keeper or owner of
the dog will have the opportunity to present testimony and evidence as to the
nature of the animal. If the hearing officer upholds the designation of
dangerous or vicious, the hearing officer may order that the animal be spayed
or neutered and/or microchipped at the owner's or keeper's expense, restrained
or other reasonable action which will protect the public. The order of the
hearing officer is in addition to any penalties that may be sought by the city
attorney for violations of this code. Any subsequent violations of subsection
6-4-7(A) of this chapter will be handled under subsection (B) of this section.
(Ord. 1880, 8-15-2006)
   (L)   Redemption Of Impounded Animal: Any animal impounded under this
chapter may be redeemed by such animal's owner or keeper by paying all
applicable fees as assessed by the Fulton County animal control facility. Said
fees will be due and payable to the Fulton County animal control facility. Said
animals may be redeemed at the Fulton County animal control facility located at
22988 Illinois 9 Highway, Canton, Illinois. Said fees are subject to revision
from time to time as the county of Fulton deems appropriate and said changes
will be reflected by resolution.
No animal shall be released from impoundment unless proof of proper rabies
inoculation is first presented to the animal control officer. (Ord. 1907, 7-3-
2007)
   (M)   Impoundment Of Licensed Animals; Notice: In addition to the notice
requirements of subsection (K) of this section, written notice shall be mailed
to the registered owner of any animal wearing a current license tag
concurrently with the posting of notice required by subsection (K) of this
section. The animal control officer shall give such written notice and shall
retain a copy of such notice with proof of service for the city files. (Ord.
947, 9-7-1982)
   (N)   Animal Bites: Whenever any animal bites a person, the owner or keeper
of such animal, or, any person having knowledge of such bite, shall immediately
notify the chief of police who shall order in writing that such animal be
impounded as above set forth for a period of fourteen (14) consecutive days,
exclusive of the day of the bite. The animal shall be examined immediately
after it has bitten a person by a veterinarian licensed to practice in the
state and shall be examined again at the end of such fourteen (14) day period
by the same veterinarian. If at the end of the fourteen (14) day period the
same veterinarian, in writing, certifies the animal to be free from rabies,
such animal shall be released from impoundment if its owner or keeper first
pays all impoundment costs and fees as above set forth and, also, first
reimburses the city for the actual expenses of having such animal examined by a
veterinarian as aforesaid. If the owner or keeper fails to redeem such animal
from impoundment, it shall be destroyed at the end of said fourteen (14) day
period. If the animal dies during the fourteen (14) day period, its head shall
be sent to appropriate state authorities for examination for rabies. The
fourteen (14) day impoundment period contemplated in this subsection may be
extended for such other reasonable period as may seem necessary to protect the
public health and/or safety by the chief of police. (Ord. 1078, 8-20-1985)
   (O)   Trucks Containing Livestock: It is unlawful to stand or park any truck
or vehicle containing livestock in the city for a period of time longer than
five (5) minutes, except for loading or unloading.
   (P)   Nuisance By Animals: It is unlawful for any owner, keeper or walker of
any animal to permit such animal to discharge or deposit such animal's excreta
upon any public or private property, other than the property of the owner or
keeper of such animal, if such owner, keeper or walker does not immediately
thereafter remove and clean up such animal's excreta from the public or private
property. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to negate the
requirement of this chapter relating to unclean or unwholesome housing of
animals or to negate the requirements of any other portion of this chapter.
(Ord. 947, 9-7-1982)
   (Q)   Mandatory Rabies Inoculation: Every owner or keeper of a dog or cat
kept or found within the corporate limits of the city shall cause such dog or
cat to be inoculated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian at such
intervals as may be established by regulations promulgated pursuant to the
Illinois animal control act 1 . For purposes of this subsection the term "cat"
is defined as a domesticated carnivorous mammal scientifically known as Felis
domestica, of whatever breed, sex or variety. (Ord. 1200, 6-21-1988)
   (R)   Fees: As applicable in this chapter, the following fees are hereby in
effect:
 
Pick up fee      $25.00  
Boarding fee     18.00  for first day, $10.00 per each additional day
State safety tax 25.00   
Surrender fee    30.00   
 
Said fees are subject to revision from time to time as the county of Fulton
deems appropriate and said changes will be reflected by resolution. (Ord. 1907,
7-3-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. 510 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
6-4-3: ANIMALS IN HEAT:
A female animal which has not been spayed and when in heat shall be confined by
her owner in an enclosed place so that male animals of the same species cannot
enter such place. (Ord. 947, 9-7-1982)
6-4-4: LEASH FOR DANGEROUS DOG OR OTHER ANIMAL; EXEMPTIONS; INJUNCTION;
NUISANCE:
It is unlawful for any person to maintain a public nuisance by permitting any
dangerous dog or other animal to leave the premises of its owner when not under
control by leash or other recognized control methods.
Guide dogs for the blind or hearing impaired, support dogs for the physically
handicapped, and sentry, guard, or police owned dogs are exempt from this
section; provided, an attack or injury to a person occurs while the dog is
performing duties as expected. To qualify for exemption under this section,
each such dog shall be currently inoculated against rabies in accordance with
state law. It shall be the duty of the owner of such exempted dog to notify the
chief of police of changes of address. In the case of a sentry or guard dog,
the owner shall keep the chief of police advised of the location where such dog
will be stationed. The chief of police shall provide police and fire
departments with a categorized list of such exempted dogs, and shall promptly
notify such departments of any address changes reported to him.
The city, or any citizen of the city in which a dangerous dog or other animal
exists may file a complaint in the name of the city to enjoin all persons from
maintaining or permitting such, to abate the same, and to enjoin the owner of
such dog or other animal from permitting same to leave his premises when not
under control by leash or other recognized control methods. Upon the filing of
a complaint in the circuit court, if satisfied that this nuisance may exist,
shall grant a preliminary injunction with bond in such amount as the court may
determine enjoining the defendant from maintaining such nuisance. If the
existence of the nuisance is established, the owner of such dog or other animal
shall be in violation of this section, and in addition, the court shall enter
an order restraining the owner from maintaining such nuisance and may order
that such dog or other animal be humanely dispatched. (Ord. 1164, 9-17-1987)
6-4-5: EXCEPTIONS:
None of the provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted to unreasonably be
applied to the owners or users of seeing eye dogs. (Ord. 1164, 9-17-1987)
6-4-6: PENALTY:
Violations of section
6-4-2 of this chapter shall be required to appear in court. Any person who is
convicted of violating subsection
6-4-2(A) of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00), exclusive of court costs, for each such occurrence. Violation of
subsections
6-4-2(B) through (R) through section
6-4-5 of this chapter shall be governed by title 1, chapter 27, "General
Penalty", of this code and the fee schedule that is adopted by city council
from time to time. (Ord. 4034, 7-19-2016)
6-4-7: VICIOUS DOGS:
   (A)   Definition Of Terms: As used in this section:
    OWNER: Any person, firm, corporation, organization or department possessing
or harboring or having the care or custody of a dog.
   VICIOUS DOG: 1. Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to
attack unprovoked, to cause injury to, or otherwise threaten the safety of
human beings or domestic animals; or
      2.   Any dog which, without provocation, attacks or bites, or has
attacked or bitten, a human being or domestic animal; or
      3.   Any dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of
dogfighting, or any dog trained for dogfighting.
A vicious dog is "unconfined" if the dog is not securely confined indoors or
confined in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure upon the premises
of the owner of the dog. The pen or structure must have secure sides and a
secure top attached to the sides. If the pen or structure has no bottom secured
to the sides, the sides must be embedded into the ground no less than one foot
(1'). All such pens or structures must be adequately lighted and kept in a
clean and sanitary condition. (Ord. 1199, 6-21-1988; amd. Ord. 1950, 10-21-
2008)
   (B)   Confinement: The owner of a vicious dog shall not suffer or permit the
dog to go unconfined.
   (C)   Leash And Muzzle: The owner of a vicious dog shall not suffer or
permit the dog to go beyond the premises of the owner unless the dog is
securely muzzled and restrained by a chain or leash, and under the physical
restraint of a person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause
injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration, but shall
prevent it from biting any human or animal.
   (D)   Signs: The owner of a vicious dog shall display in a prominent place
on his or her premises a clearly visible warning sign indicating that there is
a vicious dog on the premises. A similar sign is required to be posted on the
pen or kennel of the animal.
   (E)   Dogfighting: No person, firm, corporation, organization or department
shall possess or harbor or maintain care or custody of any dog for the purpose
of dogfighting, or train, torment, badger, bait or use any dog for the purpose
of causing or encouraging the dog to attack human beings or domestic animals.
   (F)   Penalties: Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or
imprisonment of not more than six (6) months in jail, or by both fine and
imprisonment.
   (G)   Severability: If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this
section is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision
of any court, such a decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this section. (Ord. 1199, 6-21-1988)
6-4-8: KEEPING, BREEDING, CARING FOR AND POSSESSING CERTAIN BIRDS AND ANIMALS:
   (A)   Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases when used in this
section, shall have the meaning ascribed in this subsection, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ANIMAL: Every nonhuman species of animal, both domestic and wild.
CAT: All domestic members of the feline family, Felis catus.
DOG: Includes all domestic members of the canine family, Canis familiaris.
DOMESTIC ANIMALS: The following are considered to be domestic animals:
      1.   Dogs (not including hybrids of dogs).
      2.   Cats (not including hybrids of cats).
      3.   Domestic rodents (hamsters, guinea pigs, white mice, white rats,
etc.).
      4.   Farm animals (equines, bovines, swine, ovine, caprine, poultry and
rabbits).
      5.   Nonlife threatening, nonpoisonous reptiles or amphibians.
      6.   Nonlife threatening, nonpoisonous fish.
      7.   All birds, except those protected as wild birds by state or federal
statute.
EXOTIC ANIMALS: Any nondomestic animal not native to the state.
KEEP: Owning, possessing or harboring. The term "harboring" shall include
regular feeding.
NUISANCE: For purposes of this chapter, an animal is considered a nuisance when
it causes inconvenience or disturbance to other persons by reason of noise,
odor or when said animal:
      1.   Damages real or personal property other than the owner's;
      2.   Causes unsanitary, dangerous or unreasonably offensive conditions;
      3.   Causes a disturbance by excessive barking, caterwauling or other
noisemaking;
      4.   Chases vehicles;
      5.   Chases, molests, attacks, bites, interferes with or physically
intimidates any person while on or off the premises of the owner;
      6.   Chases, molests, attacks, bites, or interferes with other animals
while off the premises of the owner.
WILD ANIMAL: Any living member of the animal kingdom (including exotic animals)
other than a domestic animal. (Ord. 1467, 6-6-1995; amd. Ord. 1914, 11-20-2007)
   (B)   Possession Of Certain Animals Prohibited: No person, partnership, firm
or corporation shall keep, harbor, possess, care for, act as custodian for or
have a right of property in:
      1.   A wild animal (including, but not limited to, all animals enumerated
in section 1 of the dangerous animal act of Illinois) except circuses, zoos,
veterinary hospitals or clinics, animal shelters which must be legally licensed
pursuant to federal and/or state statutes, or facilities licensed and regularly
inspected by the USDA and which are located within a proper zoning
classification.
      2.   Any animal or bird which has been declared "rare" and/or
"endangered" by any national government, recognized international organization
or by interim treaty, including animals listed in the federal animal welfare
act.
      3.   Any exotic animal or bird.
   (C)   Sale, Lease Or Transfer: No person shall sell, lease or transfer any
of the animals described in subsection (B)1 of this section except to a legally
licensed dealer, circus or zoo. (Ord. 1467, 6-6-1995)
   (D)   Keeping Of Dogs, Cats And Rabbits: Notwithstanding any other
requirements of this chapter, no household or individuals comprising a
household shall keep or maintain more adult dogs and/or adult cats and/or adult
rabbits on or about his/her household or place of residence than can be
reasonably cared for without causing a nuisance.
   (E)   Limit On The Number Of Animals: No household shall harbor four (4) or
more animals (as defined in this section) over the age of six (6) months on
property within the city without obtaining a multiple pet license under this
chapter. Even households or individuals who have obtained multiple pet licenses
cannot maintain more adult dogs and/or adult cats and/or adult rabbits on or
about his/her household or place of residence than can be reasonably cared for
without causing a nuisance.
The licensing requirement shall not apply to property operated as an animal
hospital or veterinary clinic when operated by a veterinarian licensed under
the Illinois veterinary medicine and surgical practice act of 2004.
The licensing requirement shall not apply to individuals or households engaged
in the business of pet shop operator, dog dealer, kennel operator, cattery
operator, operator of a guard dog service, an animal control facility or animal
shelter, as defined by the animal welfare act 1 . The city may request verified
financial reports from a certified accountant or tax professional providing
sufficient information and detail to establish that individuals or member(s) of
the household are engaged in the professions outlined above. The city may
request proof of a current license issued by the Illinois department of
agriculture pursuant to the animal welfare act 2 . Inability to produce
appropriate financial records or a state license will be considered prima facie
evidence of a violation of this subsection.
The licensing requirement shall not apply to households engaged in the act of
foster care for animals in need in which case the city may request
documentation from the referring agency providing sufficient information and
detail to establish that member(s) of the household is engaged in the act of
foster care for animals or the city may request proof of a current license
issued by the Illinois department of agriculture pursuant to 225 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 605/3.2. Inability to produce appropriate financial records
or a state license will be considered prima facie evidence of a violation of
this subsection.
      1.   Multiple Pet License: Multiple pet owners, excepting those above,
shall obtain an annual license from the city clerk upon application for
issuance or renewal of a multiple pet license and payment of a fee. Such
license shall be obtained no later than thirty (30) days after assuming
ownership of a fourth pet and must be renewed annually by January 1. The
initial fee shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) and the annual renewal fee
shall be ten dollars ($10.00). Payment of a license or renewal fee by a
multiple pet owner shall not exempt such licensee from payment of any other
city registration fees for each pet owned by him. (Ord. 1914, 11-20-2007)
   (F)   Farm Animals: Except as otherwise provided in this code, all farm
animals, including those classified as pets, shall be prohibited. (Ord. 3069,
6-17-2014)
   (G)   Public Display: It shall be unlawful for any person to display in
public in the city any animal, bird or reptile which will reasonably cause fear
or apprehension of bodily injury in a person of normal sensibilities. This
subsection shall not apply to animals, birds or reptiles in confinement or in
cages. (Ord. 1485, 10-17-1995; amd. Ord. 1914, 11-20-2007)
   (H)   Penalty; Revocation; Impoundment:
      1.   Penalty: Violation of this section shall cause a penalty to be
issued in the form of a fine of not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
      2.   Revocation Of Multiple Pet License: Upon conviction or plea of a
second violation of the multiple pet license requirements pursuant to this
chapter, and each subsequent violation, the city may revoke the multiple pet
license for a period of not less than three (3) months nor more than two (2)
years, the length of such revocation period to be determined by the number and
severity of the violations. After expiration of the revocation period, the
license shall not automatically be reinstated. The former licensees must
reapply for the license and show an ability to conform to the existing
ordinances before he or she may be issued a multiple pet license. During the
revocation period, the owner shall either relinquish ownership of his or her
pets to an animal shelter or place his or her pets in the care of another
person. A multiple pet license may also be revoked if the licensee fails to
consent to an inspection of the licensed premises after a request for an
inspection by the city based upon the city's good faith belief that violations
of this section have occurred.
      3.   Impoundment Of Multiple Pets: The city may impound the pets of any
multiple pet owner if such owner does not hold a multiple pet license. Such
pets shall be redeemed by the owner upon payment to the city the lawful fees
accrued pursuant to this chapter and after application and approval for a
multiple pet owner license. (Ord. 1914, 11-20-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 605 et seq.
2 2. 225 ILCS 605/3.
CHAPTER 5
DOGS AND CATS
(Rep. by Ord. 947, 9-7-1982)
CHAPTER 6
DUTCH ELM DISEASE
SECTION:
6-6-1: Nuisance Declared
6-6-2: Inspection
6-6-3: Owner, Abatement
6-6-4: City, Abatement
6-6-5: Penalty
6-6-1: NUISANCE DECLARED:
Any tree or part thereof, whether living or dead, infected with or attacked by
ceratocystis ulmi (the Dutch elm disease), or any other disease or parasite,
and any tree which has become hazardous to life or property because of age or
neglect of the owner thereof, is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall
be unlawful to permit any such tree or part thereof to remain in the city.
(Ord. 852, 11-18-1980)
6-6-2: INSPECTION:
The director of public works or some other person designated by him is hereby
authorized to inspect and examine any tree in the city, to determine whether or
not it is infected by the Dutch elm disease, or is in a hazardous condition, as
in this chapter set forth. Upon discovering that any such tree is so infected
or is in a hazardous condition, as aforesaid, the owner or occupant of the
premises shall be notified of this fact. (Ord. 852, 11-18-1980)
6-6-3: OWNER, ABATEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of any land upon which such
diseased or hazardous tree exists to take action within ten (10) days after
such notice to remove and burn said tree, as aforesaid, and shall, within
thirty (30) days of said notice have such diseased or infected tree removed and
burned. (Ord. 84, 8-6-1963)
6-6-4: CITY, ABATEMENT:
Where the owner or occupant of the premises concerned does not properly dispose
of such infected or hazardous tree, as herein set forth, after such notice, or
where the owner or occupant cannot be located, the director of public works, or
any other person designated by him, is hereby authorized to remove and destroy
such tree or trees, engaging such services from the city and its employees as
may be necessary to properly remove and destroy such tree or trees, at the
expense of the party or parties permitting same. (Ord. 852, 11-18-1980)
6-6-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less
than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
a diseased or infected tree or hazardous tree or any portion thereof remains on
the premises more than thirty (30) days after notice has been given in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 852, 11-18-1980)
CHAPTER 7
ABANDONED, WRECKED VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-7-1: Definitions
6-7-2: Abandonment Of Vehicle
6-7-3: Leaving On Street
6-7-4: Disposition Of Vehicles
6-7-5: Prima Facie Evidence
6-7-6: Police Authority
6-7-7: Enforcement
6-7-8: Penalty
6-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this chapter:
ABANDONED VEHICLE: Any vehicle which is described in any one or more of the
following categories:
   (A)   In a state of disrepair rendering it incapable of being operated in
its condition, or
   (B)   Unregistered for over ninety (90) days, or
   (C)   One on a public street or alley which has not been moved or used for
seven (7) consecutive days and is apparently deserted.
PROPERTY: Any real property within the city which is not a street or highway.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel including alleys.
VEHICLE: A machine propelled by power other than human power designed to travel
along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and transport
persons or property or pull machinery, and shall include, without limitation,
automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle and tractor. (Ord. 1591, 7-21-1998)
6-7-2: ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLE:
No person shall abandon a vehicle within the city and no person shall leave a
vehicle at any place within the city for such time and under such circumstances
as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to be an abandoned vehicle. (Ord.
1591, 7-21-1998)
6-7-3: LEAVING ON STREET:
No person shall leave or park any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked
or junked vehicle on any street or highway within the city. (Ord. 1591, 7-21-
1998)
6-7-4: DISPOSITION OF VEHICLES:
No person in charge or control of any property within the city, whether as
owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise, shall allow any partially
dismantled nonoperating, wrecked, junked, discarded or abandoned vehicle to
remain on such property longer than ten (10) days; and no person shall leave
any such vehicle on any property within the city for a longer time than ten
(10) days; except that this chapter shall not apply with regard to a vehicle in
an enclosed building; a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise
operated in a lawful place and manner, when necessary to the operation of such
business enterprise; or a vehicle in any appropriate storage or depository
maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city. (Ord. 1591, 7-21-1998;
amd. Ord. 1853-A, 1-3-2006)
6-7-5: PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE:
It shall be prima facie evidence that a vehicle is abandoned if state law
requires registration and it has been unregistered for over ninety (90) days,
or if the motor has been removed from a motor vehicle, or if the tires have
been removed. (Ord. 1591, 7-21-1998)
6-7-6: POLICE AUTHORITY:
The police department shall have the authority to tow any vehicle abandoned
without justification upon forty eight (48) hours' written notice at the last
known address to the last registered owner of the vehicle or to the owner of
the real estate where it is located. (Ord. 1591, 7-21-1998)
6-7-7: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the health officer of the city to investigate and make
report of apparent violations of this chapter to the police chief of the city
who shall, thereupon, take the necessary steps to enforce this chapter. Nothing
herein contained, however, shall be construed to prevent any other person from
making complaint with the proper authorities for any alleged violation of this
chapter. (Ord. 1591, 7-21-1998)
6-7-8: PENALTY:
Violations of this chapter shall be governed by title 1, chapter 27, "General
Penalty", of this code and the fee schedule that is adopted by city council
from time to time. (Ord. 4034, 7-19-2016)
CHAPTER 8
FAIR HOUSING
SECTION:
6-8-1: Declaration Of Policy
6-8-2: Definitions
6-8-3: Unfair Real Estate Practice
6-8-4: Duties Of Canton Committee On Community And Industrial Development
6-8-5: Enforcement Procedure
6-8-6: Penalty
6-8-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
   (A)   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city, in order to
promote the general welfare of the community, to assure full and equal
opportunity to all residents of the city in the obtaining of fair and adequate
housing for themselves and their families without discrimination against them
solely because of their age, sex, race, color, religion, national origin,
ancestry, disability or familial status.
   (B)   It is further declared to be the policy of the city that, in a spirit
of harmony, this council and its committee on community and industrial
development shall endeavor to work with and cooperate with the homeowners and
realtors of the city to the end that the declared purpose of this chapter can
be accomplished in an orderly, lawful and proper fashion. (Ord. 650, 5-16-1978;
amd. Ord. 4188, 4-16-2020)
6-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the
context, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed in this section:
COMMITTEE: The city of Canton committee on community and industrial
development.
DISCRIMINATE; DISCRIMINATION: Any difference in the terms of the sale, lease,
rental or financing of any real property offered to a person applying for such
sale, rental, lease or financing because of the age, sex, race, color,
religion, national origin, ancestry, disability, or familial status of such
person.
OWNER: The person holding title or having legal or equitable ownership or
legally representing the person who holds title to property or has legal
ownership.
REAL ESTATE BROKER: Any natural person, partnership, association or corporation
or agent thereof, who for a fee or other valuable consideration offers, sells,
purchases, exchanges or rents, or negotiates for the sale, purchase, exchange
or rental of the real property of another or holds himself or herself out as
engaged in the business of selling, purchasing, exchanging or renting the real
property of another, or collects rental for the use of the real property of
another.
UNLAWFUL HOUSING PRACTICE: The committing of any act prohibited by section 6-8-
3 of this chapter. (Ord. 650, 5-16-1978; amd. Ord. 4188, 4-16-2020)
6-8-3: UNFAIR REAL ESTATE PRACTICE:
   (A)   It shall be an unfair or discriminatory practice for any owner,
lessee, sublessee, assignee, managing agent or other person, firm or
corporation or any agent of these:
      1.   To withhold listings or refuse to sell, rent, lease, assign or
sublease any real property or part, portion or interest therein to any person
solely because of his or her age, sex, race, color, religion, national origin,
ancestry, disability or familial status.
      2.   To discriminate against any person solely because of his or her age,
sex, race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, disability or familial
status, in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale, rental, lease,
assignment or sublease of any real property or any part, portion or interest
therein.
      3.   To discriminate or participate in discrimination in connection with
borrowing or lending money, guaranteeing loans, accepting mortgages, or
otherwise obtaining or making available funds for the purchase, acquisition,
construction, rehabilitation, repairs or maintenance of any real property
because of age, sex, race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry,
disability or familial status.
      4.   To directly or indirectly advertise or in any other manner indicate
or publicize that the purchase, rental, lease assignment or sublease of any
real property or any part, portion or interest therein, by persons of any
particular age, sex, race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry,
disability or familial status, is unwelcome, objectionable, not acceptable or
not solicited. Further, it is prohibited to make, print, or publish advertise
that indicate a preference, limitation or discrimination because of age, sex,
race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, disability or familial
status.
      5.   To solicit for sale, lease or listing for sale or lease any real
property on the ground of loss of value due to the present or prospective entry
into the neighborhood of any person or persons of any particular age, sex,
race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, disability or familial
status.
      6.   To make, distribute or cause to be made or distributed any written
material or statements designed to induce any owner of real estate to sell or
lease his property because of any present or prospective change in the age,
sex, race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, disability or familial
status of the proposed buyer or tenant. (Ord. 650, 5-16-1978; amd. Ord. 4188,
4-16-2020)
6-8-4: DUTIES OF CANTON COMMITTEE ON COMMUNITY AND INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT:
It shall be the duty of the committee to:
   (A)   Receive or initiate, record and investigate complaints charging any
unlawful housing practice.
   (B)   Seek conciliation of parties involved in such complaints by
conciliation, conferences, hold hearings where necessary, make findings of
fact, issue recommendations, and report its findings of fact and
recommendations in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 650,
5-16-1978)
6-8-5: ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE:
   (A)   The committee shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be
necessary to carry out the purposes and provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Any person aggrieved in any manner by any violation of any provision
of this chapter may file a written complaint setting forth his grievance with
the chairman of the Canton committee on community and industrial development
who shall mark the date of filing thereon. Said complaint shall be filed within
one hundred twenty (120) days after the violation alleged in the complaint.
Said complaint shall state name and address of the complainant and of the
persons against whom the complaint is brought and shall also state the alleged
facts surrounding the alleged violation of this chapter.
   (C)   Said committee is hereby fully authorized immediately to investigate
any such complaint filed. If the committee determines that the respondent has
not engaged in any unlawful practice, it shall state its findings of fact in
writing and dismiss the complaint. If the committee determines after such
investigation that probable cause exists for the allegation made in the
complaint, the committee shall set a date for a conciliation conference. At
such conference the committee or a subcommittee of the committee shall
interview the complainant and the person or persons against whom the complaint
has been directed and shall attempt to resolve the complaint by all proper
methods of conciliation and persuasion. If such attempts at conciliation are
not successful within sixty (60) days after the filing of the complaint, the
committee shall then proceed promptly with full hearing of the complaint.
   (D)   Such hearing shall be conducted by the committee, or a subcommittee
thereof, upon due and reasonable notice to all parties. The committee shall
have full power to subpoena witnesses and pertinent documents and to take sworn
testimony. Any party alleged to have violated this chapter shall be entitled to
be represented by counsel and shall have the right to call witnesses on his
behalf and to cross examine witnesses. At the conclusion of the hearings, the
committee shall make a written report and recommendations which shall be served
by mail upon the complainant and respondent. No report shall be delayed more
than sixty (60) days after date of the issuance of notice for commencement of
the first conciliation conference.
   (E)   A copy of said written report and recommendations shall be delivered
to the council and if any act of discrimination has been determined, the report
shall include a recommendation to the council that the city attorney prosecute
any person or persons who have violated any of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 650, 5-16-1978)
6-8-6: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 258, 9-3-1968)
CHAPTER 9
AUXILIARY POLICE FORCE
SECTION:
6-9-1: Title
6-9-2: Creation
6-9-3: Requirements
6-9-4: Course Of Training
6-9-5: Fingerprinted
6-9-6: Uniforms
6-9-7: Subject To Discipline
6-9-8: Duties
6-9-9: Duties Restricted
6-9-10: Powers
6-9-1: TITLE:
This chapter may be referred to as the AUXILIARY POLICE ORDINANCE. (Ord. 417,
4-3-1973)
6-9-2: CREATION:
An auxiliary police force for the city is hereby created and established. The
members thereof shall consist of thirty (30) auxiliary policemen, each of whom
shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice, consent and approval of not
less than two-thirds (2/3) of the city council. Such appointments shall be made
on the first Tuesday of each May hereafter and at such intervals thereafter as
may be necessary to fill any vacancy and so as to keep the complement of the
auxiliary police force at its maximum of thirty (30) members at all times or as
near thereto as may be. (Ord. 837, 9-2-1980)
6-9-3: REQUIREMENTS:
Auxiliary policemen shall meet the following minimum requirements: Each of them
shall be adult persons residing no more than ten (10) miles beyond the
corporate limits of the city of Canton as the same now or may hereafter exist,
shall not be members of the regular police department of the city, shall be of
good morals and character and shall not have ever been convicted of a felony or
any crime involving moral turpitude. (Ord. 592, 7-5-1977)
6-9-4: COURSE OF TRAINING:
Prior to entering upon any of their duties, each auxiliary policeman shall
receive a course of training in the use of weapons and such other police
procedures as shall be appropriate for the exercise of their powers conferred
upon by this chapter and as shall be determined and provided by the corporate
authorities of the city from time to time. (Ord. 417, 4-3-1973)
6-9-5: FINGERPRINTED:
A candidate for appointment to the auxiliary police force of the city, as a
condition to appointment, shall be fingerprinted and shall provide such other
personal data as may be requested of him by the police chief of the city, such
prints and data to be maintained by said police chief. (Ord. 417, 4-3-1973)
6-9-6: UNIFORMS:
Auxiliary policemen shall wear appropriate uniforms while on duty. Such
uniforms shall not be provided at the expense of the city. Such uniforms shall
be different and distinct from those used by the members of the regular police
department of the city and any identification symbols worn thereon shall
likewise be different and distinct from those used by members of the regular
police department of the city. Such uniforms and identification symbols shall
be as provided by the corporate authorities of the city. (Ord. 592, 7-5-1977)
6-9-7: SUBJECT TO DISCIPLINE:
Auxiliary policemen shall at all times during the performance of their duties
be subject to the following discipline: They shall be subject to the direction
and control of the police chief of the city. (Ord. 417, 4-3-1973)
6-9-8: DUTIES:
Auxiliary police members shall only be assigned to perform the following duties
in the city:
   (A)   To aid or direct traffic within the city.
   (B)   To aid in the control of natural or manmade disasters.
   (C)   To aid in cases of civil disorder as directed by the chief of police
of the city; provided, that in cases that render it impractical for members of
the regular police department to perform the regular and normal police duties,
the chief of police of this city may (and he is hereby authorized) to assign
auxiliary policemen to perform such normal and regular police duties as may be
necessary. (Ord. 417, 4-3-1973)
6-9-9: DUTIES RESTRICTED:
The duties of auxiliary policemen shall be restricted and confined to the areas
above provided. Auxiliary police officers shall not carry firearms except with
the expressed permission of the chief of police and then only while in uniform
and in the performance of their duties. (Ord. 417, 4-3-1973)
6-9-10: POWERS:
In addition to the foregoing duties, auxiliary policemen, when on duty, shall
have the powers now specified and which may hereafter be specified in the
legislative enactments of the state of Illinois. Auxiliary policemen do not
have the power to act as conservators of the peace. (Ord. 2020, 11-2-2010)
CHAPTER 10
PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
SECTION:
6-10-1: Title
6-10-2: Definitions
6-10-3: Parental Responsibility; Failure To Exercise
6-10-4: Penalty
6-10-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 603-A, 9-6-1977)
6-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the terms
specified have the meanings ascribed to them:
LEGAL GUARDIAN: A person appointed guardian, or given custody, of a minor by a
circuit court of the state of Illinois, but does not include a person appointed
guardian, or given custody, of a minor under the juvenile court act.
MINOR: A person who is above the age of eleven (11) years, but not yet nineteen
(19) years of age. (Ord. 603-A, 9-6-1977)
6-10-3: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY; FAILURE TO EXERCISE:
The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor residing with such
parent or legal guardian shall be presumed, in the absence of evidence to the
contrary, to have failed to exercise proper parental responsibility and said
minor shall be deemed to have committed the acts described below with the
knowledge and permission of the parent or guardian, in violation of this
chapter, upon the occurrence of the events described in subsections (A), (B)
and (C) of this section:
   (A)   An unemancipated minor residing with said parent or legal guardian
shall either be adjudicated to be in violation of any ordinance, law or statute
prohibiting wilful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or property,
or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another official agency
resulting from an admission of guilt of violation of any ordinance, law or
statute prohibiting wilful and malicious acts causing injury to a person or
property; and
   (B)   Said parent or legal guardian shall have received a written notice
thereof, either by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or
by personal service, with a certificate of personal service returned, from the
police department of the city of Canton following said adjudication or
nonjudicial sanction; and
   (C)   If at any time within one year following receipt of the notice set
forth in subsection (B) of this section, said minor is either adjudicated to be
in violation of any ordinance, law or statute as described in subsection (A) of
this section, or shall have incurred nonjudicial sanctions from another
official agency resulting from an admission of guilt or violation of any
ordinance, law or statute as described in subsection (A) of this section. (Ord.
603-A, 9-6-1977)
6-10-4: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall
be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00), nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 603-A, 9-6-1977)
CHAPTER 11
LIBRARY THEFT
SECTION:
6-11-1: Title
6-11-2: Definitions
6-11-3: Acts Of Theft
6-11-4: Posting Of Warning
6-11-5: Penalty
6-11-6: Restitution
6-11-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the LIBRARY THEFT chapter.
(Ord. 1106, 3-4-1986)
6-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings,
unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended:
LIBRARY CARD: A card or plate issued by a library facility for purposes of
identifying the person to whom the library card was issued as authorized to
borrow, subject to all limitations and conditions imposed on such borrowing by
the library facility issuing such card, library material.
LIBRARY FACILITY: Any city library, other public library, or any library of a
museum, educational, historical or eleemosynary institution, organization or
society.
LIBRARY MATERIAL: Any book, plate, picture, photograph, engraving, painting,
sculpture, statue, artifact, drawing, map, newspaper, pamphlet, broadside,
magazine, manuscript, document, letter, microfilm, sound recording, audiovisual
material, magnetic or other tape, electronic data processing record of other
documentary, written or printed material regardless of physical form or
characteristics, or any part thereof, belonging to, or on loan to or otherwise
in the custody of a library facility.
PREMISES OF A LIBRARY FACILITY: The interior of a building, structure or other
enclosure in which a library facility is located and in which the library
facility keeps, displays and makes available for inspection or borrowing
library material, but for purpose of this chapter, such premises do not include
the exterior appurtenances to such building, structure or enclosure nor the
land on which such building, structure or other enclosure is located. (Ord.
1106, 3-4-1986)
6-11-3: ACTS OF THEFT:
A person commits the offense of library theft when he or she does any of the
following acts:
   (A)   Removes any library material from the premises of a library facility
without authority to do so; or
   (B)   Conceals any library material upon his or her person or among his or
her belongings, while still in the premises of a library facility and in such
manner that the library material is not visible through ordinary observation
although there may be some notice of its presence, and removes such library
material beyond the last point in the premises of that library facility at
which library material may be borrowed in accordance with procedures
established by the library facility for the borrowing of library material; or
   (C)   Borrows or attempts to borrow any library material from a library
facility by: 1) use of a library card issued to another without the other's
consent, or 2) use of a library card knowing that it is revoked, canceled or
expired, or 3) use of a library card knowing that it is falsely made,
counterfeit or materially altered; or
   (D)   Borrows from a library facility library material and without good
cause fails to return such library material within thirty (30) days after
receiving written notice by registered mail from the library facility demanding
the return of such library material. (Ord. 1106, 3-4-1986)
6-11-4: POSTING OF WARNING:
Each library facility shall post a copy of the ordinance codified herein at a
location adjacent to each entrance to the premises of the library facility and
at each point in the premises of the library facility at which the borrowing of
library materials occurs. (Ord. 1106, 3-4-1986)
6-11-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less
than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues. Court costs and expenses
shall be in addition to the fine assessed. (Ord. 1106, 3-4-1986)
6-11-6: RESTITUTION:
In addition to the mandatory penalty and court costs, any person found guilty
of library theft shall, as applicable, be required to make restitution for
lost, destroyed, or damaged articles at such article's reasonable replacement
and/or repair cost. Such restitution amount shall be included in the court's
judgment and shall be paid upon such terms and conditions as the court may deem
just. (Ord. 1106, 3-4-1986)
CHAPTER 12
WEAPONS AND FIREARM REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-12-1: Definitions
6-12-2: Discharge Of Weapons And Firearms Prohibited
6-12-3: Carrying Of Firearms Prohibited
6-12-4: Carrying Of Weapons Prohibited
6-12-5: Exceptions
6-12-6: Defensive Use Of Weapons And Firearms
6-12-7: Penalty
6-12-8: Banning Jack Rocks And Similar Devices
6-12-9: Educational, School-Sponsored Extracurricular And/Or Philanthropic
Activity Exception
6-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever in this chapter the following terms or words are used they shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
FIREARMS: Shotgun, rifle, BB gun, pellet gun, pistol, revolver, machine gun, or
any device capable of ejecting or firing a projectile by any means.
PEACE OFFICERS: Officers duly appointed by the Fire and Police Commission of
the City of Canton, Illinois, or officers elected by the people or appointed by
an official or board of the United States government or of the State of
Illinois or of some subdivision thereof and having a right to carry weapons and
firearms in their official capacity.
WEAPONS: Blackjack, slingshot, sand club, sandbag, switchblade knife, dagger,
dirk, sword, saber, stiletto, broken bottle, cross bow, bow and/or arrows,
piece of glass or other dangerous or deadly weapon of like character, tear gas
projector or bomb or any object containing a noxious gas or substance, or any
bomb, bombshell, grenade, bottle or other container containing an explosive
substance, such as, but not limited to, black powder bombs and Molotov
cocktails. (Ord. 4114, 9-4-2018)
6-12-2: DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS AND FIREARMS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm or any weapon
within or into the corporate limits of the City, except that firearms firing
"blank" ammunition may be discharged for military funerals and other patriotic
observances and, excepting further, that nothing contained in this section
shall be construed to make unlawful the discharge of a firearm or weapon by a
peace officer while in the performance of his duties. (Ord. 1123, 12-2-1986)
6-12-3: CARRYING OF FIREARMS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry firearms within the corporate
limits of the City. (Ord. 1123, 12-2-1986)
6-12-4: CARRYING OF WEAPONS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or have on his person or in any
vehicle any weapon within the corporate limits of the City. (Ord. 1123, 12-2-
1986)
6-12-5: EXCEPTIONS:
Sections
6-12-3 and
6-12-4 of this chapter shall not apply to any of the following:
   (A)   Peace officers or any person summoned by such officers in making
arrests or preserving the peace while he is actually assisting such officer.
   (B)   The Mayor and Aldermen of the City when acting as conservators of the
peace as set forth in section
1-7-9 of this Code.
   (C)   Members of the armed forces or reserve forces of the United States or
the Illinois National Guard or reserve officers training corps in the
performance of their official duties.
   (D)   Special agents employed by a railroad to perform police functions
while actually engaged in the performance of their employment or commuting
between their place of employment and watchmen or guards while actually engaged
in the performance of their employment.
   (E)   Duly authorized military or civic organizations while parading or
conducting funeral or other military or civic observances.
   (F)   Licensed hunters or fishermen while commuting between their homes and
their places of hunting or fishing, provided they comply with the laws of the
State in such cases made and provided.
   (G)   Transportation of weapons or firearms when broken down, or in a
nonfunctioning state, or when stored in or locked in an inaccessible place in a
vehicle so that the weapon or firearm is not capable of ready use.
   (H)   Members of any club or organization organized for the shooting of
targets upon established target ranges, whether public or private, when
commuting from their home to said range.
   (I)   Members of an organized fraternal or religious organization in which a
sword or saber is a part of the regalia while commuting to/from his home to/
from the meeting place of such organization or during public observances of
such organization.
   (J)   Mailmen, meter readers, delivery men, and other persons of the minimal
age of twenty one (21) years carrying or using chemical weapons formulated or
designed for defensive use against animals while in the actual performance of
their duties.
   (K)   Individuals with a valid license pursuant to the Firearm Concealed
Carry Act 1  carrying a concealed firearm according to the Firearm Concealed
Carry Act.
   (L)   Individuals practicing their archery skills at a residence or shooting
range established for that purpose. (Ord. 4114, 9-4-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. 430 ILCS 66/1 et seq.
6-12-6: DEFENSIVE USE OF WEAPONS AND FIREARMS:
Nothing in this chapter shall ever be construed to prohibit or deny to any
person the right to lawfully use a weapon or firearm in the defense of one's
person, the person of another, in the defense of one's home; or, to lawfully
possess a weapon or firearm. (Ord. 1123, 12-2-1986)
6-12-7: PENALTY:
Any person found or adjudged guilty of any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each instance of
violation shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1123, 12-2-1986)
6-12-8: BANNING JACK ROCKS AND SIMILAR DEVICES:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other entity
to sell, offer to sell, distribute, assemble, manufacture, purchase, possess,
throw or place any so called "jack rock" or similar device composed of nails or
other material of similar character welded or otherwise attached together in
such fashion that a sharp point is directed upward regardless of how the item
is placed, tossed or thrown onto an essentially flat surface.
   (B)   The presence in or upon a motor vehicle, including motorcycles, and
the throwing or tossing from said motor vehicle, other than a public omnibus,
of any device referred to in subsection (A) of this section, shall be prima
facie evidence that it is in the possession of all persons occupying said motor
vehicle or was thrown or tossed by all persons occupying such motor vehicle.
   (C)   The presence of any device referred to in subsection (A) of this
section, in a place other than a motor vehicle shall be prima facie evidence
that it is in the possession of the occupant of the premises where such device
be found. This provision shall not prohibit prosecution under this section of
the person who is in actual possession of or threw or tossed said item.
   (D)   Upon the discovery of such item, the police officer or other
enforcement officer shall confiscate the item, and it shall be held as an item
of evidence. The item shall be destroyed when no longer needed for prosecution
or other lawful purposes. In no event shall the item be returned to the
individual or entity charged with a violation of this section.
   (E)   The sale, offering for sale, distribution, assembling, manufacturing,
purchase, possession, throwing, or placing of any item referred to in
subsection (A) of this section shall constitute a separate and distinct offense
for each individual item discovered.
   (F)   Any person, corporation or other entity found guilty of violating this
section shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 1464, 5-2-1995)
6-12-9: EDUCATIONAL, SCHOOL-SPONSORED EXTRACURRICULAR AND/OR PHILANTHROPIC
ACTIVITY EXCEPTION:
Sections
6-12-2,
6-12-3, and
6-12-4 of this chapter shall not apply to individuals while they are actively
involved in activities hosted by not-for-profit organizations or educational
institutions, for educational, school-sponsored extracurricular, or
philanthropic purposes only, and involving the shooting of targets or
practicing archery skills, provided the weapons/firearms used, activities and
location of the shooting of targets and/or archery skills are first approved in
writing by the Chief of Police. The carrying or transportation of any firearms
or weapons to and from said approved educational, school-sponsored
extracurricular, or philanthropic activities, or discharge of any weapons or
firearms outside of said activities, must otherwise comply with this Municipal
Code and/or any other applicable laws or regulations. (Ord. 4256, 9-7-2021)
CHAPTER 13
COMPROMISE AND PAYMENT OF FINES
SECTION:
6-13-1: Compromise And Payment
6-13-2: City Staff
6-13-3: Disposition Of Fines
6-13-4: Repealer
6-13-5: Minimum Fines
6-13-1: COMPROMISE AND PAYMENT:
Charges for violation of city ordinances and state traffic offenses may be
compromised and settled by the person or party charged with such violation by
pleading guilty to the charge and paying the following standard fines and
costs, inclusive, in full, at the time the plea is submitted:
   (A)   For plea and payment within five (5) days of the date the offense was
charged, exclusive of the date on which the charge was made:
      1.   Violations of title 9, chapter 10, "Traffic Schedules", of this
code, for which a greater minimum fine is not otherwise provided by ordinance:
five dollars ($5.00).
      2.   Violations of state traffic offenses (625 ILCS); violations of
titles 6, 7 and 9 of this code, excluding title 9, chapter 10 of this code, for
which a greater minimum fine is not otherwise provided by state statute, law,
or local ordinance: twenty dollars ($20.00).
   (B)   For plea and payment without five (5) days of the date the offense was
charged, exclusive of the date on which the charge was made, but within ten
(10) days thereof:
      1.   Violations of title 9, chapter 10, "Traffic Schedules", of this
code, for which a greater minimum fine is not otherwise provided by ordinance:
ten dollars ($10.00).
      2.   Violations of state traffic offenses (625 ILCS); violations of
titles 6, 7 and 9 of this code, excluding title 9, chapter 10 of this code, for
which a greater minimum fine is not otherwise provided by state statute, law,
or local ordinance: twenty five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 1173, 10-20-1987)
6-13-2: CITY STAFF:
City staff personnel are hereby authorized and directed to compromise and
settle all such charges as above set forth, giving good receipt therefor on
behalf of the city. (Ord. 1173, 10-20-1987)
6-13-3: DISPOSITION OF FINES:
All monies received thereby are to be delivered to the city treasurer on the
same date on which the funds are received, or, deposited to a regular, standing
city bank account on the same day the funds are received with a copy of the
deposit ticket to be delivered to the city treasurer on the date such deposit
is made. (Ord. 1173, 10-20-1987)
6-13-4: REPEALER:
To the extent that minimum fines are increased by this chapter, all
inconsistent prior ordinances, or, portions thereof, are hereby repealed. (Ord.
1173, 10-20-1987)
6-13-5: MINIMUM FINES:
Nothing in this chapter shall ever be construed as repealing or amending any
ordinance, or, portion thereof, which imposes a greater minimum fine than as
herein set forth, or, which requires restitution as part of the resolution of
the charge. Except as specific ordinances may otherwise provide, the minimum
and maximum fines which may be imposed, exclusive of court costs, for each
violation of titles 6, 7 and 9 of this code, exclusive of title 9, chapter 10
of this code shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) and two hundred dollars
($200.00), respectively. (Ord. 1173, 10-20-1987)
CHAPTER 14
SMOKING
SECTION:
6-14-1: Smoking Prohibited
6-14-1: SMOKING PROHIBITED:
   (A)   Title And Purpose: This section may be cited as the CITY OF CANTON
SMOKING BAN ORDINANCE, the purpose of which is to protect the public health,
comfort and environment by prohibiting smoking in all public places and places
of employment in order to ensure that nonsmokers may breathe air free from the
hazardous effects of secondhand smoke and to avoid damage to property that may
result from the combustible nature of such substance.
   (B)   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following terms shall
have the following meanings:
BEER GARDEN: A seating area open to the air that is supplemental to a Class A
liquor license, as defined in subsection
3-8-4(A)2 of this Code.
EMPLOYEE: Any person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct
or indirect monetary wages or profits or a person who volunteers his or her
services for a nonprofit entity.
EMPLOYER: Any person, business, partnership, association or corporation,
including municipal corporations, trust or nonprofit entity that employs one or
more employees.
ENCLOSED AREA: All space in any structure or building that is enclosed on all
sides by any combination of walls, windows or doorways, extending from floor to
ceiling.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT: Any enclosed area of a business within the City where one
or more employees are required or permitted by an employer to work in the
course of their employment, and includes, without limitation, common work
areas, private offices, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms,
cafeterias, elevators, employee lounges, stairs, hallways, restrooms, medical
facilities, private clubs, and the interior of a vehicle of public conveyance.
A "place of employment" does not include a private dwelling unit, unless the
dwelling is also used as a daycare facility for children or adults.
PUBLIC PLACE: That portion of any building or vehicles used by and open to the
public. Public place specifically excludes a private dwelling unit, unless said
dwelling is also used as a daycare facility for children or adults.
SMOKE OR SMOKING: Inhaling, exhaling, burning, carrying or possessing a lighted
cigar, cigarette, pipe or other combustible substance in any manner or form.
   (C)   Prohibition In Public Places, Schools, Places Of Employment And
Government Vehicles: No person shall smoke in a public place or in any place of
employment or within fifteen feet (15') of any entrance, exit, windows that
open and ventilation intake to a public place or place of employment. No person
may smoke in any vehicle owned, leased or operated by the City of Canton.
Smoking is prohibited in indoor public places and workplaces unless
specifically exempted in this section. No person shall smoke in any school or
on any school related property or vehicle. Smoking for solely school purposes
shall include the use of electronic cigarettes and vaping machines.
   (D)   Designation Of Other No Smoking Areas: Nothing in this section shall
be deemed to limit the owner, operator, lessor, lessee, employer, manager or
other person in control of a public place or a place of employment from further
prohibiting smoking by designating outdoor areas not subject to the
restrictions of this section as a place where smoking is also prohibited,
provided the owner, operator, lessor, lessee, employer, manager or other person
in control conspicuously posts signs wherever smoking is prohibited in the same
manner set forth in this section.
   (E)   Signs: Each owner, operator, lessor, lessee, employer, manager or
other person in control of a public place shall post conspicuous "No Smoking"
signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol, consisting of a pictorial
representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar
across it, at the entrance of each public place and place of employment where
smoking is prohibited. All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where
smoking is prohibited by the owner, operator, lessor, lessee, employer, manager
or other person having control of the area.
   (F)   Exemptions: This section shall not apply to the following specific
locations and circumstances:
      1.   Private residences or dwelling places, except when used as child or
adult daycare or other home based business open to the public.
      2.   The portion of the premises of a tobacco store or tobacco stand
operated by a tobacco dealer, or that portion of the premises operated by a
tobacco wholesaler, within which customers are allowed to sample tobacco
products; provided, however, that any smoke generated by smoking on the
premises of the tobacco store, tobacco stand, or tobacco wholesaler shall not
infiltrate any other enclosed public place or place of employment. For purposes
of this exemption, a "tobacco dealer" is a retailer whose principal business is
the sale at retail of tobacco and tobacco related products, and a "tobacco
wholesaler" is a wholesaler whose principal business is the sale of tobacco and
tobacco related products in quantity for resale.
      3.   Private and semiprivate rooms in a "convalescent or nursing home"
(as defined in section 10-1-12 of this Code) where each resident occupant of
the room has signed a written waiver authorizing smoking in the room.
      4.   Hotel or motel rooms designated as smoking, provided that no more
than ten percent (10%) of the available rooms for rent in any single hotel or
motel facility shall be designated as smoking rooms. Nothing in this section
shall be deemed or interpreted as requiring, and no hotel or motel facility
shall have, a minimum number of hotel or motel rooms in which smoking is
permitted.
      5.   Beer gardens, provided that it is operated by a Class A liquor
license holder, with a Subclass A supplemental license and subject to the
restrictions set forth in subsection
3-8-4(A)2 of this Code and that the smoking occurs more than fifteen feet (15')
from the entrance, exit, windows that open or ventilation intake.
   (G)   Penalties:
      1.   Any person who violates this section shall be fined one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for a first violation and two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00)
for each subsequent violation. A person who owns, operates, or otherwise
controls a public place or place of employment that violates this section shall
be fined two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first violation and five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second violation within one year of the date
of the first violation and two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for
each additional violation within one year of the date of the first violation.
      2.   Each day that any violation of this section continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
      3.   Violation notices or citations for violations of this section may be
issued, served, and resolved in accordance with other ordinance violations of
this Code. (Ord. 4127, 2-19-2019)
CHAPTER 15
RESERVED
CHAPTER 16
RESERVED
CHAPTER 17
CITY CURFEW
SECTION:
6-17-1: Restrictions
6-17-1-1: Exceptions
6-17-1-2: Enforcement
6-17-2: Parental Responsibility
6-17-3: Penalty
6-17-1: RESTRICTIONS:
   (A)   It is unlawful in the city of Canton for a person less than seventeen
(17) years of age to be present at or upon any public assembly, building,
place, street, parking lot, alley, park or highway at the following times:
      1.   On Saturdays, between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M.
and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.;
      2.   On Sundays, between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) A.M.; and
      3.   Every day Sunday through Thursday, between eleven o'clock (11:00)
P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. the following day. (Ord. 3061, 5-20-2014)
6-17-1-1: EXCEPTIONS:
The following circumstances shall be deemed exceptions to section
6-17-1 of this chapter:
   (A)   The minor is accompanied by his or her parent, legal guardian, or
other adult person over the age of eighteen (18) having custody of such minor;
   (B)   The minor is accompanied by a person over the age of eighteen (18)
years of age specified by the child's parent, legal guardian or custodian;
   (C)   The minor is participating in, going to or returning from, without any
detour or stop:
      1.   An errand at the direction of the minor's parent, legal guardian or
custodian;
      2.   Lawful employment;
      3.   A school sanctioned activity;
      4.   A religious event;
      5.   An emergency involving protection of a person or property from an
imminent threat or serious bodily injury or substantial damage;
      6.   An activity involving the exercise of the child's rights protected
under the first amendment of the United States constitution or sections 3, 4
and 5 of the constitution of the state of Illinois such as the free exercise of
religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly;
      7.   An activity conducted by a nonprofit or governmental entity that
provides recreation, education, training or other care under the supervision of
one or more adults;
   (D)   The minor is in a motor vehicle engaged in interstate or international
travel; or
   (E)   The minor is married or has been married or is an emancipated minor
pursuant to the provisions of 750 Illinois Compiled Statutes 30/1 et seq., as
amended. (Ord. 1795, 5-4-2004)
6-17-1-2: ENFORCEMENT:
Before taking any enforcement action under this chapter, a police officer shall
ascertain the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place.
The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this chapter
unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that,
based on any response or lack thereof and other circumstances, no exception set
forth in section
6-17-1-1 of this chapter is present. (Ord. 1795, 5-4-2004)
6-17-2: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other person to knowingly permit
a person in his custody or control to violate section
6-17-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 1258, 9-19-1989)
6-17-3: PENALTY:
Violations of this chapter shall be governed by title 1, chapter 27, "General
Penalty", of this code and the fee schedule that is adopted by city council
from time to time. (Ord. 4034, 7-19-2016)
CHAPTER 18
UNSAFE OR DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
SECTION:
6-18-1: Dangerous Buildings Generally
6-18-2: Definition Of Dangerous Building
6-18-3: Enforcement Power
6-18-4: Notice Of Unsafe Condition Of Buildings; Means Of Service
6-18-5: Lis Pendens Notice
6-18-6: Placarding Of Building Or Structure
6-18-7: Demolition Lien, Personal Judgment
6-18-8: Nuisance Structures
6-18-9:    Interaction With State Law
6-18-1: DANGEROUS BUILDINGS GENERALLY:
It shall be unlawful for any owner or agent thereof to keep or maintain any
building or structure or part thereof in any unsafe or dangerous condition. The
word "building", as used in this chapter, shall mean any walled or roofed
structure including mobile homes, commercial establishments, dwellings and any
accessory structures. (Ord. 1244, 5-16-1989)
6-18-2: DEFINITION OF DANGEROUS BUILDING:
For the purpose of this chapter, any building or structure which has any
defects or is in any of the conditions, including, but not limited to the
following hereinafter described shall be deemed a "dangerous building" and/or
unsafe:
   (A)   Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit
is not of sufficient width or size, or is not so arranged as to provide safe
and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic for all persons housed or
assembled therein who would be required to or might use such door, aisle,
passageway, stairway or other means of exit;
   (B)   Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by wind, flood, fire or
by any other cause in such a manner that the structural strength or stability
thereof is appreciably less than it was before the catastrophe and is less than
the minimum requirements of this chapter;
   (C)   Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to
fail or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and injure persons or
damage property;
   (D)   Whenever any portion thereof has settled to such an extent that walls
or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds than is
required in the case of new construction;
   (E)   Whenever any building or structure or any part thereof, because of
dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, or because of the
removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of
supporting such building or portion thereof, or for other reason, is likely to
partially or completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or
underpinning is likely to fall or give away;
   (F)   Whenever for any reason whatsoever, the building or structure or any
portion thereof is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is used;
   (G)   Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind
or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to afford a harbor
for vagrants, criminals, or immoral persons, or as to enable persons to resort
thereto for the purpose of committing a nuisance or unlawful or immoral acts;
   (H)   Whenever a building or structure used or intended to be used for
dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay, damage or faulty
construction or arrangement is unsanitary or unfit for human habitation as
certified by the Fulton County health department or other competent authority,
and is likely to work injury to the health, safety or general welfare of those
living within;
   (I)   Whenever a building or structure is infested with rodents, insects,
pests or other vermin, or is likely to cause sickness or disease when so
determined by the Fulton County health department or other competent authority;
   (J)   Whenever any building shall become vacant, dilapidated or open at door
or window, leaving the interior of the building exposed to the elements or
accessible to entrance by trespassers;
   (K)   Whenever any unoccupied building or structure is deemed a nuisance by
common law or the code of the city and the structure or building has been
secured by the owner or his agents by covering up the windows and exits with
lumber or materials other than glazing materials for a period of thirty (30)
days or more, thereby causing a blighting influence on a neighborhood; or
   (L)   Whenever a building or structure is deemed dangerous and/or unsafe, as
certified by the chief of police, the zoning/code enforcement officer, the
commercial development/commercial building inspector or his or her designees.
(Ord. 1244, 5-16-1989; amd. Ord. 4236, 5-18-2021)
6-18-3: ENFORCEMENT POWER:
The chief of police or his designee shall have full power to pass any question
arising under the provisions of this chapter, subject to the conditions,
modifications and limitations contained in this chapter.
The chief of police or his designee is hereby authorized to demolish or repair
or cause the demolition or repair of dangerous buildings or uncompleted
buildings or abandoned buildings within the territorial limits of the city.
The chief of police or his designee is further authorized, when removing or
causing the demolition of a dangerous building, uncompleted building or
abandoned building from a lot, to remove all private sidewalks, fences,
concrete foundations and driveways located on the lot with such building. (Ord.
1244, 5-16-1989)
6-18-4: NOTICE OF UNSAFE CONDITION OF BUILDINGS; MEANS OF SERVICE:
When a building or structure within the city is found to be a "dangerous
building" or unsafe, the mayor, the chief of police, the zoning/code
enforcement officer, the commercial development/commercial building inspector,
or the city attorney, or any of their designees shall issue a written notice by
mail thereof upon the owner or owners of the building/real estate, including
the lien holders of record (as shown within the office of the Fulton County
Land Records or Recorder’s Office) and upon persons in apparent possession of
the premises.
Where, upon diligent search, the identity or whereabouts of the owner or owners
of any such building, including the lien holders of record is not
ascertainable, notice mailed to the person or persons in whose name such real
estate was last assessed for general real estate taxes is sufficient notice
under this section.
The notice shall briefly and concisely specify the defect(s) or condition(s) of
the building or structure which renders it dangerous or unsafe. The notice
shall further specify that the owners must make the building safe (by complete
elimination of any unsafe conditions) or demolish the building at the owner’s
cost within fifteen (15) days upon receipt of the notice (the “15-day Notice
Period”). The notice may allow for more than fifteen (15) days under said 15-
day Notice Period, if the City desires.
In the event the owner or owners fail to make the building safe or commence and
complete demolition within the 15-day Notice Period, the city attorney is
hereby authorized to commence a civil action in the circuit court of Fulton
County seeking a court order (1) authorizing the demolition or repair of the
building or structure subject to the notice provided for by this chapter or (2)
requiring the owner or owners of record to demolish, repair, or enclose such
building and to create the lien described in section
6-18-7  herein. It shall not be a defense to this cause of action that the
building is boarded up or otherwise enclosed, although the court may order the
building boarded up or otherwise enclosed. It further shall not be a defense
that the building is put in a safe condition during the pendency of the civil
action.
Joined as defendants in said cause shall be the owner or owners of record, lien
holders of record, and other parties having an interest in the property as
shown by documents recorded in the office of the Fulton County recorder of
deeds on the date of the filing of the complaint for demolition. (Ord. 1244, 5-
16-1989; amd. Ord. 4236, 5-18-2021)
6-18-5: LIS PENDENS NOTICE:
Upon the commencement of the civil action set forth in section
6-18-4 of this chapter, a lis pendens notice designating the property upon
which the subject building is located shall be filed with the recorder of
deeds. Failure to file or the improper filing of the lis pendens notice does
not, however, affect the civil action for demolition. Any person obtaining or
recording in said office an interest in the property after such filing may
become party to the civil action only if he intervenes by order of the court.
(Ord. 1244, 5-16-1989)
6-18-6: PLACARDING OF BUILDING OR STRUCTURE:
Whenever any dwelling or building has been designated a "dangerous building" or
contains unsafe conditions, the chief of police or his designee shall placard
the building indicating that the condition is dangerous and unsafe. It shall be
unlawful for any person to rent, cause to rent, to occupy or allow another to
occupy any premises, knowing that said premises has been designated a
"dangerous building".
It shall be unlawful for any persons to remove, cause to remove or cover up in
any way any placard designating a building or structure a "dangerous building".
A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine
and imprisonment. (Ord. 1244, 5-16-1989)
6-18-7: DEMOLITION LIEN, PERSONAL JUDGMENT:
The cost of the demolition, repair, enclosure, or removal incurred by the city,
including court costs, attorney’s fees, and other costs related to the
enforcement of this chapter, is recoverable from the owner or owners of the
real estate or the previous owner or both if the property was transferred
during the 15-day Notice Period and is a lien on the real estate. Said lien is
superior to all prior existing liens and encumbrances, except taxes, if, within
one hundred eighty (180) days after the repair, demolition, enclosure, or
removal, the city files a notice of lien for the cost and expense incurred in
the office of the Fulton County recorder of deeds. The notice of lien shall
consist of a sworn statement setting out (1) a description of the real estate
sufficient for its identification, (2) the amount of money representing the
cost and expense incurred, and (3) the date or dates when the cost and expense
was incurred by the city. Upon payment of said cost and expense of demolition
or repair by the owner of or persons interested in the property after the
notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the city attorney.
The lien may be enforced by foreclosure proceedings as in the case of mortgage
foreclosures or mechanics’ lien foreclosures. An action to foreclose this lien
may be commenced at any time after the date of the filing of the notice of
lien. The costs of foreclosure incurred by the city, including court costs,
reasonable attorney’s fees, advances to preserve the property, and other costs
related to the enforcement of this chapter, plus statutory interest, are a lien
on the real estate and are recoverable by the city from the owner or owners of
the real estate. Suit to foreclose this lien shall be commenced by the city
attorney within three (3) years after the date of the filing of the notice of
lien.
Any liens arising under this chapter shall be assignable by the city. The
assignee of the lien shall have the same power to enforce the lien as the city,
except the lien may not be enforced under Section 11-31-1(c) of the Illinois
Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/11-31-1).
If payment of the city's cost of demolition or repair is not paid to the city
within fifteen (15) days of the filing of the notice of lien, the city attorney
may commence proceedings in the circuit court seeking a personal judgment from
the owner of the subject property at the time the complaint for demolition was
filed with the circuit clerk in the amount of said costs. The action authorized
by this paragraph shall be in addition to, and without waiver of, any other
remedies authorized and available by law. (Ord. 1244, 5-16-1989; amd. Ord.
4236, 5-18-2021)
6-18-8: NUISANCE STRUCTURES:
Any unsafe, dilapidated or abandoned building, house, barn or other structure
situated within the limits of the city is, and the same is hereby declared to
be, a nuisance.
If any such building or structure is being constructed, altered, enlarged or
repaired and the building permit issued for said building or structure expires
or is revoked by the building official, and the owner of the building or
structure fails within thirty (30) days of the revocation or expiration to
obtain a certificate of occupancy as provided by this code or to obtain another
building permit, then that building or structure shall remain a declared
nuisance.
The penalty for maintaining a nuisance shall be as provided in this code, and
each and every day that such nuisance remains unabated shall constitute a new
and separate offense. (Ord. 1244, 5-16-1989)
6-18-9: INTERACTION WITH STATE LAW:
Nothing in this Title 6, Chapter 18 shall be construed to limit the city’s
ability to proceed with the demolition, repair, enclosure of dangerous and
unsafe buildings or uncompleted and abandoned buildings pursuant to Section 11-
31-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/11-31-1) or any of the
provisions thereunder. The city has the option to proceed with any such actions
under this chapter or the Illinois Municipal Code.
Furthermore, nothing in Title 6, Chapter 18 shall be construed nor is intended
to conflict with Section 11-31-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/11-
31-1). However, whenever any provision of this chapter conflicts with the
requirements, regulations, restrictions or limitations that are imposed or
required by Section 11-31-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/11-31-1),
then the provisions provided for in the Illinois Municipal Code shall prevail.
(Ord. 4236, 5-18-2021)
CHAPTER 19
LOITERING
SECTION:
6-19-1: Loitering Prohibited
6-19-2: Loitering By Minors
6-19-3: Definitions
6-19-4: Penalty
6-19-1: LOITERING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain
idle either alone or in consort with others in a public place in such manner so
as to:
   (A)   Obstruct any public street, highway, sidewalk, alley, parkway, parking
lot, park or any other public place or any building by hindering or impeding or
tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles,
traffic or pedestrians; or
   (B)   By his presence or in consort with others, interfere with or interrupt
the conduct of pedestrian movement, motor vehicular traffic or business in such
stores or shops or in the offices located in any such building in the city; or
   (C)   Sit, lie, stand, kneel, recline, or place lawn chairs, etc., on any
improvement such as walls, retaining fixtures, sidewalks, and curbing or on any
such improvement which is not specifically provided for or intended for such
purpose or use in any public place in the city; or
   (D)   Commit in or upon any public street, highway, sidewalk, alley,
parkway, parking lot, park or any other public place or any building any act or
thing which is an obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use
or enjoyment of property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in
or upon or facing or fronting on any such public street, highway, sidewalk,
alley, parkway, parking lot, park or any such public place or any building, all
of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress, to and from such
premises; or
   (E)   Engage in activities, make loud noises, consume alcoholic beverages or
create circumstances that afford probable cause for alarm or concern for the
safety and well being of persons or for the security of public or private
property in the surrounding area. (Ord. 1510, 8-20-1996)
6-19-2: LOITERING BY MINORS:
No parent or guardian of a minor under the age of eighteen (18) years shall
knowingly permit the minor to loiter in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1510,
8-20-1996)
6-19-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
LOITERING: Remaining idle in essentially one location and includes the concept
of spending time idly; to be dilatory; to linger; to stay; to saunter; to
delay; to stand around and also includes the colloquial expressions "hanging
around" and "hanging out".
POLICE ACTION: When any person causes or commits any of the acts enumerated in
this chapter, a police officer, or any law enforcement officer, shall order
that person to stop causing or committing such acts and to move on or disperse.
Any person who fails or refuses to obey such orders is guilty of a violation of
this chapter.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the general public has access and a right to
resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose, but does not
necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the use of the public. It also
includes the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or
other place of business, and also public grounds, sidewalks, areas or parks.
(Ord. 1510, 8-20-1996)
6-19-4: PENALTY:
Violations of this chapter shall be governed by title 1, chapter 27, "General
Penalty", of this code and the fee schedule that is adopted by city council
from time to time. (Ord. 4034, 7-19-2016)
CHAPTER 20
TRUANCY
SECTION:
6-20-1: Definitions
6-20-2: Prohibition
6-20-3: Valid Cause
6-20-4: False Excuse Prohibited
6-20-5: Notice, Penalty And Payment Of Fines
6-20-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:
MINOR: Any unemancipated person under eighteen (18) years of age.
PARENT: A mother, father or legal guardian of a minor who has responsibility
for the health, welfare, care, maintenance and/or supervision of a minor.
RELIGION: Includes all aspects of religious observance and practice, as well as
belief.
TRUANT: A minor under the age of eighteen (18) enrolled in a public, private or
parochial school within the corporate limits of the city and who is absent
without valid cause from such attendance for a school day or portion thereof.
(Ord. 2033, 5-18-2011)
6-20-2: PROHIBITION:
It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) enrolled in
public, private or parochial school within the corporate limits of the city to
be absent without valid cause from attendance for a school day or portion
thereof. Any person who shall so absent himself or herself shall be guilty of
the offense of truancy. (Ord. 2033, 5-18-2011)
6-20-3: VALID CAUSE:
It is a valid cause to be absent for a school day or portion thereof due to:
   (A)   Parental permission;
   (B)   Engaged in approved school related activities;
   (C)   Illness;
   (D)   Observation of a religious holiday;
   (E)   Death in the immediate family;
   (F)   Family emergency;
   (G)   And such other situations beyond the control of the student, as
determined by the board of education. (Ord. 2033, 5-18-2011)
6-20-4: FALSE EXCUSE PROHIBITED:
It shall be an offense under this chapter for any person to knowingly submit to
the proper school authorities a valid cause for absence under section
6-20-3 of this chapter that contains false information, including falsifying a
signature. A person convicted of an offense under this section shall be subject
to the penalty outlined in section
6-20-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 2033, 5-18-2011)
6-20-5: NOTICE, PENALTY AND PAYMENT OF FINES:
   (A)   Notice:
      1.   Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-5-9, a school may
disclose student's attendance records to the Canton police department for the
enforcement of this chapter. The Canton police department will not disclose the
attendance information to any other individual or entity, without prior written
consent of the parent or guardian except as necessary to enforce this chapter
or as provided under state law. A school will not transmit attendance records
that pertain to a student's attendance on or after the date the student's
parent gives the school notice that the parent is withdrawing the student from
the school.
      2.   The police department will issue a written notice to the truant or
the truant's parent via hand delivery or via regular mail to the last address
on file with the school only upon receipt of a truant's attendance record.
      3.   If the violator fails to appear at the Canton police department to
pay the requisite fine within ten (10) days from the date the notice was
delivered or mailed, a citation will be issued to the violator.
   (B)   Penalty:
      1.   Any person guilty of a violation of this chapter, shall be fined a
penalty of no less than fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first violation in one
school year.
      2.   Any person guilty of a violation of this chapter, shall be fined a
penalty of no less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) for the second violation
in one school year.
      3.   Any person guilty of a violation of this chapter, shall be fined a
penalty of no less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the third and any
subsequent violations in one school year.
   (C)   Community Service: Community service work may be sentenced in addition
to, or as an alternative to, any fines issued. Where a violator fails to
perform the community service, the term of community service may be increased
or may be converted to a fine.
   (D)   Separate Offenses: Each day or portion for each day that a person is
truant shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2033, 5-18-2011)
CHAPTER 21
CITIZENS BAND RADIO CONTROL
SECTION:
6-21-1: Application
6-21-2: Definitions And Abbreviations
6-21-3: Channels And Frequencies
6-21-4: Antenna Height
6-21-5: Authorized Equipment
6-21-6: Power Requirements
6-21-7: Power Amplifiers Prohibited
6-21-8: Authorized Communication
6-21-9: Prohibited Communications
6-21-10: Responsibility
6-21-11: Length Of Communication
6-21-12: Emergency Communication
6-21-13: Remote Control
6-21-14: Telephone Connection
6-21-15: Causing Interference Prohibited
6-21-16: Inspections Of CB Station Equipment And CB Station Records
6-21-17: Transmitter Service
6-21-18: Penalties
6-21-19: Construction
6-21-1: APPLICATION:
All persons shall comply with these rules when operating a station in the CB
service from within the corporate boundaries of the city of Canton, Illinois,
unless that person, station or entity holds a current and valid license in any
radio service issued by the FCC pursuant to title 47, United States Code,
section 301 and is operating within the parameters of that license. (Ord. 1837,
5-3-2005)
6-21-2: DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS:
ANTENNA: The radiating system (for transmitting, receiving or both) and the
structure holding it up (tower, pole or mast) and everything else attached to
the radiating system and the structure.
CB: Citizens band.
CFR: Code of federal regulations.
CITIZENS BAND RADIO SERVICE OR CB RADIO SERVICE: Private, two- way, short
distance voice communications service for personal or business activities or
for voice paging.
CITIZENS BAND STATION OR CB STATION: A radio station transmitting in the CB
radio service.
CITIZENS BAND TRANSMITTER OR CB TRANSMITTER:
   (A)   An apparatus that converts electrical energy received from a source
into radio frequency capable of being radiated; and
   (B)   An apparatus authorized by the FCC, pursuant to an application filed
after September 9, 1976, for use in the operation of a CB station.
FCC: Federal communications commission.
PERSON: An individual, a corporation, a partnership, an association, a joint
stock company, a trust, a state, territorial or local government unit, or other
legal entity.
RADIO FREQUENCY INTERFERENCE: Radio frequency energy which:
   (A)   Is radiated from a CB station; and
   (B)   Interferes with the operation of electronic devices located off the
premises of the CB station. (Ord. 1837, 5-3-2005)
6-21-3: CHANNELS AND FREQUENCIES:
No person may operate a CB radio station on any channel or at any frequency
other than the channels and frequencies authorized by 47 CFR 95.407 which is
adopted herein by reference. (Ord. 1837, 5-3-2005)
6-21-4: ANTENNA HEIGHT:
   (A)   Antennas installed at a fixed location (whether receiving,
transmitting or both) must comply with either one of the following:
      1.   The highest point must not be more than twenty feet (20') higher
than the highest point of the building or tree on which it is mounted; or
      2.   The highest point must not be more than sixty feet (60') above the
ground.
   (B)   Antennas mounted on a handheld portable unit need not comply with the
limitations imposed upon antennas installed at fixed locations.
   (C)   If the CB station is located near an airport, and the antenna
structure is more than twenty feet (20') high, additional restrictions may
apply. Contact the nearest FCC field office for a worksheet to figure the
maximum allowable height of the antenna. (Ord. 1837, 5-3-2005)
6-21-5: AUTHORIZED EQUIPMENT:
   (A)   No person may use a CB transmitter unless that transmitter has an FCC
type accepted label placed on it by the manufacturer.
   (B)   No person may make, or have made, any internal modification to a
certificated CB transmitter.
   (C)   No person shall operate a CB transmitter which has been modified by
anyone in any way, including modification to operate on unauthorized
frequencies or with illegal power. (Ord. 1837, 5-3-2005)
6-21-6: POWER REQUIREMENTS:
No person shall use a CB station transmitter with a power output exceeding the
following values:
   (A)   AM (A3): Four (4) watts (carrier power).
   (B)   SSB: Twelve (12) watts (peak envelope power). (Ord. 1837, 5-3-2005)
6-21-7: POWER AMPLIFIERS PROHIBITED:
   (A)   No person shall attach the following power amplifiers to a
certificated CB transmitter:
      1.   External radio frequency (RF) power amplifiers (sometimes called
linears or linear amplifiers); or
      2.   Any other devices which, when used with a radio transmitter as a
signal source, are capable of amplifying the signal.
   (B)   It shall be presumed that a CB operator has used a linear or other
external RF power amplifier if:
      1.   It is in CB operator's possession or on the premises from which the
CB station transmits; and
      2.   There is evidence that the CB station operated with more power than
allowed by section
6-21-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 1837, 5-3-2005)
6-21-8: AUTHORIZED COMMUNICATION:
   (A)   CB station operators shall transmit two-way plain language
communications without codes or coded messages. Operating signals such as "ten
codes" are not considered codes or coded messages.
   (B)   A CB station operator may transmit two-way plain language
communications only to other CB stations, to units of the operator's CB station
or to authorized government stations on CB frequencies about:
      1.   Personal or business activities of the operator or the members of
the operator's immediate family living in the operator's household;
      2.   Emergencies;
      3.   Traveler assistance; or
      4.   Civil defense activities in connection with official tests or drills
conducted by, or actual emergencies announced by, the civil defense agency with
authority over the area in which the CB station is located.
   (C)   Operators may use the CB station to transmit a tone signal only when
the signal is used to make contact or to continue communications. (Examples of
circuits using these signals are tone operated squelch and selective calling
circuits.) If the signal is an audible tone, it must last no longer than
fifteen (15) seconds at one time. If the signal is a subaudible tone, it may be
transmitted continuously only as long as the operator is talking.
   (D)   Operators may use the CB station to transmit one-way communications
(messages which are not intended to establish communications between 2 or more
particular CB stations) only for emergency communications, traveler assistance,
brief tests (radio checks) or voice paging. (Ord. 1837, 5-3-2005)
6-21-9: PROHIBITED COMMUNICATIONS:
No person may use a CB station:
   (A)   For any activity which is against federal, state or local law;
   (B)   To transmit obscene, indecent or profane words, language or meaning;
   (C)   To interfere intentionally with the communications of another CB
station;
   (D)   To advertise or solicit the sale of any goods or services;
   (E)   To transmit music, whistling, sound effects or any material to amuse
or entertain;
   (F)   To transmit any sound effect solely to attract attention;
   (G)   To transmit the word "mayday" or any other international distress
signal, except when the CB station is located in a vehicle, the occupants of
which are threatened by grave and imminent danger and in need of immediate
assistance;
   (H)   To communicate with, or attempt to communicate with, any CB station
more than 155.3 miles (250 kilometers) away;
   (I)   To advertise a political candidate or political campaign;
   (J)   To transmit a false or deceptive communication;
   (K)   To transmit communications for live or delayed rebroadcast on a radio
or television broadcast station. (Ord. 1837, 5-3-2005)
6-21-10: RESPONSIBILITY:
The occupants of the premises upon which the CB station is located shall be
responsible for all CB communications made from the CB station and for all CB
equipment kept on the premises. (Ord. 1837, 5-3-2005)
6-21-11: LENGTH OF COMMUNICATION:
   (A)   No person may operate a CB station which communicates with another CB
station or stations for more than five (5) continuous minutes.
   (B)   No person may, at the end of a conversation, transmit again for at
least one minute. (Ord. 1837, 5-3-2005)
6-21-12: EMERGENCY COMMUNICATION:
Every CB operator shall, at all times and on all channels, give priority to
emergency communications. (Ord. 1837, 5-3-2005)
6-21-13: REMOTE CONTROL:
   (A)   No person shall operate a CB station transmitter by radio remote
control unless specific approval is obtained in writing from the FCC.
   (B)   In this section, "remote control" means the operation of a CB
transmitter from any place other than the premises on which the CB transmitter
is located. (Ord. 1837, 5-3-2005)
6-21-14: TELEPHONE CONNECTION:
No person shall connect a CB station transmitter to a telephone, except as
permitted by 47 CFR section 95.420. (Ord. 1837, 5-3-2005)
6-21-15: CAUSING INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED:
No person shall operate a CB station which causes radio frequency interference
with the operation of any electronic device located in the city of Canton and
off the premises of the CB station. If a city of Canton police officer
determines that a CB station is causing interference with the electronic
equipment of nearby premises adjacent to the CB station, the police officer may
do any of the following:
   (A)   Order the operator of the CB station and/or the occupant of the
premises on which the CB station is located, to cease operation of the CB
station during specified hours or times.
   (B)   Have the CB station equipment inspected by a person certified as
technically qualified to perform transmitter maintenance and repair duties in
the private land mobile services and fixed services by an organization or
committee representative of users of those services. (Ord. 1837, 5-3-2005)
6-21-16: INSPECTIONS OF CB STATION EQUIPMENT AND CB STATION RECORDS:
A police officer may inspect CB radio station equipment and CB station records
whenever the officer has probable cause to believe that a CB station operator,
or person in possession of CB radio equipment, has interfered with the
operation of electronic equipment of another by means of radio frequency
interference. (Ord. 1837, 5-3-2005)
6-21-17: TRANSMITTER SERVICE:
   (A)   The operator may adjust an antenna to the CB transmitter and make
radio checks.
   (B)   The operator is responsible for the proper operation of the station at
all times and is expected to provide for observations, servicing and
maintenance as often as may be necessary to ensure proper operation. All
internal repairs or internal adjustments to the CB transmitter shall be made in
accordance with the federal regulations. (Ord. 1837, 5-3-2005)
6-21-18: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject,
upon conviction, to a fine of not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation and the
court may order that any and all equipment, whether electronic or otherwise,
used to commit a violation of this chapter be surrendered to the city of
Canton. (Ord. 1837, 5-3-2005)
6-21-19: CONSTRUCTION:
Nothing contained herein shall be construed so as to abrogate or suspend any of
the terms or provisions of any other city ordinance, except as herein
specifically provided. (Ord. 1837, 5-3-2005)
CHAPTER 22
SYNTHETIC ALTERNATIVE DRUGS
SECTION:
6-22-1: Definitions
6-22-2: Sale Or Delivery
6-22-3: Possession
6-22-4: Use
6-22-5: Penalty
6-22-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires different meaning:
PRODUCT CONTAINING A SYNTHETIC ALTERNATIVE DRUG: Any product containing a
synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant or psychedelic/hallucinogen, as those terms
are defined herein such as, but not limited to, the examples of brand names or
identifiers listed on exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein.
SYNTHETIC CANNABINOID: Any laboratory created compound that functions similar
to the active ingredient in marijuana, tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), including,
but not limited to, any quantity of a natural or synthetic material, compound,
mixture, preparation, substance and their analog (including isomers, esters,
ethers, salts, and salts of isomers) containing a cannabinoid receptor agonist,
such as:
JWH-007 (1-pentyl-2-methyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole)
JWH-015 ((2-Methyl-1-propyl-1H-indol-3-yl)-1- naphthalenylmethanone)
JWH-018 (1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole)
JWH-019 (1-hexyl-3-(naphthalen-1-oyl)indole)
JWH-073 (naphthalen-1-yl-(1-butylindol-3- yl)methanone)
JWH-081 (4-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol- 3-yl)methanone)
JWH-098 (4-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentyl-2- methylindol-3-yl)methanone)
JWH-122 (1-Pentyl-3-(4-methyl-1-naphthoyl)indole)
JWH-164 (7-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol- 3-yl)methanone
JWH-200 (1-(2-morpholin-4-ylethyl)indol-3-yl)- naphthalen-1-ylmethanone)
JWH-203 (2-(2-chlorophenyl)-1-(1-pentylindol-3- yl)ethanone
JWH-210 (4-ethylnaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3- yl)methanone
JWH-250 (1-pentyl-3-(2-methoxyphenylacetyl)indole)
JWH-251 (1-pentyl-3-(2-methylphenylacetyl)indole)
JWH-398 (1-pentyl-3-(4-chloro-1-naphthoyl)indole)
HU-210 ((6aR,10aR)-9-(Hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl- 3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-
6a,7,10,10a- tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1-ol)
HU-211 ((6aS,10aS)-9-(Hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl- 3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-
6a,7,10,10a- tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1-ol)
HU-308 ([(1R,2R,5R)-2-[2,6-dimethoxy-4-(2- methyloctan-2-yl)phenyl]-7,7-
dimethyl-4- bicyclo[3.1.1]hept-3-enyl] methanol)
HU-331 ((3-hydroxy-2-[(1R,6R)-3-methyl-6-(1- methylethenyl)-2-cyclohexen-1-yl]-
5-pentyl-2,5- cyclohexadiene-1,4-dione)
CP 55,940 (2-[(1R,2R,5R)-5-hydroxy-2-(3- hydroxypropyl)cyclohexyl]-5-(2-
methyloctan-2- yl)phenol)
CP 47,497 (2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2- methyloctan-2-yl)phenol) and
its homologues
WIN 55,212-2 ((R)-(+)-[2,3-Dihydro-5-methyl-3-(4- morpholinylmethyl)pyrrolo
[1,2,3-de)-1,4- benzoxazin-6-yl]-1-nepthalenylmethanone)
RCS-4 ((4-methoxyphenyl)(1-pentyl-1H-indol-3- yl)methanone)
RCS-8 (1-(1-(2-cyclohexylethyl)-1H-indol-3-yl)-2- (2-methoxyphenyl)ethanone)
SYNTHETIC PSYCHEDELIC/HALLUCINOGEN: Any compound that mimics the effects of any
federally controlled schedule I substance, including, but not limited to, any
quantity of a natural or synthetic material, compound, mixture, preparation,
substance and their analog (including salts, isomers, esters, ethers and salts
of isomers) containing substances which have a psychedelic/hallucinogenic
effect on the central nervous system and/or brain, such as:
2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-ethylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-E);
2-(2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-D);
2-(4-Chloro-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-C);
2-(4-Iodo-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-I);
2-(4-(Ethylthio)-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-T-2);
2-(4-(Isopropylthio)-2,5- dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-T-4);
2-(2,5-Dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-H);
2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-nitro-phenyl)ethanamine (2C-N);
2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-(n)-propylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-P).
SYNTHETIC STIMULANT: Any compound that mimics the effects of any federally
controlled schedule I substance such as cathinone, methcathinone, MDMA and
MDEA, including, but not limited to, any quantity of a natural or synthetic
material, compound, mixture, preparation, substance and their analog (including
salts, isomers, and salts of isomers) containing substances which have a
stimulant effect on the central nervous system, such as:
3-Fluoromethcathinone
4-Fluoromethcathinone (other name: flephedrone)
3,4-Methylenedioxymethcathinone (other name: methylone, MDMC)
3,4-Methylenedioxypyrovalerone (other name: MDPV)
4-Methylmethcathinon (other names: mephedrone, 4-MMC)
4-Methoxymethcathinone (other names: methedrone, bk-PMMA, PMMC)
4-Ethylmethcathinone (other name: 4-EMC)
Ethcathinone
Beta-keto-N-methylbenzodioxyolylpropylamine (other names: butylone, bk-MBDB)
Napthylpyrovalerone (other names: naphyrone, NRG-1)
N,N-dimethylcathinone (other name: metamfepramone)
Alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name: alpha-PPP)
4-methoxy-alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name: MOPPP)
3,4-methylenedioxy-alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name: MDPPP)
Alpha-pyrrolidinovalerophenone (other name: alpha-PVP)
6,7-kihydro-5H-indeno(5,6-d)-1,3-dioxal-6-amine) (other name: MDAI)
Any compound that is structurally derived from 2- amino-1-phenyl-1-propanone by
modification or substitution in any of the following ways:
In the phenyl ring to any extent with alkyl, alkoxy, alkylenedioxy, haloalkyl,
or halide substituents, whether or not further substituted in the phenyl ring
by one or more other univalent substituents;
At the 3-position with an alkyl substituent;
At the nitrogen atom with alkyl, dialkyl, benzyl, or methoxybenzyl groups; or
By inclusion of the nitrogen atom in a cyclic structure. (Ord. 2075, 3-6-2012)
6-22-2: SALE OR DELIVERY:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation, LLC or
other legal entity to sell, offer for sale, advertise, display or deliver any
product containing a synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant or psychedelic/
hallucinogen. (Ord. 2075, 3-6-2012)
6-22-3: POSSESSION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess a product containing a
synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant or psychedelic/hallucinogen. (Ord. 2075, 3-6-
2012)
6-22-4: USE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be under the influence of a synthetic
cannabinoid, stimulant or psychedelic/hallucinogen. (Ord. 2075, 3-6-2012)
6-22-5: PENALTY:
Violations of this chapter, whether by a person, firm, partnership,
corporation, LLC, or other legal entity, shall be governed by title 1, chapter
27, "General Penalty", of this code and the fee schedule that is adopted by
city council from time to time.
Additionally, any person guilty of violating any provision of this chapter may
also have up to fifty (50) hours of community service work added to his/her
sentence in addition to or as an alternative to any fine issued. (Ord. 4034, 7-
19-2016)
CHAPTER 23
SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-23-1: Vehicles Subject To Seizure And Impoundment
6-23-2: General Regulations
6-23-3: Administrative Fee For Towed And Impounded Vehicles
6-23-4: Procedure For Seizure And Impoundment Of Vehicles
6-23-5: Notice And Opportunity For Hearing
6-23-6: Release Of Vehicle
6-23-7: Administrative Review
6-23-1: VEHICLES SUBJECT TO SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT:
A motor vehicle used in the commission of any of the following violations or
offenses may be seized and impounded by the City of Canton and may also be
assessed administrative fees in addition to towing and storage fees for the
motor vehicle:
   (A)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized and
forfeited pursuant to Section 36-1 of the Criminal Code of 2012; or
   (B)   Driving under the influence of alcohol, another drug or drugs, an
intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof, in violation of
Section 11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code; or
   (C)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, a felony or in violation of the Cannabis Control Act; or
   (D)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act; or
   (E)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of Section 24-1, 24-1.5, or 24-3.1
of the Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012; or
   (F)   Driving while a driver's license, permit, or privilege to operate a
motor vehicle is suspended or revoked pursuant to Section 6-303 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code; except that vehicles shall not be subjected to seizure or
impoundment if the suspension is for an unpaid citation (parking or moving) or
due to failure to comply with emission testing; or
   (G)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting, possessing, or
attempting to solicit or possess cannabis or a controlled substance, as defined
by the Cannabis Control Act or the Illinois Controlled Substances Act; or
   (H)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle with an expired driver's license,
in violation of Section 6-101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, if the period of
expiration is greater than one year; or
   (I)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a
driver's license or permit, in violation of Section 6-101 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, or operating a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a
driver's license or permit due to a person's age; or
   (J)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a warrant
has been issued by a circuit clerk in Illinois for failing to answer charges
that the driver violated Section 6-101, 6-303, or 11-501 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code; or
   (K)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of Article 16 or 16A of the Criminal
Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012; or
   (L)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, any other misdemeanor or felony offense in violation of the
Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012, when so provided by local
ordinance; or
   (M)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in violation of Section 11-503 of
the Illinois Vehicle Code:
      1.   While the vehicle is part of a funeral procession; or
      2.   In a manner that interferes with a funeral procession. (Ord. 3008,
2-5-2013, eff. 5-1-2013; amd. Ord. 4487, 7-15-2025)
6-23-2: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   (A)   This chapter shall not replace or otherwise abrogate any existing
state or federal laws or city ordinances.
   (B)   Fees for towing and storage of a vehicle under this chapter shall be
those approved by the chief of police and shall be uniform for all similarly
situated vehicles. (Ord. 3008, 2-5-2013, eff. 5-1-2013)
6-23-3: ADMINISTRATIVE FEE FOR TOWED AND IMPOUNDED VEHICLES:
The following shall apply to any fees imposed for administrative and processing
costs pursuant to section
6-23-1 of this chapter:
   (A)   The registered owner or the agent or agents of the owner shall be
liable to the city for an administrative fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
The fee shall be in addition to any other penalties that may be assessed by a
court of law for the underlying violations and any towing and/or storage fees
charged by the towing company.
   (B)   The administrative fee shall be collected by and paid to the city.
   (C)   The towing or storage fees, or both, shall be collected by and paid to
the person, firm, or entity that tows and stores the vehicle impounded under
this chapter.
   (D)   The administrative fee provided for in this section shall be waived by
the city upon submission of verifiable proof that the vehicle was stolen at the
time that the vehicle was impounded. (Ord. 3008, 2-5-2013, eff. 5-1-2013)
6-23-4: PROCEDURE FOR SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES:
Whenever a City police officer has probable cause to believe that the driver of
a motor vehicle has committed an eligible offense as enumerate in Section
6-23-1  of the Chapter, the officer may provide for the towing or
transportation of the motor vehicle to a towing/impound facility authorized by
the City of Canton. (Ord. 3008, 2-5-2013, eff. 5-1-2013; amd. Ord. 4487, 7-15-
2025)
6-23-5: NOTICE AND OPPORTUNITY FOR HEARING:
   (A)   At the time the vehicle is towed, the City shall notify or make a
reasonable attempt to notify the owner, lessee, agent or agents, or person
identifying himself or herself as the owner or lessee of the vehicle, or any
person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged
offense, of the following:
      1.   The fact the seizure occurred;
      2.   The vehicle owner's or the lessee's right to an administrative
hearing; and
      3.   That the seized motor vehicle will remain impounded pending the
completion of an administrative hearing, unless the owner or lessee of the
vehicle, or a lienholder, posts with the City a bond equal to the
administrative fee as set forth in this Chapter and pays all towing and storage
charges.
   (B)   The registered owner or lessee of the vehicle and any lienholder
ofrecord shall also be provided with a written notice of administrative
hearing. The notice shall:
      1.   Be served upon the owner, lessee, and any lienholder of record
either by personal service or by first class mail to the interested party's
address as registered with the secretary of state;
      2.   Be served upon such interested party within ten (10) days after
impoundment of a vehicle by the City; and
      3.   Contain a date, time and location of the administrative hearing. An
initial hearing shall be scheduled and convened no later than forty-five ( 45)
days after the date of the mailing of the notice of hearing.
   (C)   All administrative hearings conducted pursuant to this Chapter shall
be conducted by a hearing officer who is an attorney licensed to practice law
in the State of Illinois for a minimum of three (3) years. At the conclusion of
the administrative hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision
either sustaining or overruling the vehicle impoundment.
      1.   The hearing officer shall consider as a defense to the vehicle
impoundment that the motor vehicle was stolen or hijacked at the time the
vehicle was impounded; to demonstrate that the motor vehicle was hijacked or
stolen at the time the vehicle was impounded, the owner or the agents of the
owner or a lessee must submit proof that a report concerning the motor vehicle
was filed with a law enforcement agency in a timely manner.
      2.   If the basis for the vehicle impoundment is sustained by the
administrative hearing officer, any administrative fee posted to secure the
release of the vehicle as set forth herein shall be forfeited to the City.
      3.   Unless the administrative hearing officer overturns the basis for
the vehicle impoundment, no vehicle shall be released to the owner, lessee, or
lienholder of record until all administrative fees and towing and storage
charges are paid.
      4.   If the administrative hearing officer finds that the City's
impoundment of the motor vehicle exceeded its authority under this Illinois
Vehicle Code, the City shall be liable to the registered owner or lessee of the
vehicle for the cost of storage fees and reasonable attorney's fees; and
      5.   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, if the
administrative hearing officer finds that the City impounded a motor vehicle
that was stolen or hijacked at the time the vehicle was impounded, the City
shall refund any administrative fees already paid by the registered owner or
lessee of the vehicle.
   (D)   Vehicles not retrieved from the towing facility or storage facility
within thirty five (35) days after the administrative hearing officer issues a
written decision shall be deemed abandoned and may be disposed of in accordance
with the provisions of Article II of Chapter 4 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, or
as elsewhere provided for in the Illinois Vehicle Code.
   (E)   Unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, any fine, penalty
or fee imposed under this Chapter which remains unpaid in whole or in part
after the expiration of the deadline for seeking judicial review under the
administrative review law may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment
entered by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 3008, 2-5-2013, eff. 5-1-
2013; amd. Ord. 4487, 7- 15-2025)
6-23-6: RELEASE OF VEHICLE:
Motor vehicles seized and impounded under this chapter shall remain impounded
until:
   (A)   All costs associated with the towing and storage of the motor vehicle
are paid; and
   (B)   The registered owner, lessee, or lienholder of the vehicle remits the
administrative fee to the city of Canton police department. The city of Canton
police department shall have the right to hold the vehicle until the costs
associated with towing, storage, and the administrative fee have been paid in
full or until the motor vehicle is released as a result of the administrative
review process, or as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. 3008, 2-5-2013,
eff. 5-1-2013)
6-23-7: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
All final decisions of the administrative hearing officer shall be subject to
review under the administrative review act pursuant to 735 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/3-101 et seq. (Ord. 3008, 2-5-2013, eff. 5-1-2013)
TITLE 7
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
7-1-1: Nuisances
7-1-1-1: Definition, Prohibition
7-1-1-2: Nonsummary Abatement, Notice
7-1-1-3: Nonsummary Abatement
7-1-1-4: Summary Abatement
7-1-2: Noises Prohibited
7-1-3: Controlled Substances And Cannabis
7-1-3-1: Possession Of Cannabis
7-1-3-2: Selling, Etc., Controlled Substances, Abatement
7-1-3-3: Filing Complaint For Injunction, Procedure; Lessee To Be Party
Defendant
7-1-3-4: Evidence, Hearing, Dismissal, Costs
7-1-3-5: Interrogatories, Refusal To Answer, Contempt
7-1-3-6: Judgment
7-1-3-7: Proceeds From Sale Of Property, Disposition
7-1-3-8: Prosecution For Violation Of Injunction Or Abatement Order
7-1-3-9: Release Of Premises
7-1-3-10: Fine And Costs To Be Lien Against Property
7-1-3-11: Leases, Void At Option Of Lessor
7-1-3-12: Application Of Section
7-1-3-13: Penalty
7-1-4: Drug Paraphernalia Control
7-1-4-1: Possession Of Drug Paraphernalia
7-1-4-2: Sale Or Delivery; Public Nuisance
7-1-4-3: Exempt Items, Determination
7-1-4-4: Forfeiture And Seizure Of Property
7-1-4-5: Legislative Intent, Inference Of Legitimacy
7-1-4-6: Penalty
7-1-5: Search Warrants; Code Enforcement
7-1-5-1: Issuance Of Search Warrant
7-1-5-2: Application For Search Warrant
7-1-5-3: Application To Municipal Code
7-1-6: Weeds And Tall Grass
7-1-6-1: Definition, Weeds
7-1-6-2: Enforcement Of Chapter
7-1-6-3: Notice To Abate Weeds And Litter From Lots With Occupied Structures
7-1-6-4: Notice To Abate Weeds And Litter On Vacant Lots And On Lots With
Unoccupied Structures
7-1-6-5: Lien And Personal Judgment
7-1-6-6: Penalty
7-1-1: NUISANCES:
7-1-1-1: DEFINITION, PROHIBITION:
The following acts, conduct and conditions set forth in this chapter are hereby
declared and defined to be nuisances, and when committed, performed or
permitted to exist by any individual, firm, association or corporation within
the territorial limits of the city, are hereby declared to be unlawful and
prohibited:
   (A)   Any act or offense which is a nuisance according to the common law of
the state of Illinois, or declared or defined to be a nuisance by the
ordinances of the city. In addition, the officials of the municipality shall be
authorized to abate any nuisance which, while not specifically defined within
this section, shall constitute the unreasonable, unwarrantable, or unlawful use
by a person of property real or personal or from his own improper, indecent or
unlawful personal conduct which works an obstruction or injury to a right of
another, or of the public, and produces such material annoyance, inconvenience,
discomfort, or hurt that the law will presume an actionable nuisance. Nuisances
may be abated which are public or which are both public and private in nature.
   (B)   To cause or suffer the carcass of any animal or any offal, filth or
noisome substance to be collected, deposited or to remain in any place under
his ownership or control to the prejudice of others.
   (C)   To throw or deposit any offal or other offensive matter, or the
carcass of any dead animal in any watercourse, lake, pond, spring, well or
common sewer, street or public highway.
   (D)   To corrupt or render unwholesome or impure the water of any spring,
river, stream, pond or lake, to the injury or prejudice of others.
   (E)   To obstruct or encroach upon public highways, private ways, streets,
alleys, commons, landing places, and ways to burying places.
   (F)   To erect, continue or use any building or other place for the exercise
of any trade, employment or manufacture, which, by occasioning noxious
exhalations, offensive smells or otherwise, is offensive or dangerous to the
health of individuals, or of the public.
   (G)   To advertise wares or occupation by painting notices of the same on,
or affixing them to fences, walls, windows, building exteriors, utility poles,
or on hydrants, other public or private property, or on rocks or other natural
objects, without the consent of the owner, or if in the highway or other public
place, without permission of the proper authorities.
   (H)   To harass, intimidate or threaten any person who is about to sell or
lease or has sold or leased a residence or other real property or is about to
buy or lease or has bought or leased a residence or other real property, when
the harassment, intimidation or threat relates to a person's attempt to sell,
buy or lease a residence, or other real property, or refers to a person's sale,
purchase or lease of a residence or other real property.
   (I)   To dump, abandon, deposit, dismantle or burn upon any public property
or right of way, highway, park, street or parkway anywhere in the city any
trash, garbage, ashes, junk, junked or wrecked motor vehicles or parts thereof,
or miscellaneous waste.
   (J)   To store, keep, or maintain outside of a closed building, any junk,
parts, machinery or equipment not in an operable condition, or motor vehicle
not in an operable condition, where such inoperable motor vehicle is an actual
danger or detriment to life, safety, health or peaceful enjoyment of the
property of surrounding landowners; provided, however, that this provision
shall not apply to a properly licensed junkyard or other permitted outdoor
storage use which is in full compliance with all of the ordinances of the city
governing the same.
   (K)   To own, maintain or keep a dwelling unit unfit for human habitation,
or dangerous or detrimental to life, safety or health because of lack of
repair, defects in the plumbing system, lighting or ventilation, the existence
of contagious diseases or unsanitary conditions likely to cause sickness among
persons residing in said premises or residing in proximity thereof.
   (L)   To store or place any materials in a manner which may harbor rats.
   (M)   To produce or permit to be produced, whether on public or private
property, any offensive noise to the disturbance of the peace or quiet of any
person residing in the vicinity. (Ord. 1193, 5-3-1988)
7-1-1-2: NONSUMMARY ABATEMENT, NOTICE:
Except where otherwise provided by the ordinances of the city, any officer of
the city possessing police powers may serve or cause to be served a notice, in
writing, upon the owner, agent, occupant or person in possession, charge or
control of any lot, building or premises or item of personalty in or upon which
any nuisance, requiring them, or either or both of them, to abate the same
within a specified reasonable time, in such manner as the notice shall direct.
(Ord. 1193, 5-3-1988)
7-1-1-3: NONSUMMARY ABATEMENT:
If the person so served and notified does not abate the nuisance within the
specified reasonable time, the corporate authorities may proceed to abate the
nuisance in any or all manner allowable by law, including, without limited to,
the following:
   (A)   Seeking to impose a penalty as governed by title 1, chapter 27,
"General Penalty", of this code and the fee schedule that is adopted by city
council from time to time.
   (B)   Seeking to enjoin the continuation of the nuisance by the filing of a
lawsuit in a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 4034, 7-19-2016)
7-1-1-4: SUMMARY ABATEMENT:
Whenever, in the opinion of an officer of the city possessing police powers,
the maintenance or continuation of a nuisance creates an imminent threat of
serious injury to persons or serious damage to personal or real property, or if
the nuisance can be abated summarily without or with only minor damage to the
items or premises which are creating the nuisance, and the continuation of the
nuisance poses a substantial threat of injury to persons or property or a
substantial interference with the quiet enjoyment of life normally present in
the community, such officer shall proceed to abate such nuisance; provided,
further, that whenever the owner, occupant, agent or person in possession,
charge or control of the real or personal property which has become a nuisance
is unknown or cannot readily be found, the municipal officer with police power
may proceed to abate such nuisance without notice. Where the abatement of the
nuisance requires continuing acts by the corporate authorities beyond the
initial summary abatement and any other additional emergency abatements, it
shall seek abatement of such nuisance on a permanent basis through judicial
process as soon as reasonably possible. (Ord. 1193, 5-3-1988)
7-1-2: NOISES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to make, continue or cause
to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which either
annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, convenience,
health, peace or safety of others, within the limits of the city. It shall be
unlawful and a nuisance for any person to permit any noise as described
hereunder to be made in or upon any house or premises owned or possessed by
them or under their management and/or control.
The following acts, without limitation, are declared to be examples of loud,
disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section:
   (A)   Vehicles:
      1.   Horns, Signaling Devices: The sounding of any horn or signaling
device on any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle on any street or public
place of the city, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any
such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; the sounding of
any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; the use of
any horn, whistle, or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of
any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up. Authorized
emergency vehicles may use warning sounds.
      2.   Engine Exhausts: The discharge into the open air within the city of
the exhaust of any steam engine, gasoline engine, stationary internal
combustion engine, or other kind or type of engine, motor boat, or motor
vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
      3.   Defect In Vehicle Or Load: The use within the city of any wagon,
cart, automobile, truck, motorcycle, or other vehicle, so out of repair or
loaded in such manner or with material of such nature as to create loud and
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noises.
      4.   Loading, Unloading; Opening Boxes: The creation within the city of
loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading of any
vehicle, or the opening or destruction of bales, boxes, crates, containers, or
the like, without exercising reasonable care to limit such noise and to confine
the same.
      5.   Music; Sounds: It shall be unlawful for a motor vehicle operator to
play any radio or device capable of transmitting music or sounds from said
motor vehicle in such a manner as to be plainly audible to any other person
other than the player or operator of the device at a distance of twenty feet
(20').
   (B)   Construction, Repairing Of Buildings: The creation (including
excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building within the city,
other than between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:
00) P.M. on weekdays, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of
public health and safety, and then only with the requisite city permit, which
permit may be granted for a period up to three (3) days while the emergency
continues and which permit may be renewed for periods of three (3) days while
the emergency continues.
   (C)   Drums: The use within the city of any drum or other instrument or
device for the purpose of attracting attention, by the creation of noise, to
any place of business or entertainment or place of public assembly.
   (D)   Heavy Equipment:
      1.   Pile Drivers, Hammers: The operation within the city between the
hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. of any pile
driver, power shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick or hoist, or other appliance,
the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noises.
      2.   Blowers: The operation within the city of any noise creating blower
or power fan, the operation of which causes loud disturbing noise, unless such
blower or fan is muffled to deaden such noise.
   (E)   Loudspeakers, Amplifiers, Paging Systems:
      1.   Sound On Streets: The playing, using, operating or permitting to be
played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument,
phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or device for the
producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets of the
city. (Ord. 2078, 4-17-2012)
      2.   Restrictions Upon Hours Of Permitted Use: No machine or device
specified in the foregoing paragraph shall be operated between the hours of ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. from Sunday evening through
Friday morning, and between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:
00) A.M. from Friday evening through Sunday morning and on those evenings
preceding national holidays and legal school holidays established by state law
in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of thirty feet (30')
from the location of such set, instrument or device, for all locations without
a valid class A, B, C, D, or G liquor license and at a distance of three
hundred feet (300') for those locations with a valid class A, B, C, D, or G
liquor license. School property and park district property shall be exempt from
this requirement.
   (F)   Radios, Televisions, Musical Instruments Or Similar Devices, Time And
Use Restrictions: The playing, using, operating or permitting to be played,
used or operated, any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph,
tape, CD or MP3 player, television receiving set or other machine or device for
the producing or reproducing of sound between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. from Sunday evening through Friday morning,
and between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. from
Friday evening through Sunday morning and on those evenings preceding national
and legal holidays as established by state law, loud enough to be clearly heard
outside of the boundary of the property on which the sound is produced or
reproduced, for all locations without a valid class A, B, C, D, or G liquor
license, and three hundred feet (300') for those locations with a valid class
A, B, C, D, or G liquor license. School property and park district property
shall be exempt from this requirement. (Ord. 3023, 8-6-2013)
   (G)   Schools, Courts, Churches And Hospitals: The creation within the city
of any excessive noise in the vicinity of any school, institution of learning,
church, court or hospital, while the same is in use, which unreasonably
interferes with the workings of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly
annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed at or
near such buildings indicating that the same is a school, hospital, court or
church.
   (H)   Hawkers, Peddlers: The shouting and crying within the city of
peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood.
   (I)   Yelling, Shouting: Yelling, shouting, hollering, whistling, or singing
on the public streets of the city, between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00)
P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. or at any time or place so as to annoy or
disturb the peace, quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, or in any
dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or of persons in the vicinity,
within the limits of this city.
   (J)   Animals, Birds: The keeping of any animal or bird shut up or tied up
in any yard, enclosure, stable, or other place within the city which, by
frequently repeated barking, howling, crying, or singing causes frequent or
long continued noise.
   (K)   Interpretation And Legislative Intent: It is the intent of the Canton
city council that the peaceful and quiet enjoyment of each resident's property,
home, house, apartment and domicile be assured. Accordingly, this section shall
be broadly interpreted to give force and effect to such section; specifically,
no delineation of quiet hours in said section shall ever be interpreted as
creating a right or immunity in any person to annoy, disturb, injure or
endanger the comfort, repose, convenience, health, peace or safety of others by
making, continuing or causing to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary or
unusual noise as aforesaid, even though such noise be made during nonrestricted
hours. (Ord. 2078, 4-17-2012)
   (L)   Penalty: Violations of this section shall be governed by title 1,
chapter 27, "General Penalty", of this code and the fee schedule that is
adopted by city council from time to time. (Ord. 4034, 7-19-2016)
7-1-3: CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES AND CANNABIS:
   (A)   Definitions: As used in this section unless the context otherwise
requires:
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES: Any substance as defined and included in the schedules
of article II of the "Illinois controlled substance act"; and, cannabis as
defined in the "cannabis control act" enacted by the 77th general assembly;
and, "alcohol", "spirits", "wine", "beer", and "alcoholic liquor" as defined in
the Illinois liquor control act of 1934.
DEPARTMENT: The Canton police department, or, any commissioned officer of said
department.
NUISANCE: Any place which is resorted to for the purpose of unlawfully selling,
serving, storing, keeping, giving away or using controlled substances.
PERSON: Any corporation, association, partner, or one or more individual(s).
PLACE: Any store, shop, warehouse, dwelling house, building, apartment or any
place whatever located in the city, or, located anywhere within the
jurisdictional limits of the city as the same relates to the abatement of
nuisances. (Ord. 1193, 5-3-1988; amd. Ord. 3052, 2-18-2014)
7-1-3-1: POSSESSION OF CANNABIS:
   (A)   Possession: It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for
any person to possess cannabis, as defined in the Illinois cannabis control
act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., in the amount less than ten
grams (10 g). (Ord. 3052, 2-18-2014)
   (B)   Penalty: Violations of this section shall be governed by title 1,
chapter 27, "General Penalty", of this code and the fee schedule that is
adopted by city council from time to time. (Ord. 4034, 7-19-2016)
7-1-3-2: SELLING, ETC., CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES, ABATEMENT:
All places and the fixtures and movable contents thereof, used for the purpose
of unlawfully selling, serving, storing, hereby keeping, giving away or using
controlled substances are declared to be nuisances and may be abated as
hereinafter provided and the owners, agents, occupants of and any other person
using any such place may be enjoined as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 1193, 5-3-
1988)
7-1-3-3: FILING COMPLAINT FOR INJUNCTION, PROCEDURE; LESSEE TO BE PARTY
DEFENDANT:
The city attorney may file a complaint in the name of the city, to enjoin all
persons from maintaining or permitting such nuisance, to abate the same and to
enjoin the use of any such place for the period of one year.
Upon the filing of a complaint by the city attorney in which the complaint
states that irreparable injury, loss or damage will result to the city, the
court shall enter a temporary restraining order without notice enjoining the
maintenance of such nuisance, upon affidavit or testimony under oath,
sufficient, if sustained, to justify the court in entering a preliminary
injunction upon a hearing after notice. Every such temporary restraining order
entered without notice shall be endorsed with the date and hour of entry of the
order, shall be filed of record, and shall expire by its terms within such time
after entry, not to exceed ten (10) days as fixed by the court, unless the
temporary restraining order for good cause is extended for a like period or
unless the party against whom the order is directed consents that it may be
extended for a longer period. The reason for extension shall be shown in the
order. In case a temporary restraining order is entered without notice, the
motion for a permanent injunction shall be set down for hearing at the earliest
possible time and takes precedence over all matters except older matters of the
same character, and when the motion comes on for hearing, the city attorney
shall proceed with the application for a permanent injunction, and, if he does
not do so, the court shall dissolve the temporary restraining order. On two (2)
days' written notice to the city attorney the defendant may appear and move the
dissolution or modification of such temporary restraining order and in that
event the court shall proceed to hear and determine such motion as
expeditiously as the ends of justice require.
Upon the filing of the complaint by the city attorney (in cases in which the
city attorney does not request injunctive relief without notice) in the circuit
court, the court, if satisfied that the nuisance complained of exists, shall
allow a temporary restraining order, without bond, enjoining the defendant from
maintaining any such nuisance within the jurisdiction of the court granting the
injunctive relief. However, no such injunctive relief shall be granted unless
it be made to appear to the satisfaction of the court that the owner or agent
of such place knew or had been personally served with a notice signed by the
plaintiff and, that such notice has been served upon such owner or such agent
of such place at least five (5) days prior thereto, that such place,
specifically describing the same, was being so used, naming the date or dates
of its being so used, and that such owner or agent had failed to abate such
nuisance, or that upon diligent inquiry such owner or agent could not be found
within the city for the service of such preliminary notice. The lessee, if any,
of such place shall be made a party defendant to such petition. (Ord. 1193, 5-
3-1988)
7-1-3-4: EVIDENCE, HEARING, DISMISSAL, COSTS:
The defendant shall be held to answer the allegations of the complaint as in
other civil proceedings. At all hearings upon the merits, evidence of the
general reputation of such place, of the inmates thereof, and of those
resorting thereto, shall be admissible for the purpose of proving the existence
of such nuisance. The cause shall be heard immediately upon issue being joined.
(Ord. 1193, 5-3-1988)
7-1-3-5: INTERROGATORIES, REFUSAL TO ANSWER, CONTEMPT:
The plaintiff at any time before, but not later than ten (10) days after, the
filing of the answer, unless further time be granted by the court, may file
interrogatories in writing concerning matters material to the allegations of
the complaint or respecting the ownership of the property upon which it is
claimed the nuisance is maintained. A full answer to each interrogatory under
the oath of the defendant shall be filed with the clerk within ten (10) days
after a copy of the interrogatories has been served upon him. For a failure to
so answer interrogatories the court may strike the answer to the complaint from
the files and enter an order of default and final judgment, and a rule to
answer interrogatories may be entered and the court may punish a defendant for
contempt of court for a refusal to obey such rule. No person shall be excused
from answering interrogatories under oath on the ground that the answer may
tend to incriminate him or subject him to a penalty or forfeiture. The answer
shall be evidence against, but not on behalf of, the defendant and it shall not
be used against him in any criminal proceeding nor shall he be prosecuted or
subjected to a penalty or forfeiture for or on account of any transaction,
matter or thing disclosed by him in such answer responsive to the
interrogatories. (Ord. 1193, 5-3-1988)
7-1-3-6: JUDGMENT:
If the existence of the nuisance is established, the court shall enter a
judgment perpetually restraining all persons from maintaining or permitting
such nuisance, and from using the place in which the same is maintained for any
purpose for a period of one year thereafter, unless such judgment is sooner
vacated, as hereinafter provided, and perpetually restraining the defendant
from maintaining any such nuisance within the jurisdiction of the court. While
the judgment remains in effect, such place shall be in the custody of the
court. An order of abatement shall also be entered as a part of such judgment,
which order shall direct the department to remove from such place all fixtures
and movable property used in conducting or aiding or abetting such nuisance,
and to sell the same in the manner provided by law for the sale of chattels in
the enforcement of a judgment for the payment of money, and to close such place
against its use for any purpose, and to keep it closed for a period of one year
unless sooner released as hereinafter provided. The department's fees for
removing and selling the movable property shall be taxed as a part of the
costs, and shall be the same as those for levying upon and selling like
property in the enforcement of a judgment for the payment of money. For closing
the place and keeping it closed, the court shall allow a reasonable fee to be
taxed as part of the costs; provided, that no injunction shall be entered
against an owner, nor shall an order be entered requiring that any place be
closed or kept closed, if it appears that such owner and his agent have in good
faith endeavored to prevent such nuisance or did not have knowledge of such
nuisance except in cases in which the city attorney states in his complaint
that immediate and irreparable injury will result to the city, then a
preliminary injunction may be entered. Nothing in this section contained shall
authorize any relief respecting any other place than that in which such
nuisance exists. (Ord. 1193, 5-3-1988)
7-1-3-7: PROCEEDS FROM SALE OF PROPERTY, DISPOSITION:
The proceeds of the sale of the movable property shall be applied in payment of
the costs of the proceeding, and the balance, if any, shall be paid to the city
treasurer for deposit in the police protection fund of the city. (Ord. 1193, 5-
3-1988)
7-1-3-8: PROSECUTION FOR VIOLATION OF INJUNCTION OR ABATEMENT ORDER:
In case of the violation of any injunction or order of abatement issued under
the provisions of this section, the court may summarily try and punish the
offender for his contempt of court. The hearing may be had upon affidavits, or
either party may demand the production and oral examination of witnesses. (Ord.
1193, 5-3-1988)
7-1-3-9: RELEASE OF PREMISES:
If the owner of the place has not been guilty of any contempt of court in the
proceedings, and appears and pays all costs, fees, and allowances that are a
lien on the place and files a bond in the full value of the property, to be
ascertained by the court, with sureties, to be approved by the court
conditioned that he will immediately abate any such nuisance that may exist at
the place and prevent it from being established or kept therein within a period
of one year thereafter, the court may, if satisfied of good faith, order the
place to be delivered to the owner and the order of abatement canceled so far
as it may relate to such place. The release of such place under the provisions
of this section does not release it from any judgment, lien, or liability to
which it may be subject. (Ord. 1193, 5-3-1988)
7-1-3-10: FINE AND COSTS TO BE LIEN AGAINST PROPERTY:
Whenever a fine or costs shall be assessed under the provisions of this section
7-1-3 against the owner of any property herein declared to be a nuisance, such
fine or costs shall constitute a lien upon such property to the extent of the
interest of such owner, and an order of execution shall issue thereon. (Ord.
1193, 5-3-1988)
7-1-3-11: LEASES, VOID AT OPTION OF LESSOR:
If any lessee or occupant shall use leased premises for the purpose of unlawful
using, keeping or selling controlled substances or shall permit them to be used
for any such purposes, the lease or contract for letting such premises shall,
at the option of the lessor, become void, and the owner may have the like
remedy to recover possession thereof as against a tenant holding over after the
expiration of his term. (Ord. 1193, 5-3-1988)
7-1-3-12: APPLICATION OF SECTION:
Nothing contained in this section
7-1-3 shall apply to any unlawful act which results from failing to comply with
the provisions prescribed in the "Illinois controlled substances act", enacted
by the 77th general assembly. (Ord. 1193, 5-3-1988)
7-1-3-13: PENALTY:
Violations of this section
7-1-3 shall be governed by title 1, chapter 27, "General Penalty", of this code
and the fee schedule that is adopted by city council from time to time. (Ord.
4034, 7-19-2016)
7-1-4: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA CONTROL:
   (A)   Definitions: As used in this section, unless the context otherwise
requires:
   CANNABIS: Shall have the same meaning as ascribed to it in section 3(a) of
the "Illinois cannabis control act", if that definition were incorporated
herein.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in section 102
of the "Illinois controlled substances act", as if that definition were
incorporated herein.
   DELIVER OR DELIVERY: The actual, constructive or attempted transfer of
possession, with or without consideration, whether or not there is an agency
relationship.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: All equipment, products and materials of any kind which
are peculiar to and marketed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating,
growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing,
containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing
into the human body cannabis or a controlled substance in violation of the
"cannabis control act" or the "Illinois controlled substances act". It
includes, but is not limited to:
      1.   Kits peculiar to and marketed for use in manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing or preparing cannabis or a controlled
substance;
      2.   Isomerization devices peculiar to and marketed for use in increasing
the potency of any species of plant which is cannabis or a controlled
substance;
      3.   Testing equipment peculiar to and marketed for private home use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of cannabis
or controlled substances;
      4.   Diluents and adulterants peculiar to and marketed for cutting
cannabis or a controlled substance by private persons;
      5.   Object peculiar to and marketed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing cannabis, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human
body including, where applicable, the following items:
           (a) Water pipes;
          (b) Carburetion tubes and devices;
           (c) Smoking and carburetion masks;
           (d) Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
           (e) Carburetor pipes;
           (f) Electric pipes;
           (g) Air driven pipes;
           (h) Chillums;
           (i) Bongs;
           (j) Ice pipes or chillers;
      6.   Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by the seller, is
for use in violation of this section
7-1-4. (Ord. 1194, 5-3-1988; amd. Ord. 3053, 2-18-2014)
7-1-4-1: POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
   (A)   Possession: It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for
any person to possess drug paraphernalia. (Ord. 3064, 6-3-2014)
   (B)   Penalty: Violations of this section
7-1-4 and/or this section
7-1-4-1 shall be governed by title 1, chapter 27, "General Penalty", of this
code and the fee schedule that is adopted by city council from time to time.
(Ord. 4034, 7-19-2016)
7-1-4-2: SALE OR DELIVERY; PUBLIC NUISANCE:
   (A)   Any person who keeps for sale, offers for sale, sells, or delivers for
any commercial consideration any item which that person knows, or under all of
the circumstances reasonably should have known, to be drug paraphernalia,
commits a business offense.
   (B)   Any store, place, or premises from which or in which any item of drug
paraphernalia is kept for sale, offered for sale, sold, or delivered for any
commercial consideration is declared to be a public nuisance.
The city attorney may commence an action in the circuit court, in the name of
the city, to abate a public nuisance as described in this subsection.
Upon being satisfied by affidavits or other sworn evidence that an alleged
public nuisance exists the court may, without bond, enter a temporary
restraining order to enjoin any defendant from maintaining such nuisance and
may, without bond, enter a preliminary injunction restraining any defendant
from removing or interfering with any property used in connection with the
public nuisance.
If during the proceedings and hearings upon the merits, the existence of the
nuisance is established, and it is established that such nuisance was
maintained with the intentional, knowing or reckless permission of the owner,
or an agent of the owner managing the premises, the court shall enter an order
restraining all persons from maintaining or permitting such nuisance and from
using the premises for a period of one year thereafter. However an owner,
lessee, or other occupant thereof may use such premises if the owner gives bond
with sufficient security or surety, in an amount between five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) and ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) approved by the court,
payable to the city. Such bond shall include a condition that no offense
specified in this section
7-1-4 shall be committed at, in, or upon the property described, and a
condition that the principal obligor and surety assume responsibility for any
fine, costs, or damages incurred by any person resulting from such an offense.
(Ord. 1194, 5-3-1988)
7-1-4-3: EXEMPT ITEMS, DETERMINATION:
This section
7-1-4 shall not apply to:
   (A)   Items marketed for use in the preparation, compounding, packaging,
labeling, or other use of cannabis or a controlled substance as an incident to
lawful research, teaching, or chemical analysis and not for sale; or
   (B)   Items marketed for, or historically and customarily used in connection
with the planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, or inhaling of tobacco or any other lawful substance.
Items exempt under this subsection include, but are not limited to, garden
hoes, rakes, sickles, baggies, tobacco pipes, and cigarette rolling papers.
   (C)   Items listed in subsection
7-1-4(A) of this chapter marketed for decorative purposes, when such items have
been rendered completely inoperable or incapable of being used for any illicit
purpose prohibited by this section
7-1-4.
In determining whether or not a particular item is exempt under this
subsection, the trier of fact should consider, in addition to all other
logically relevant factors, the following:
      1.   The general, usual, customary, and historical use to which the item
involved has been put;
      2.   Expert evidence concerning the ordinary or customary use of the item
and the effect of any peculiarity in the design or engineering of the device
upon this functioning;
      3.   Any written instructions accompanying the delivery of the item
concerning the purposes or uses to which the item can or may be put;
      4.   Any oral instructions provided by the seller of the item at the time
and place of sale or commercial delivery;
      5.   Any national or local advertising, concerning the design, purpose or
use of the item involved, and the entire context in which such advertising
occurs;
      6.   The manner, place and circumstances in which the item was displayed
for sale, as well as any item or items displayed for sale or otherwise
exhibited upon the premises where the sale was made;
      7.   Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a legitimate
supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed
distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
      8.   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
city. (Ord. 1194, 5-3-1988)
7-1-4-4: FORFEITURE AND SEIZURE OF PROPERTY:
   (A)   All drug paraphernalia is subject to forfeiture.
   (B)   Property subject to forfeiture under this section may be seized by any
peace officer upon process issued by any court having jurisdiction over the
property. Judgments in favor of the city in an ordinance, or forfeiture
proceeding based upon this section
7-1-4 against a person's specific property shall serve as process authorizing a
police officer to seize such property without further process.
Seizure by a police officer may be made without process:
      1.   If there is probable cause to believe that the property is directly
dangerous to health or safety and existing circumstances do not allow
reasonable time for the officer to obtain lawful process; or
      2.   In accordance with the provisions of the code of criminal procedure
of 1963, as amended.
      3.   The presence of items which are deemed violative of this section
7-1-4 are otherwise subject to its forfeiture provisions in an inventory shall
not subject the entire inventory to seizure or forfeiture.
   (C)   Property taken or detained under this section
7-1-4 shall not be subject to replevin, but is deemed to be in the custody of
the law enforcement department or agency employing the seizing officer, subject
only to the order and judgments of the circuit court having jurisdiction over
the forfeiture proceedings. When property is seized under this section
7-1-4, the chief administrative officer of the seizing department or agency may
place the property under seal, or remove the property to a place designated by
him.
   (D)   No disposition may be made of property under seal until the validity
of the seizure has been determined in a circuit court, unless such court upon
application therefor, orders the sale of perishable substances and the deposit
of the proceeds of the sale with the clerk of the court. The circuit court
shall rule on the validity of the seizure within thirty (30) days after the
seizure, unless a continuance is obtained by a person from whom the items were
seized or a person who otherwise has standing to complain, or by the city for
good cause shown. In no event shall a continuance granted to the city pursuant
to this section
7-1-4 extend beyond thirty (30) days. If judgment is entered in favor of the
person from whom the property is seized, all seized property shall be returned
immediately. Appeals from orders of the circuit court shall be heard within
sixty (60) days from the date judgment is entered. Judgments in favor of the
person entitled to possession of the subject property shall serve as a mandate
to the agency holding said property to return same forthwith.
   (E)   When property is forfeited under this section
7-1-4 the chief administrative officer of the seizing department or agency may
retain it for official use, or forward it to the bureau of narcotics and
dangerous drugs, United States department of justice, or its successor agency,
for disposition. (Ord. 1194, 5-3-1988)
7-1-4-5: LEGISLATIVE INTENT, INFERENCE OF LEGITIMACY:
This section
7-1-4 is intended to be used solely for the suppression of the commercial
traffic in items which, within the context of the sale or offering for sale,
are clearly and beyond a reasonable doubt marketed for the illegal and unlawful
use of cannabis or controlled substances. To this end all reasonable and common
sense inferences shall be drawn in favor of the legitimacy of any transaction
or item. (Ord. 1194, 5-3-1988)
7-1-4-6: PENALTY:
Any individual, firm, association or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this section
7-1-4 of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or be
incarcerated in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a period of
time not to exceed six (6) months, or both. Each day or portion thereof that a
violation is allowed to exist shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1194,
5-3-1988)
7-1-5: SEARCH WARRANTS; CODE ENFORCEMENT:
7-1-5-1: ISSUANCE OF SEARCH WARRANT:
Where no consent has been given to enter or to inspect any property or place,
real or personal, and where the officer does not otherwise have a legal right
to enter or inspect the property or place in the city, no entry or inspection
shall be made without the procurement of a search warrant from the Fulton
County circuit court. The court may consider any of the following factors along
with such other matters as it deems pertinent in its decision as to whether a
search warrant shall issue:
   (A)   Eyewitness account of apparent violation;
   (B)   Citizen's complaint;
   (C)   Tenant complaints;
   (D)   Plain view violations;
   (E)   Violations apparent from city records;
   (F)   Property deterioration;
   (G)   Age of property;
   (H)   Nature of alleged violation;
   (I)   Similar properties in the area;
   (J)   Documented violations of similar properties in the area;
   (K)   Passage of time since last inspection;
   (L)   Previous violations on the property;
   (M)   General reputation of the place;
   (N)   General reputation of the inmates of the place, and of those resorting
thereto.
Cause for issuance of the search warrant shall be deemed to exist in light of
reasonable legislative and administrative standards which show that there is
reason to believe that a condition of nonconformity exists with respect to a
particular property or place in violation of this code. (Ord. 1195, 5-3-1988)
7-1-5-2: APPLICATION FOR SEARCH WARRANT:
The application for a search warrant shall be made through the office of the
city attorney. The police officer or other city officer having actual knowledge
of the facts shall sign the verified complaint and shall accompany the city
attorney and appear before a judge who may put the applicant under oath and
question the applicant. (Ord. 1195, 5-3-1988)
7-1-5-3: APPLICATION TO MUNICIPAL CODE:
This section
7-1-5 respecting search warrants in enforcement of municipal code enforcement
actions shall apply to all violations appearing in this code, to all uniform
codes adopted by the city and to other similar codes, and to all other matters
imposed upon the city by law, or, to all other matters where enforcement has
been delegated to the city. (Ord. 1195, 5-3-1988)
7-1-6: WEEDS AND TALL GRASS:
7-1-6-1: DEFINITION, WEEDS:
All noxious vegetation and all grasses, annual plants and vegetation other than
trees or shrubs which exceed a height or length of eight inches (8"); provided,
however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens. All
"weeds" as so defined are prohibited in the city of Canton. (Ord. 1655, 5-2-
2000)
7-1-6-2: ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER:
It shall be the duty of the Canton police department, the city maintenance
department, and the fire department to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1358, 7-21-1992)
7-1-6-3: NOTICE TO ABATE WEEDS AND LITTER FROM LOTS WITH OCCUPIED STRUCTURES:
Notice to abate a violation of weeds and litter on lots with occupied
structures shall be given by personal service, by certified mail which is
addressed to the residence or usual place of business of the owner or person in
control of the property, or by posting a sign regarding the violation on the
premises of the property in violation. Personal service may also be obtained
through delivery of the complaint by a city employee or any person authorized
by law to make personal service.
The city may give notice to abate a violation by posting a sign in a
conspicuous place near the main entrance of a structure. The posted sign shall
be at least fourteen inches (14") in height and eight inches (8") in width and
at the top thereof in large letters shall state the words, "Notice to Abate".
The text of the notice shall contain a reference to the provision of this code
violated and may contain such other information respecting the nature of the
violation as is deemed advisable. It shall be unlawful for anyone to deface,
tamper with or remove the "notice to abate" sign from the property where it is
posted unless authorized by the code enforcement officer.
If the notice to abate sent by certified mail is returned to the city by the
United States post office because of its inability to make delivery thereof,
the city is authorized to cut the weeds or remove the litter.
Upon the failure of the owner or persons in control to comply with a notice to
cut weeds or remove litter from lots with occupied structures within five (5)
days from the date of the service of the notice to abate by personal service,
certified mail or posting, the designated officials shall cut any weeds or
remove any litter located thereon. (Ord. 1358, 7-21-1992)
7-1-6-4: NOTICE TO ABATE WEEDS AND LITTER ON VACANT LOTS AND ON LOTS WITH
UNOCCUPIED STRUCTURES:
The city shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation
within the city limits once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks during the
spring and summer months of each year a notice informing all owners and persons
in control of any vacant lot or any lot with an unoccupied structure that the
growth of weeds and the existence of litter on any such lot is contrary to the
ordinances of the city. The notice shall further inform the public that should
the weeds ever grow to more than eight inches (8") in height, or should litter
accumulate, the city may cut the weeds or remove the litter located thereon
without further notice and the owner or person in control shall be liable to
the city for its costs. This notice shall be a display advertisement. (Ord.
1358, 7-21-1992)
7-1-6-5: LIEN AND PERSONAL JUDGMENT:
The cost of cutting the weeds and the removal of litter from private property
shall be recoverable from the owner or person in control of the real estate and
is a lien thereon. The per hour per person cost of such labor will be a minimum
of two hundred dollars ($200.00) and any rate greater than two hundred dollars
($200.00) per hour per person must be established by the city council on a
yearly basis. The lien shall be superior to all prior existing liens and
encumbrances, except taxes; provided, however, that within ninety (90) days
after completion of the cutting of the weeds, or the removal and disposal of
the litter, the city attorney shall file a notice of lien for the cost incurred
by the city in the office of land records of Fulton County. Upon payment of the
cost, the lien shall be released by the city. (Ord. 1358, 7-21-1992; amd. Ord.
1935, 6-17-2008; Ord. 2002, 6-15-2010)
The lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose as in case of mortgages or
mechanics' liens. Suit to foreclose this lien shall be commenced by the city
attorney within three (3) years after the date of filing of notice of lien.
If the city's costs for cutting weeds or removal of the litter are not paid,
the city attorney may commence proceedings in the circuit court seeking a
personal judgment from the owner or person in control of the subject property.
The action authorized by this section shall be in addition to, and without
waiver of, any other remedies. (Ord. 1358, 7-21-1992)
7-1-6-6: PENALTY:
Violations of this chapter shall be governed by title 1, chapter 27, "General
Penalty", of this code and the fee schedule that is adopted by city council
from time to time. (Ord. 4034, 7-19-2016)
CHAPTER 2
HEALTH REGULATIONS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Definition
7-2-2: Refuse, Offal
7-2-3: Dangerous Buildings
7-2-4: Nuisance On Property
7-2-5: Spitting
7-2-6: Penalty
7-2-7: Human Waste
7-2-1: DEFINITION:
A nuisance when used in this chapter includes everything which endangers life
or health, gives offense to the senses, violates the laws of decency, or
obstructs the reasonable and comfortable use of property, the unwarrantable or
unlawful use by any person of his property so as to produce material annoyance,
inconvenience, discomfort, or hurt to any person or the public in general.
(Ord. 48, 10-17-1961)
7-2-2: REFUSE, OFFAL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit anywhere in the city any
uncovered refuse, garbage, offal or carcasses of dead animals; and refuse,
garbage or offal is hereby declared to be a nuisance. (Ord. 860, 12-16-1980)
7-2-3: DANGEROUS BUILDINGS:
It shall be unlawful to permit any building, structure or place to remain in
such a condition as to be dangerous to the public health in any way. Any such
structure, building or place is hereby declared to be a nuisance. (Ord. 48, 10-
17-1961)
7-2-4: NUISANCE ON PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or maintain the existence of any
nuisance on any property under his control. The chief of police and health
officers are each hereby authorized to abate any such nuisance existing in the
city whether such nuisances are specifically recognized by ordinance or not.
(Ord. 48, 10-17-1961)
7-2-5: SPITTING:
It shall be unlawful to spit or expectorate on any public sidewalk or street or
other public place, on the floors or walls of any store, theater, hall, public
vehicle or other place frequented by the public or to which the public is
invited. (Ord. 48, 10-17-1961)
7-2-6: PENALTY:
Violation of this chapter shall be governed by title 1, chapter 27, "General
Penalty", of this code and the fee schedule that is adopted by city council
from time to time. (Ord. 4034, 7-19-2016)
7-2-7: HUMAN WASTE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate anywhere in the city
that is within public view and/or is on public property. (Ord. 4034, 7-19-2016)
CHAPTER 3
GARBAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM
SECTION:
7-3-1: Establishment
7-3-2: Definitions
7-3-3: Garbage Containers
7-3-4: City To Collect, Dispose Of
7-3-5: Placement Of Receptacles
7-3-6: Time Of Collection, Authority To Make Rules
7-3-7: Tampering With Containers
7-3-8: Penalty
7-3-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby established in the city a system for the collection and
disposal of garbage and rubbish. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 21, Sec. 1; amd. Ord. 1724, 3-
19-2002)
7-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
GARBAGE: For the purpose of classification of the various types of refuse
included in the subsequent sections of this chapter, the word "garbage" as used
herein shall be construed to include rejected or waste household food and
offal. It shall be taken to mean and include all table and kitchen refuse of
every kind and description, also decaying vegetables or meats, or anything
whatsoever that will or may decompose or become offensive or dangerous to
health.
RUBBISH: Shall be construed to mean all combustible substances discarded as
worthless, such as paper, rags, cardboard, worn out shoes, excelsior, straw,
paper circulars, handbills, and the like, together with such incombustible
substances discarded as worthless such as dirt, bottles, broken glass,
crockery, tin cans, metals, worn out and discarded articles.
SERVICE UNIT: Any single-family residence or dwelling house within the city.
(R.O. 1959, Ch. 21, Sec. 2; amd. Ord. 757, 12-18-1979; Ord. 1724, 3-19-2002)
7-3-3: GARBAGE CONTAINERS:
Except for flattened cartons and boxes, all garbage and rubbish shall be placed
in containers, cans and bags approved by the streets and traffic committee,
provided that all "garbage" as defined in this chapter shall be drained of
liquid, and deposited in a watertight container with a tightfitting cover.
(Ord. 1724, 3-19-2002)
7-3-4: CITY TO COLLECT, DISPOSE OF:
The city will collect and dispose of all garbage and rubbish from all service
units within the city, provided they are placed in the receptacle or
receptacles as provided in section
7-3-3 of this chapter and provided that no container, can or bag shall exceed
sixty (60) pounds in weight. Further, the city shall not collect more than six
(6) containers or six (6) cans or six (6) bags or any combination of
containers, cans or bags exceeding six (6) per service unit. (Ord. 757, 12-18-
1979; amd. Ord. 1724, 3-19-2002)
7-3-5: PLACEMENT OF RECEPTACLES:
It shall be the duty of any person desiring his garbage and rubbish to be
collected by the city to place his receptacle or receptacles at the curb or in
such other place as may be conveniently reached by the garbage collector at
such time and in such manner as the streets and traffic committee may direct.
(Ord. 757, 12-18-1979; amd. Ord. 1724, 3-19-2002)
7-3-6: TIME OF COLLECTION, AUTHORITY TO MAKE RULES:
The streets and traffic committee shall establish the time when garbage and
rubbish shall be collected within the various sections of the city and it shall
have the authority to make rules and regulations for the collection and
disposal of garbage and rubbish, provided that said rules and regulations do
not conflict with the laws of the state of Illinois and the provisions of this
code. (Ord. 757, 12-18-1979; amd. Ord. 1724, 3-19-2002)
7-3-7: TAMPERING WITH CONTAINERS:
No person shall tamper with any of the containers or receptacles containing
"garbage" or "rubbish" as defined in this chapter. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 21, Sec. 7;
amd. Ord. 1724, 3-19-2002)
7-3-8: PENALTY:
Any person who shall unlawfully violate any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be fined an amount of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) and not
more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. (Ord. 757, 12-18-
1979)
ARTICLE A. GARBAGE SERVICE CHARGE
SECTION:
7-3A-1: Service Charge
7-3A-2: Payment Of Bills
7-3A-3: Discontinuance Of Service
7-3A-4: Billings And Collection
7-3A-5: Duty Of City Treasurer
7-3A-6: Guidelines, Rules And Regulations
7-3A-1: SERVICE CHARGE:
The Council of the City of Canton hereby establishes a service charge to
finance the establishment and maintenance of plants for the collection and
disposal of garbage or solely for the collection or disposal of garbage by a
service charge of seventeen dollars and fifty cents ($17.50), beginning
November 1, 2019; eighteen dollars and fifty cents ($18.50), beginning May 5,
2020; nineteen dollars and zero cents ($19.00), beginning May 4, 2021; and
nineteen dollars and fifty cents ($19.50), beginning May 3, 2022. Said service
charge shall cover the collection of garbage as set forth in Title 7, Chapter
3, Section 4 of the City Code of the City of Canton. Stickers for bulk items
that do not fit within containers shall be ten dollars and zero cents ($10.00)
per sticker. (Ord. 4109, 4-3-2018; amd. Ord. 4169, 10-15-2019)
7-3A-2: PAYMENT OF BILLS:
Said service charge shall be billable bimonthly and payable by the tenth day of
the month following the month of billing. The owner of the premises, the
occupant thereof or the user of the service shall be liable to pay for the
service to such premises and the service furnished to the premises by the City,
upon the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant of the premises or
user of the service is liable therefor to the City. All bills for service shall
be mailed bimonthly no later than the last day of the billing month and shall
be payable not later than the close of business of the tenth day thereafter
following. If payment of the full amount of the bill is made after said tenth
day, a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the bill shall be added to
the outstanding balance. An additional charge of five dollars ($5.00) shall be
charged to accounts paid by check, draft or other negotiable instrument when
such check, draft or other negotiable instrument is returned and not honored
for payment.
In the event that said service charge is billed together with City water and
sewer service charges, the aggregate payment(s) received from any such user or
customer shall be first applied to the full payment of the service charge, plus
all penalties and other charges accrued thereon; the remaining balance of any
such aggregate payment(s) shall be then applied to the water and sewer charges.
(Ord. 1073, 7-16-1985; amd. Ord. 3059, 5-6-2014)
7-3A-3: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
If the service charge for such services is not paid by the twenty fifth day of
the month following the month of mailing of the bill for such service, such
service shall be immediately discontinued without further notice and shall not
be reinstated until all past due bills, including the penalties thereon, are
paid in full.
The service charge may be voluntarily discontinued by the user or customer for
periods of not less than thirty (30) consecutive days by making written request
to the City. Such request must state the address affected, service stop date,
service start date and City account number, as applicable.
If the rates or charges for such services are not paid by the twenty fifth day
of the month after the mailing of the bill, there shall be an additional charge
of ten dollars ($10.00) for discontinuing said service. (Ord. 1073, 7-16-1985;
amd. Ord. 3059, 5-6-2014)
7-3A-4: BILLINGS AND COLLECTION:
Qualified personnel appointed by the Mayor and Council shall render bills and
collect monies for service for all rates and charges in connection therewith.
All revenues and monies derived from said service charge shall be kept separate
and apart from Water Department funds and said sum, without any deducting
whatever, shall be delivered to the City Treasurer once a month after receipt
of the same, or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be
directed by the Mayor and Council. (Ord. 1724, 3-19-2002; amd. Ord. 3059, 5-6-
2014)
7-3A-5: DUTY OF CITY TREASURER:
The City Treasurer shall receive all such revenues from said service charges
and all other funds and monies incident thereto as the same may be delivered to
him and deposit the same in the general fund, garbage department of the city
and said treasurer shall administer such fund in every respect in the manner
provided by the provisions of the Illinois municipal code, effective July 1,
1961, and all laws amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto. Revenues so
received shall be used solely to defray the cost of operation, maintenance, and
service of a depreciation fund of the city garbage department.
The city treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep
proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall
be made of all transactions relative to the garbage department fund, and at
regular annual intervals he shall cause to be made an audit by an independent
auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and disbursements of the
fund. (Ord. 1073, 7-16-1985; amd. Ord. 3059, 5-6-2014)
7-3A-6: GUIDELINES, RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The streets and garbage committee is hereby tasked with the responsibility of
developing and promulgating written guidelines, rules and regulations to be
used in the implementation and perpetuation of said service charge.
The levy of such a service charge to be collected from persons receiving
garbage service is reasonably expected to yield revenues to properly fund the
cost of operation, maintenance, and an adequate depreciation fund for the city
garbage department. (Ord. 1073, 7-16-1985; amd. Ord. 1724, 3-19-2002; Ord.
3059, 5-6-2014)
CHAPTER 4
WATER WELLS
SECTION:
7-4-1: Definitions
7-4-2: Water Wells Prohibited; Existing Wells
7-4-3: Memorandum Of Understanding
7-4-4: Penalty
7-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
COMMUNITY WATER SUPPLY: A public water supply which serves or is intended to
serve at least fifteen (15) service connections used by residents or regularly
serves at least twenty five (25) residents.
CONTAMINANT: Any solid, liquid, or gaseous matter, any odor, or any form of
energy, from whatever source.
GROUND WATER: Underground water which occurs within the saturated zone and
geologic materials where the fluid pressure in the pore space is equal to or
greater than atmospheric pressure.
NONCOMMUNITY PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY: A public water supply that is not a community
water supply.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, limited
liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust,
estate, political subdivision, or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns.
POTABLE: Generally fit for human consumption in accordance with accepted water
supply principles and practices.
POTENTIAL ROUTE: Abandoned and improperly plugged wells of all kinds, drainage
wells, all injection wells, including closed looped heat pump wells, and
excavation for the discovery, development or production of stone, sand or
gravel.
PRIVATE WATER SYSTEM: Any supply which provides water for drinking, culinary,
and sanitary purposes and serves an owner occupied single-family dwelling.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY: All mains, pipes and structures through which water is
obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well structures,
intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage
tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or intended
for use for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic
use and which serve at least fifteen (15) service connections or which
regularly serve at least twenty five (25) persons at least sixty (60) days per
year. A public water supply is either a "community water supply" or a
"noncommunity water supply".
SEMIPRIVATE WATER SYSTEM: A water supply which is not a public water system,
yet which serves a segment of the public other than an owner occupied single-
family dwelling. (Ord. 1794, 4-20-2004)
7-4-2: WATER WELLS PROHIBITED; EXISTING WELLS:
   (A)   Use of ground water as a private, semiprivate, noncommunity public
water supply, or community water supply not under the control of the city of
Canton, Illinois, is prohibited.
   (B)   Except for such uses of potable drinking water wells that are properly
constructed and are in existence before the effective date hereof, the use or
attempt to use a potable water well supply of ground water from within the
corporate limits of the city of Canton, Illinois, by the installation or
drilling of wells or by any other method is hereby prohibited, except at points
of withdrawal by the city of Canton, Illinois. (Ord. 1794, 4-20-2004)
7-4-3: MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING:
The mayor of the city of Canton, Illinois, is hereby authorized and directed to
enter into a memorandum of understanding with the Illinois environmental
protection agency in which the city of Canton, Illinois, assumes responsibility
for tracking remedial sites, notifying the Illinois EPA of changes to this
chapter and taking certain precautions when siting public potable water supply
wells. (Ord. 1794, 4-20-2004)
7-4-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine
of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. (Ord. 1794, 4-20-
2004)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
PUBLIC WORKS ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
8-1-0: Public Works Director
8-1-1: Department Of Public Works
8-1-2: Board Of Local Improvements
8-1-3: City Engineer; Assistant
8-1-4: Superintendent Of Streets
8-1-5: System Maintenance Superintendent
8-1-0: PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR:
   (A)   Establishment; Appointment: A full time position of public works
director is hereby established. The public works director shall be appointed by
the mayor with concurrence of the city council.
   (B)   Duties: The public works director will supervise the street
superintendent, system maintenance superintendent, water superintendent,
wastewater superintendent, and the zoning officer. The public works director
will also be required to attend all city council and committee meetings. (Ord.
1743, 12-17-2002)
8-1-1: DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS:
There is hereby established an executive department of the city government,
which shall be known as the department of public works, and shall embrace the
board of local improvements, the city engineer, the superintendent of streets,
the superintendent of water and sewer distributions, the chief operators of the
water treatment plant and sewage treatment plant and such assistants and
employees as the city council may provide. (Ord. 593, 7-5-1977)
8-1-2: BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS:
There is hereby established and created a board of local improvements of the
city, which shall embrace and consist of the mayor, who shall be president of
said board, the city engineer, the superintendent of streets, and the city
attorney, which board is especially charged with performing all such duties
relating to local improvements to be paid wholly or in part by special
assessment or special taxation, as the laws of the state may impose or devolve
upon it. The clerk shall be the clerk of said board and shall keep a full and
correct record of its proceedings in a book to be provided for that purpose.
(Ord. 865, 1-20-1981)
8-1-3: CITY ENGINEER; ASSISTANT:
   (A)   Office Created, Appointment: There is hereby created the office of
city engineer of the city who shall be registered under the provisions of the
Illinois professional engineering act who shall be appointed by the mayor, by
and with the advice and consent of the council on the first Tuesday in May of
each year, or as soon thereafter as may be, and shall hold his office for the
term of one year, and until his successor is duly appointed and qualified.
   (B)   Oath, Bond: He shall, before entering upon the duties of his office,
take and subscribe the oath prescribed by law for the city officers, and shall
execute a bond to the city in the penal sum of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), with sureties to be approved by the council, conditioned for the
faithful performance of the duties of his office.
   (C)   Duties:
      1.   Said engineer shall have charge of all public improvements,
commenced or to be commenced by the city which are to be paid for in whole or
in part by special assessment or special taxation, and such other public
improvements as require the skill of a civil engineer. He shall have special
charge of the construction and inspection of all public and private sewers and
catch basins laid on or in any public street, alley or way, and of the
construction and repair of all bridges and viaducts constructed by the city.
      2.   The city engineer shall advise the city on all engineering matters;
he shall, when required, advise the city council or any city officer in all
matters of engineering, in which the interest of the corporation are involved.
He shall, when required by the mayor, council, or any committee thereof,
furnish written opinions upon any subject submitted to him pertaining to the
city or its interests.
      3.   The city engineer shall draw and examine such plans, specifications,
and other papers as may be required of him by the mayor, council or any
committee thereof, and he shall examine and pass upon the engineering
sufficiency of any and all plans, specifications, and papers submitted to him
pertaining to the city or its interests, when required by the mayor, council,
or any committee thereof.
   (D)   Submit Estimates And Specifications: The city engineer shall, when
requested by the mayor, the board of local improvements, the council or any
committee thereof, make out and submit plans, estimates and specifications for
public work, which may be proposed or ordered by the council or the board of
local improvements.
   (E)   Superintend Public Works: He shall daily or as often as may be
necessary, examine all public works under his charge and see that the same is
properly executed, and if the contractor therefor shall neglect or refuse to
execute such work in accordance with his contract and specifications, said
engineer may suspend the work, and shall, thereupon, report the facts to the
mayor.
   (F)   Inspect Materials: He shall, when required, receive, inspect or
measure any lumber, brick, stone or other material to be used in any public
work of the city, and, if necessary, shall keep an accurate account of the
quantity or quality of the same, the cost thereof, of whom received and for
what purpose used or to be used, and he shall examine all bills for materials
so received by him, and, if found correct, shall certify the same to the
council for allowance.
   (G)   Establish Grades And Boundaries: He shall, when required by the
council of the committee on streets and alleys thereof, make a survey of the
grade or boundary of any street, avenue or alley of the city, and prepare a
plat or profile thereof and report the same to the council, and no such survey
or grade or boundary shall be deemed established or valid until the plat or
profile shall be approved by the council. Any plat, profile or other paper
belonging to the office of the city engineer shall be returned to him by the
clerk as soon as the council shall have no further use of the same.
   (H)   Furnish Grades, Make Surveys: He shall give or mark the grade of any
street or alley, where established, for any person desiring to erect any
building or enclosure or to lay any sidewalk thereon, when directed to do so by
the council. He shall make all surveys within and for the city when called
upon.
   (I)   Field Notes, Errors: It shall be the duty of the city engineer to
provide himself, so far as practicable, with copies of field notes of the
original surveys of the town and city of Canton, and to make his own surveys in
accordance therewith; he shall carefully note all errors or discrepancies in
the original surveys or resurveys as soon as discovered.
   (J)   Plats, Surveys Or Sewers And Water Mains: Said engineer shall keep in
his office plats of all grades or boundaries of streets and alleys established
by the council, correcting the same when any grade shall be changed, and adding
thereto when any new grade or boundary shall be established. He shall also keep
correct surveys of all public sewers and water mains within the city, showing
the location, length and dimensions of the same, respectively. He shall record
in a suitable book, to be provided by the city, the profiles of all surveys of
grades and boundaries established, and preserve the original papers relating
thereto, and shall otherwise keep a systematic record of all the transactions
pertaining to his office.
   (K)   Other Duties: He shall also perform such other duties as may be
required of him by the board of local improvements and the mayor or council in
the prosecution and construction of any public improvements within or under the
control of the city, as shall require the skill and experience of a civil
engineer.
   (L)   Assistants: He shall be allowed such assistants and other clerks and
subordinate help as the necessities of his office may require, and the council,
by ordinance or resolution, shall from time to time authorize him to employ.
   (M)   Monthly Reports: It shall be the duty of said engineer to make
monthly, written reports to the city treasurer and city clerk of all monies
received by his office arising from any official act, and to pay over to the
city treasurer, at least once each month, all monies so received by him.
He shall likewise make a monthly written report at the first meeting of the
council in each month of the monies so received by him and of all his acts and
doings for the preceding month.
   (N)   Annual Reports: The city engineer shall annually, on or before the
first Tuesday in May of each year, make out and submit to the council a written
report showing in detail the public works or improvements undertaken or
completed in connection with his office during the preceding fiscal year, and
the cost thereof to the city.
   (O)   Preserve Papers And Turn Over To Successor: Said engineer shall
carefully preserve in his office all plats and records of surveys, and all
books, maps and papers pertaining thereto, and upon expiration of his term of
office, or his resignation or removal therefrom, he shall deliver to his
successor in office all such books, maps, plats, records and effects of every
description belonging to the city or appertaining to said office.
   (P)   Office Hours: The office hours of the city engineer shall be from
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. until twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and from one
o'clock (1:00) P.M. until five o'clock (5:00) P.M. from Monday through Friday.
(Ord. 1279, 5-1-1990)
   (Q)   Building Official/Zoning Enforcement Officer: The city engineer shall
perform the functions of building official under the various uniform codes as
the same may be from time to time adopted by the city; further, the city
engineer shall act as the zoning enforcement officer and shall cause the
various zoning laws to be faithfully enforced. As the building official and as
the zoning enforcement officer, he shall act as a staff advisor to the joint
planning and zoning commission. He shall give written opinions and reports when
requested to do so by the chairman of the joint planning and zoning commission.
He shall cause written variances to issue in conformity with the decisions of
the joint planning and zoning commission. (Ord. 1279, 5-1-1990; amd. Ord. 3041,
12-3-2013)
8-1-4: SUPERINTENDENT OF STREETS:
   (A)   Office Created, Appointment: There is hereby created the office of
superintendent of streets of the city, who shall be appointed by the mayor, by
and with the advice and consent of the council, on the first Tuesday in May of
each year, or as soon thereafter as may be, and shall hold his office for the
term of one year, and until his successor is duly appointed and qualified.
(1959 Code § 36-5-1)
   (B)   Oath, Bond: Said superintendent shall, before entering upon the duties
of his office, take and subscribe the oath prescribed by law for city officers,
and shall execute a bond to the city in the penal sum of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), with sureties to be approved by the city council, conditioned for
the faithful performance of the duties of his office. (1959 Code § 36-4-2)
   (C)   Powers: The superintendent of streets shall have the power, subject to
the provisions of this code and the orders of the mayor, to regulate and
control the manner of using the streets, alleys, highways and public places of
the city for the erection of telegraph poles, or other poles or posts; for the
laying down of gas, water or steam pipes and conduits and such other
underground construction authorized by law or the provisions of this code, as
are not under the control of the city engineer, and to determine the location
thereof and to cause the prompt repair of the streets, alleys, highways and
public places, whenever the same are taken up or altered. (Ord. 1280, 5-1-1990)
   (D)   Duties: The said superintendent shall, subject to the provisions
hereof, and the provisions of this code, take special charge and
superintendence of all streets, alleys and highways in the city, and of all
walks, crosswalks and public grounds and parks in the city; he shall have
charge of the repair and cleaning of all streets, avenues and alleys of the
city, and shall supervise the construction and repair of all sidewalks therein.
He shall, without delay, cause all breaks in any street or alley crossing or
other unsafe place to be repaired. (Ord. 865, 1-20-1981)
   (E)   Purchase Implements And Material; Mark Implements: He may procure the
necessary implements for performing street labor or materials for bridges,
culverts and crosswalks, but he shall purchase no implement of any material
without making a written requisition to the mayor and obtaining his order
therefor, and when he shall purchase any implements or materials for the use of
the corporation, he shall report the bill therefor to the council. He shall
cause all implements or tools belonging to the city to be legibly marked or
branded with the letters "Canton", and shall cause them to be properly housed
or protected from the weather when not in use. (1959 Code § 36-4-5)
   (F)   Keep List Of Property, Turn Over To Successor: It shall be the duty of
the superintendent of streets to keep a correct list of all implements,
material and other property of the city in his charge and possession, and upon
the expiration of his term of office, or his resignation or removal therefrom,
he shall deliver said property to his successor in office, taking a receipt
therefor, which he shall immediately file with the clerk, who shall credit him
with the same and charge his successor therewith. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 36, Art. 4,
Sec. 6)
   (G)   Books Of Account: It shall be the duty of said superintendent to cause
to be kept in books of account, in such manner as may be required by the
finance and personnel committee, a plain and accurate account of all
expenditures made under his supervision, specifying to whom and for what
purpose made. He shall examine all accounts of contractors and other persons
for work pertaining to his department, or for implements or material furnished
therefor, and if correct, shall certify the same to the council for allowance.
(Ord. 865, 1-20-1981)
   (H)   Monthly Report: Said superintendent of streets shall, on the first
Tuesday in each and every month, report to the council in writing a statement
of all expenditures under his supervision during the preceding month specifying
the purpose of such expenditures, and, if required, the persons to whom paid.
No account presented or certified by him shall be allowed, or warrants issued
thereon, unless it shall be so rendered as to show to what account it is
chargeable. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 36, Art. 4, Sec. 8)
   (I)   Enforcement, Orders: He shall cause all provisions in relation to
streets, alleys and sidewalks to be enforced, by reporting all violations
thereof to the mayor or chief of police. He shall carry into effect all such
orders, general or special, as he may receive from the council, the mayor or
committee on streets and alleys, and for any wilful neglect or refusal to
perform any duty required of him by the laws or provisions of this code, he
shall be liable to removal from office. He shall perform such other duties as
shall be enjoined upon him by the provisions of this code or by law directed.
(R.O. 1959, Ch. 36, Art. 4, Sec. 9)
   (J)   Employ Laborers, Keep Time: The street superintendent, upon
appointment of the mayor and the advice and consent of the city council, may
employ the following number of full time persons in the street and garbage
departments:
      1.   Street department: Seven (7) full time laborers.
      2.   Garbage department: Three (3) full time laborers.
However, nothing herein shall be construed to preclude the street
superintendent from hiring part time personnel on an "as needed" basis by
appointment of the mayor and the advice and consent of the appropriate
committee. He shall oversee and direct the laborers and workmen under his
authority and require them to labor faithfully. He shall keep a written record
of each such employee's time at work and shall, weekly, certify such record to
the city clerk as his weekly payroll, stating therein the name of each
employee, his weekly time, and the amount of his wages. The city clerk shall
draw an order upon the city treasurer to each employee for such amount. (Ord.
977, 5-31-1983)
8-1-5: SYSTEM MAINTENANCE SUPERINTENDENT:
   (A)   Appointment: A system maintenance superintendent shall be appointed by
the mayor with concurrence of the city council.
   (B)   Duties: The system maintenance superintendent shall:
      1.   Systematically review the conditions and plans, supervise the
maintenance of storm sewers, water lines and sanitary sewers;
      2.   Prepare and monitor an annual budget/expenditure, a vehicle/truck/
heavy equipment fleet and associated equipment and recommend capital
requirements to the public works director;
      3.   Direct and provide guidance to subordinates relating to maintenance,
repair and construction of public works department; and
      4.   Perform any other duties assigned by the public works director or
mayor and city council. (Ord. 1745, 12-17-2002)
CHAPTER 2
CONTRACTS AND CONTRACTORS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Contracts, How Made
8-2-2: City Engineer To Prepare Plans
8-2-3: Mayor To Advertise For Bids
8-2-4: Proposals, Awarding Contract
8-2-5: Contractor's Bond
8-2-6: Failure To Enter Into Contract, Disability
8-2-7: Officers Not To Be Interested In Contract
8-2-8: Contracts, How Executed
8-2-9: Contracts, Essential Clauses
8-2-10: Contractor's Liability
8-2-11: Disposal Of Surplus Material
8-2-12: Payments To Contractors
8-2-13: Payments For Extra Work
8-2-1: CONTRACTS, HOW MADE:
All contracts for the making of any public improvements in the city, to be paid
for in whole or in part by special assessment or special taxation, and any work
or other public improvement, when the expense thereof shall exceed the sum of
twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), shall be let to the lowest responsible
bidder therefor, in the manner hereinafter prescribed, and be approved by the
mayor. (Ord. 1726, 5-7-2002; amd. Ord. 1854, 1-3-2006)
8-2-2: CITY ENGINEER TO PREPARE PLANS:
Whenever any local or public improvements shall be ordered by the council,
which are to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment or special
taxation or otherwise, it shall be the duty of the city engineer to prepare a
plan or profile of the proposed improvement and specifications for the
construction of the same, which shall be kept on file in his office, and be
open to the inspection of city officers and other persons interested therein.
(R.O. 1959, Ch. 36, Art. 5, Sec. 2)
8-2-3: MAYOR TO ADVERTISE FOR BIDS:
As soon as the special tax or special assessment for any such improvement shall
have been finally confirmed, as provided by law, and sooner if deemed expedient
by the mayor and council, the mayor is authorized to advertise, in one or more
newspapers of general circulation printed or published in the city, for
proposals to furnish materials and do said work, according to the plans and
specifications aforesaid. Such advertisement shall be published at least ten
(10) days before the date fixed for opening said proposals, and shall state the
nature and extent of the improvement ordered, the place where specifications
thereof may be seen, and the time and place when and where the bids will be
opened. The right to reject any and all proposals so received shall be reserved
in the advertisement. (Ord. 871, 2-17-1981)
8-2-4: PROPOSALS, AWARDING CONTRACT:
All proposals for any such improvement shall be signed by the persons bidding
and be enclosed in a sealed envelope, and directed to the mayor, and each bid
shall be accompanied by a cashier's check, bid bond and/or cash in such
reasonable amount as may be designated by the mayor in said advertisement,
payable to the order of the city treasurer, which shall become forfeited to the
city in case the bidder shall fail to enter into contract, and execute bond
with approved securities, to execute work for the price mentioned in his bid,
and according to the plans and specifications, in the event that the contract
should be awarded to him.
All proposals shall be opened by the mayor at the hour and place mentioned in
said advertisement, in the presence of such qualified bidders and other persons
as may attend, and, upon examination of the same, the city council shall award
the contract to the lowest qualified responsible bidder, or they may reject any
or all bids if the same are not satisfactory. (Ord. 871, 2-17-1981)
8-2-5: CONTRACTOR'S BOND:
Whenever any work or material is let by contract to any person or corporation,
the mayor shall, in all cases, take good and sufficient bond from such person
or corporation to ensure the performance of the work in the time and manner
required in such contract, and to save and indemnify and keep harmless against
all liabilities, judgments, costs and expenses which may in anywise accrue
against the city in consequence of granting of such contract, or which may in
anywise result from the carelessness or neglect of such person or corporation,
or his or its agents, employees or workmen, in any respect whatever, and the
payment of all labor and material claims growing or arising out of such work.
(R.O. 1959, Ch. 36, Art. 5, Sec. 5)
8-2-6: FAILURE TO ENTER INTO CONTRACT, DISABILITY:
Any bidder who shall fail to enter into any contract so awarded, or shall fail
to fulfill any contract entered into by him with the city, shall not be
permitted to bid again for any city work unless the council shall, for good
cause shown, remove his disability. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 36, Art. 5, Sec. 6)
8-2-7: OFFICERS NOT TO BE INTERESTED IN CONTRACT:
No member of the council or other city officer shall be interested, either
directly or indirectly, in any contract for work of the corporation, or become
surety for any contractor or other person upon any bond to secure the
performance of any contract with the city. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 36, Art. 5, Sec. 7)
8-2-8: CONTRACTS, HOW EXECUTED:
All such contracts and bonds shall run to and be in the name of the city, and
shall be drawn by the city attorney or be submitted to him for his approval of
the form thereof, and before the same shall be in force they shall be signed by
the mayor and countersigned and the corporate seal affixed by the city clerk.
Said contract shall be executed in duplicate, one original copy of which shall
be given to the contractor, and the other filed and kept in the office of the
city clerk, who shall furnish copies thereof when required. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 36,
Art. 5, Sec. 8)
8-2-9: CONTRACTS, ESSENTIAL CLAUSES:
Each contract shall contain a clause, in substance to the effect that it is
made subject to the provisions of this code, and to the power of the mayor,
city engineer or other designated city officer to suspend the work and of the
city council to annul the contract for a failure on the part of the contractor
to execute the same according to the terms thereof, but that such suspension
shall not affect the right to all damages claimable by it on account of the
nonperformance of such contract according to the terms thereof.
All contracts in which the contractor or contractors agree to be paid from
special taxes or special assessments, shall contain certain covenants to the
effect that they shall have no claim or lien upon the city, in any event,
except from the collection of the special taxes or assessment levied for the
work contracted, and that no liability shall attach to the city by reason of
entering into any such contract, except to the payment to such contractor or
contractors of the monies received by the city on special taxes or assessments
levied or assessed for the improvement mentioned in such contract. And no
contract for work to be paid for as aforesaid shall be let to any contractor
who will not so agree. (Ord. 871, 2-17-1981)
8-2-10: CONTRACTOR'S LIABILITY:
Whenever any city officer shall let any work or improvement which shall require
the digging up, use or occupancy of any street, alley, highway or public ground
of the city, there shall be inserted in the contract for the same, substantial
covenants requiring such contractor, during the nighttime, to put up and
maintain such barriers and lights as will effectually prevent the happening of
any accident in consequence of such digging up, use or occupancy of any such
street, alley, highway or public grounds, for which the city might be liable,
and also such other covenants and conditions as experience may prove necessary
to save the city harmless from damages. And also to provide in such contract
that the party contracting with the city shall be liable for all damages
occasioned by the digging up, use or occupancy of such street, alley, highway
or public grounds, or which may result therefrom or which may result from the
carelessness of such contractor, his agents, employees or workmen. (R.O. 1959,
Ch. 36, Art. 5, Sec. 10)
8-2-11: DISPOSAL OF SURPLUS MATERIAL:
In all contracts for street and alley improvement, where the city shall reserve
the disposition of all surplus earth removed in excavations on such streets or
alleys, no contractor or subcontractor shall in any manner sell or dispose of
any such surplus earth, under a penalty of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00)
for each offense. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 36, Art. 5, Sec. 11)
8-2-12: PAYMENTS TO CONTRACTORS:
When any contract shall have been completed, and on the filing in the office of
the city clerk of the certificate of the city engineer or other officer under
whose supervision the work was done, stating that he has inspected said work,
and that it is done according to the contract and specifications, the mayor and
clerk may issue their warrants on the treasurer for the amount due such
contractor or contractors; and they may, when so stipulated in the contract, or
with the consent of the council, from time to time during the prosecution of
the work (upon the filing of the certificate of the proper officer, stating
that he has examined and computed or measured such work, and that he believes
that there is enough done to cover the estimate, and that it is done in
accordance with the contract), advance to the contractor and draw their warrant
upon the treasurer for such advance, reserving, in all cases, at least five
percent (5%) of the estimate or contract price, to be paid when the contract is
completed. (Ord. 871, 2-17-1981)
8-2-13: PAYMENTS FOR EXTRA WORK:
No payment shall be made upon any work done by contract for any extra work not
specified therein, unless such extra work shall have been done by special order
of the board of local improvements. No officer of the corporation, or special
superintendent employed thereby, shall certify the account of any contractor
who has failed to comply with the terms of his contract, nor in any case in
advance of the progress of the work, and if he shall do so, he shall be liable
to the city for all loss that may arise therefrom. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 36, Art. 5,
Sec. 13)
CHAPTER 3
EXCAVATING PERMITS
SECTION:
8-3-1: Excavation Permit Required
8-3-2: Powers Of Superintendent Of Streets
8-3-3: Displacing Pavements
8-3-4: Application; Fee
8-3-5: Opening Parallel To Street (Rep. by Ord. 872, 2-17-1981)
8-3-6: Responsibility For Excavations
8-3-7: Reconstruction
8-3-8: Barriers, Lights
8-3-9: Construction Of Preceding Section
8-3-10: Damages
8-3-11: Duty Of Officers
8-3-12: Duty Of Gas Or Heating Companies
8-3-1: EXCAVATION PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall, without an express permit in writing, previously obtained in
each and every instance from the superintendent of streets, make any excavation
in any street or alley in the city for the purpose of laying water pipes, gas
pipes, conduits, erecting poles or constructing railway tracks, or for any
other purpose whatsoever, except such as are provided for elsewhere in this
code, under a penalty of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 36, Art. 6, Sec. 1)
8-3-2: POWERS OF SUPERINTENDENT OF STREETS:
All shafts, cables, pipes, mains, conduits, tubes, wires or other transmitting
or conducting devices at any time laid or placed underneath the surface of any
street or alley in any manner forbidden by section
8-3-1 of this chapter, shall be promptly removed or cut out by the
superintendent of streets. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 36, Art. 6, Sec. 2)
8-3-3: DISPLACING PAVEMENTS:
It shall be unlawful to open or tear up any of the paved streets of the city
for any greater distance than two (2) blocks in extent at any one time, for the
purpose of laying railroad tracks, car tracks, sewers, telegraph or telephone
cables, or the repairs of the same, or other purposes other than laying down
new pavements. The pavement of the first block opened shall be temporarily
relaid and the debris removed before opening another block of the street in
which the work is being prosecuted. The superintendent of streets shall provide
the necessary rules governing the repairs in paved streets under this and other
chapters of this code, so that the pavements shall be absolutely replaced in as
good order as before being disturbed, within three (3) weeks after it is first
turned up; provided, that no person shall be permitted to excavate in or
disturb the surface of any street, alley or avenue which is improved by
pavement, for the purpose of laying any pipe, or main, or supply pipe or
lateral for the supply of gas. (Ord. 872, 2-17-1981)
8-3-4: APPLICATION; FEE:
Any person desiring a permit for any of the purposes mentioned in section
8-3-1 of this chapter shall make application therefor to the superintendent of
streets, upon a form to be provided by said superintendent for such purposes.
Such application shall state therein the purpose for which such excavation is
to be made and the date and time it is proposed to begin such work, and shall
be accompanied by a fee of one dollar ($1.00) for each such permit, where
excavation is to be made in dirt street, and five dollars ($5.00) for each such
permit when excavation is to be made in paved street. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 36, Art.
6, Sec. 4)
8-3-5: OPENING PARALLEL TO STREET:
(Rep. by Ord. 872, 2-17-1981)
8-3-6: RESPONSIBILITY FOR EXCAVATIONS:
Any person occupying any portion of any street or alley under any permit shall
save and keep the city free, clear and harmless from any and all loss or
liability on account of any accident or damages resulting from such occupation,
and shall fully remove all material, dirt and rubbish from the space so
occupied, and restore such street or alley to its original condition
immediately upon the expiration of the period named in said permit, and for any
failure so to do, such person shall be subject to a penalty of not less than
twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). The
penalty above prescribed shall not be construed to release such person from
liability for any damages sustained by the city, or by any person on account of
such occupation or excavation. (Ord. 872, 2-17-1981)
8-3-7: RECONSTRUCTION:
Whenever any part of any street, alley, sidewalk or other place in the city
shall be torn, dug or taken up for any purpose, the person tearing, digging or
taking up any earth, paving or planking shall immediately upon completion of
such purpose and as fast as possible during the accomplishment thereof, return
the earth, ram and pack down the same as fast as returned, to a firm and solid
bearing, and in a manner, if possible, that will entirely prevent any settling
of such earth, and shall also relay all paving, planking or graveling in a
skillful and permanent manner, and in every case to the satisfaction of the
said superintendent of streets of the city and under his direction, under a
penalty for any neglect or refusal so to do of not less than twenty five
dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00); and the
superintendent of streets is hereby authorized to adopt proper rules and
regulations for such relaying and replacing of such pavements and materials,
and he is hereby empowered to employ the necessary labor to do or assist in
doing the work of relaying and replacing such pavements and material, and to
collect the expense of such labor from the person receiving permission to tear
or dig or take up such earth, paving or planking; provided, that the expense of
labor so furnished shall not exceed that paid to the city for labor of like
character. (Ord. 872, 2-17-1981)
8-3-8: BARRIERS, LIGHTS:
It shall be the duty of any person or persons engaged in digging into any
street, alley or other public highway, in paving any street or alley, building
of any sewer or drain, or trench for water pipes or gas pipes in any of the
public alleys, avenues or other public places, under contract with the city, or
by virtue of any permission which may have been granted to them by the council,
or the superintendent of streets or city engineer, where such work, if left
exposed, would be dangerous to passengers, to erect a fence or railing at such
excavation or work in such a manner as to prevent danger to passengers who may
be traveling in streets, alleys, avenues or public places, and to continue the
said railing or fence until the work shall be completed or the obstruction or
danger removed. And it shall be the duty of such persons to place upon such
railing, fence, barrier or other obstruction at twilight in the evening,
suitable and sufficient light, and keep them burning through the night during
the performance of said work, under a penalty of not less than twenty five
dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for every such
neglect. (Ord. 872, 2-17-1981)
8-3-9: CONSTRUCTION OF PRECEDING SECTION:
The provisions of the preceding section shall apply to every person who shall
place building materials in any of the streets or avenues, or be engaged in
building any vault, or constructing any lateral drain from any cellar to any
public sewer, or who shall do or perform any work causing obstructions in any
of the public streets by virtue of any permit from any department or officer of
the city and also to all public officers engaged in performing any work in
behalf of the city whereby excavations or obstructions shall be made in the
public streets. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 36, Art. 6, Sec. 9)
8-3-10: DAMAGES:
In all cases where any person or persons shall perform any of the work
mentioned in the preceding sections, either under contract with the city or by
virtue of permission obtained by authority of the city, such person shall be
answerable for any and every damage which may be occasioned to persons, animals
or property by reason of carelessness in any manner connected with said work.
(R.O. 1959, Ch. 36, Art. 6, Sec. 10)
8-3-11: DUTY OF OFFICERS:
It shall be the duty of the superintendent of streets and police to see that
the requirements contained in this chapter in regard to the erection of fencing
or barriers and the placing of lights, and in regard to obtaining permits for
opening the streets, are in all cases complied with. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 36, Art.
6, Sec. 11)
8-3-12: DUTY OF GAS OR HEATING COMPANIES:
Every gas or heating plant company which has heretofore laid, or shall
hereafter lay down gas pipes or steam conductors in any street or alley in the
city, shall make and keep on file in the office of the clerk of the city, an
accurate map showing exact location of every line of pipe or conductors and
connections laid by them. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 36, Art. 6, Sec. 12)
No such company shall open or encumber more of any street, alley or public
place at any one time than may be necessary to enable it to proceed with
advantage in the laying of pipes, nor shall said company permit any such
street, avenue or public place to remain open or encumbered for a longer period
than shall be necessary to execute the work for which the same shall have been
opened, or without putting up the necessary barriers and lights so as to
prevent the happening of any accident in consequence of such opening or
encumbrance of such street, alley, avenue or public place. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 36,
Art. 6, Sec. 13)
CHAPTER 4
STREETS, SIDEWALKS, PUBLIC GROUNDS
SECTION:
8-4-1: Leaving Excavation Unprotected
8-4-2: Removing Earth From Street
8-4-3: Fencing Streets
8-4-4: Removal Of Encroachments
8-4-5: Obstructing Streets
8-4-6: Blockade Of Streets By Vehicles
8-4-7: (Rep. by Ord. 643, 4-18-1978)
8-4-8: Debris And Waste In Streets
8-4-9: Casting Coal On Sidewalk
8-4-10: Altering Existing Curb Lines
8-4-11: Guard For Steps, Cellarways
8-4-12: Encumbering Outside Walk
8-4-13: Obstructing Sidewalks
8-4-14: Sales On Street
8-4-15: Construction Of Foregoing Section
8-4-16: Telephone And Telegraph Poles
8-4-17: Poles, Where Located
8-4-18: Wires
8-4-19: Sidewalk Construction By Special Taxation
8-4-20: Abutting Property Owners Responsible
8-4-21: Defective Sidewalks
8-4-22: Ordinance Specifications
8-4-23: Driving Against Curbstones (Rep. by Ord. 873, 2-17-1981)
8-4-24: Contractor To Erect Guards
8-4-25: Driving Over Pavement Within Guards
8-4-26: Unlawful To Remove Guards
8-4-27: Wagon Boxes
8-4-28: Poles On Square
8-4-29: South Carolina Poplar
8-4-30: Names Of Streets
8-4-31: Penalty
8-4-32: Private Driveway Construction
8-4-33: Encroachments On Right Of Way
8-4-34: Solicitation On Public Ways
8-4-1: LEAVING EXCAVATION UNPROTECTED:
Any contractor for any public work, or any officer or other person, making any
excavation in any street, avenue, alley or sidewalk of the city, who shall
leave the same open and unprotected by lights or otherwise in the nighttime, so
as to endanger the safety of persons or animals passing thereby from falling
therein, shall be liable to a fine of not less than twenty five dollars
($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for every such neglect.
(Ord. 873, 2-17-1981)
8-4-2: REMOVING EARTH FROM STREET:
Whoever shall, for any private purpose, dig, remove or carry away any earth,
gravel or sod from any street, avenue, alley or public ground, without the
express permission of the council, or of the committee on streets and alleys
thereof, shall forfeit and pay a penalty of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for
each and every load so removed and carried away; and any officer of the city
who shall use, sell or dispose of any earth, gravel or sod from any street,
avenue, alley or public ground, for his own private gain or benefit shall be
subject to a penalty of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 873, 2-17-1981)
8-4-3: FENCING STREETS:
No person shall make, or cause to be made, any enclosure, fence, bridge, arched
way or building of any kind extending upon, over or across any street, avenue,
alley or sidewalk within the city, under a penalty of not less than twenty five
dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense,
and a further fine of five dollars ($5.00) for every day that he shall allow
such enclosure, fence, bridge or building to remain, after being notified to
remove the same by the superintendent of streets or any police officer. (Ord.
873, 2-17-1981)
8-4-4: REMOVAL OF ENCROACHMENTS:
The owner, occupant or person in control of any building, fence or of any
structure or enclosure, already erected or built, extending into or encroaching
upon any street, avenue, alley or sidewalk within the city, who shall not
remove the same within thirty (30) days after being notified in writing to do
so by the superintendent of streets, or any police officer, shall be subject to
a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) and a further fine of five dollars ($5.00) for every day,
after the first conviction, that he shall fail or refuse to comply with such
notice. (Ord. 873, 2-17-1981)
8-4-5: OBSTRUCTING STREETS:
Whoever shall place, throw or leave, or shall cause to be placed, thrown or
left, any obstruction or encumbrance in or upon any street, avenue, alley or
public ground in the city, except as authorized by ordinance, shall be liable
to a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00), and to a further fine of five dollars ($5.00) for
every additional day that he shall fail to remove such obstruction or
encumbrance, after being notified to do so by the superintendent of streets or
any policeman. (Ord. 873, 2-17-1981)
8-4-6: BLOCKADE OF STREETS BY VEHICLES:
When any street, avenue or alley shall be obstructed by motor vehicles, animals
or persons, any police officer of the city, may give such orders and directions
as shall be deemed necessary to abate the obstruction; and whoever shall refuse
or neglect to obey such orders or directions shall be subject to a penalty of
twenty five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 873, 2-17-1981)
8-4-7: (Rep. by Ord. 643, 4-18-1978)
8-4-8: DEBRIS AND WASTE IN STREETS:
No person shall throw, place or leave, or cause or permit to be thrown, placed,
or left, any ashes, dirt, filth, rubbish or yard waste (including, but not
limited to, grass clippings and leaves) upon any street, avenue, alley or
sidewalk of the city, in front of or adjoining any premises or buildings owned,
occupied or controlled by him, under a penalty of not less than twenty five
dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense,
and a further penalty of five dollars ($5.00) for each additional day that such
person shall permit such ashes, dirt, filth, rubbish and yard waste (including,
but not limited to, grass clippings and leaves) to remain, after notice to
remove same from the superintendent of streets, or any policeman or code
enforcement officer; except that cinders may be deposited upon the paved
streets of the city, by and with the consent of the committee on streets and
alleys and crossings, and under the supervision of the superintendent of
streets. (Ord. 3017, 6-4-2013)
8-4-9: CASTING COAL ON SIDEWALK:
Whoever shall throw, place or leave any live coals or fire, or make or kindle
any fire upon any sidewalk, alley or street crossing, or causes, suffers,
permits or directs the same to be done, shall be subject to a penalty of not
less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars
($100.00) for each offense, and shall also be liable for all damages or injury
caused thereby. The cost of repairing any such damage or injury may be
recovered in a separate suit in the name of the city. (Ord. 873, 2-17-1981)
8-4-10: ALTERING EXISTING CURB LINES:
No person shall break, lower or alter the existing curb line around any street
intersection corner in the city. Whoever shall violate the provisions of this
section shall be fined in a sum not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 873, 2-17-
1981)
8-4-11: GUARD FOR STEPS, CELLARWAYS:
No steps or platform shall extend into or upon any sidewalk or alley in the
city more than three feet (3'); and all stairs or steps encroaching upon any
sidewalk or alley and leading to the upper story of any building shall be
securely fastened to the wall of such building and supported without posts or
pillars. No open cellar or basement way shall be permitted to extend into any
sidewalk more than three feet (3'), and in all cases shall be well protected
with a substantial iron railing with a gate at the entrance around same; nor
shall any closed cellar or basement way extend into or upon any sidewalk more
than five feet (5'), nor into any alley more than four feet (4'); nor shall the
door or grating of any such closed cellar or basement way extend above the
grade of the sidewalk, nor exceeding one inch (1") above the grade of the
alley; nor shall the hinges, lock or other fastenings thereof be placed on the
upper side of the same so as to project above the door, unless within two and
one-half feet (21/2') of the building; and all cellar windows or coal holes in
any sidewalk or alley shall be set or placed even with the grade of such
sidewalk or alley, and be well secured with iron or other suitable gratings.
Whoever shall violate or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this
section shall be subject to a penalty of not less than twenty five dollars
($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and to
a further penalty of five dollars ($5.00) for each day he shall fail or refuse
to comply herewith, after notice to do so by the mayor or superintendent of
streets. (Ord. 873, 2-17-1981)
8-4-12: ENCUMBERING OUTSIDE WALK:
No person shall encumber or obstruct more than three feet (3') of the outer
edge of any sidewalk with any goods, merchandise, fuel or other articles he may
be receiving or delivering, nor shall he permit the same to remain upon any
sidewalk longer than may be necessary in the diligent removal thereof, nor in
any case to exceed six (6) hours, under a penalty of three dollars ($3.00) for
each offense, and a further penalty of one dollar ($1.00) for every two (2)
hours he shall permit any such encumbrance or obstruction to remain after being
notified to remove the same by the superintendent of streets or any member of
the police force. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 41, Art. 1, Sec. 12)
8-4-13: OBSTRUCTING SIDEWALKS:
No person shall encumber or obstruct any part of any sidewalk, or space within
the curb line, with signboards or advertising boards, boxes, barrels or other
articles, nor with shelves or other structures for the display of any goods,
merchandise, fruit, vegetables, groceries or other articles, under a penalty of
three dollars ($3.00) for each offense, and a further penalty of one dollar
($1.00) for every two (2) hours he shall permit any such encumbrance or
obstruction to remain after being notified to remove the same by the
superintendent of streets, or any member of the police force; provided, that
barber poles, properly fastened and erected at the edge of the sidewalk, and
sign or advertising boards, properly fastened to a building, may remain. (R.O.
1959, Ch. 41, Art. 1, Sec. 13)
8-4-14: SALES ON STREET:
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, place or maintain in or upon any
street, alley, sidewalk or other public place in the city any fruit stand,
lunch stand, lunch wagon, popcorn stand or any table, box, bin, rack, showcase,
platform, vehicle or any other arrangement or structure for the sale of goods,
wares or merchandise, or for the pursuit of any occupation whatsoever, unless a
permit for the same shall be obtained from the council. And no permit shall be
issued by the council, upon objection of the occupant of the premises in front
of which it is proposed to locate under such permission; provided that when any
person is refused permission under the foregoing and has obtained a license
from the proper authorities, he may surrender said license to the officer
issuing the same, and receive back the fee paid for the same.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to
a penalty of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than fifty dollars
($50.00) for each offense. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 41, Art. 1, Sec. 14)
8-4-15: CONSTRUCTION OF FOREGOING SECTION:
The foregoing section shall not be so construed as to apply to any person or
persons coming into the city from the country with any produce for market
raised by themselves, or to any person selling vegetables, berries, fruit, milk
or other farm produce of their own production; nor shall the same be so
construed as to make it a penal offense to peddle newspapers, nor to apply to
judicial sales, nor to any person acting under license from the city; provided,
that farmers or others selling under the provisions of this section shall not
occupy a stand upon any sidewalk, alley or crossing, nor within a space of ten
feet (10') of any such sidewalk or crossing upon any street or public square,
nor shall they allow their stand, wagon or other vehicle from which they may be
selling to remain in front of any person's place of business without the
consent of the occupant of such place of business, nor so as to obstruct the
convenient travel of the street. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 41, Art. 1, Sec. 15)
8-4-16: TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH POLES:
No person shall set or cause to be set any telegraph, telephone, electric light
or other poles upon any street or alley within the city, or string or hang any
wire along or across any street or alley, unless authorized so to do by the
council, under a penalty of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 873, 2-17-1981)
8-4-17: POLES, WHERE LOCATED:
All electric light, telegraph and telephone poles now in any street of the
city, or which shall hereafter be placed on any alley or street, shall be
located and placed within the curb lines on the sidewalk side thereof, which
are now or may hereafter be established; and poles shall be placed as near as
may be in a line in such streets. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 41, Art. 1, Sec. 17)
8-4-18: WIRES:
All wires suspended from said poles shall be at least eighteen feet (18') high
above the level of the street grade, and said poles shall be neatly smoothed
and in a fit condition to be painted. All high tension wires shall, so far as
practicable, be kept upon opposite sides of the streets from telephone and
telegraph wires. (Ord. 873, 2-17-1981)
8-4-19: SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION BY SPECIAL TAXATION:
All new sidewalks and condemned sidewalks shall be constructed by special
taxation, levied upon abutting landowners, and it shall be the duty of said
landowner, whenever the same becomes defective or needs repairs, to repair the
same without notice and keep the same in repair, using the same kind of
material of which the sidewalk is constructed. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 41, Art. 1, Sec.
19)
8-4-20: ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS RESPONSIBLE:
Whenever any sidewalk in the city shall need repairs, the abutting landowner
shall make the needed repairs; and if any owner shall fail to repair the same,
the superintendent of streets shall give such owner three (3) days' notice to
repair, and shall file a copy of said notice with the clerk; and upon such
owner failing or refusing to repair the same, an ordinance shall be passed to
repair, renew or condemn the same and shall require the same to be constructed
by special taxation; which ordinance shall be passed according to law, for such
purpose. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 41, Art. 1, Sec. 20)
8-4-21: DEFECTIVE SIDEWALKS:
Whenever any sidewalk shall not be repairable, an ordinance shall be passed
condemning such defective sidewalk and requiring the same to be rebuilt by
special taxation; and new sidewalks shall be built by like taxation. (R.O.
1959, Ch. 41, Art. 1, Sec. 21)
8-4-22: ORDINANCE SPECIFICATIONS:
All ordinances shall provide and specify the material which shall be used in
such construction or repair, and the width and location of the same, and that
the owners of abutting lands shall have the time allowed by law to build and
construct the same, and in all other respects said ordinance shall conform to
law. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 41, Art. 1, Sec. 22)
8-4-23: DRIVING AGAINST CURBSTONES:
(Rep. by Ord. 873, 2-17-1981)
8-4-24: CONTRACTOR TO ERECT GUARDS:
When any street, alley or other public place in the city shall hereafter be
paved or otherwise improved, it shall be the duty of the contractor or
contractors who have charge of said work to cause to be placed in said street,
alley or public place at the intersection of all cross streets, proper and
sufficient guards to prevent automobiles, machinery or vehicles of all kinds
and descriptions, and animals of all kinds and descriptions, from entering in
and upon such streets so being paved or otherwise improved, for a distance of
at least one block from that part of the said improvement that has been lastly
constructed. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 41, Art. 1, Sec. 24)
8-4-25: DRIVING OVER PAVEMENT WITHIN GUARDS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, drive or in any manner propel any
kind of vehicle or piece of machinery, or to lead, ride or drive any horse,
mule or cow over, along or upon that portion of any street, alley or other
public place in the city so being paved or otherwise improved that is within
the guards or obstructions placed upon such street, alley or public place by
the party in charge of such pavement or improvement as provided in the
preceding section. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 41, Art. 1, Sec. 25)
8-4-26: UNLAWFUL TO REMOVE GUARDS:
It shall be unlawful for any person other than those engaged in the
construction of said pavement or improvement to remove or destroy any such
guards or obstructions placed upon any street, alley or public place that is
being paved or improved. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 41, Art. 1, Sec. 26)
8-4-27: WAGON BOXES:
   (A)   Wagon Boxes To Be Tight: Any person who shall be engaged in drawing
upon any street, crushed stone, sand, gravel, sawdust, ashes, cinders, lime,
tan bark, shavings, wastepaper, ice, mortar, rubbish, manure or other loose
material likely to sift, fall or be blown upon the streets, shall convey and
carry the same in tight wagon boxes, and in case the same fall or be scattered
in any street, such person shall cause it to be forthwith removed. Any person
violating any provision of this section shall be fined not less than twenty
five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense.
   (B)   Wagon Boxes, Overloaded: Any person causing any cart, wagon or other
vehicle to be loaded and heaped up so that the contents or any part thereof
shall be scattered in any street, or other place in the city, shall be fined
not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 873, 2-17-1981)
8-4-28: POLES ON SQUARE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain upon the public
square, or upon any of the streets radiating from the public square, in the
city, any poles for the purpose of conducting telegraph, telephone or electric
light wires. Any person violating the terms of this section shall be fined,
upon conviction, not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and each day's neglect to move same
after notice to do so shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 873, 2-17-
1981)
8-4-29: SOUTH CAROLINA POPLAR:
   (A)   South Carolina Poplar Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person
to plant or cause to be planted in any of the public streets of the city, in
the parts of such streets commonly called parkings, any tree or trees of the
variety commonly known as South Carolina poplar. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 41, Art. 1,
Sec. 30)
   (B)   Distance From Sidewalk: It shall be unlawful for any person to plant
or cause to be planted in or upon any lawn or other private premises within the
corporate limits of the city, any tree or trees of the variety commonly known
as South Carolina poplars, within a distance of fifty feet (50') from any
sidewalk or sidewalk line; and it further shall be unlawful for any person to
plant or cause to be planted in or upon any lawn or other private premises,
within the city, or in any of the public streets of the city, in the parts of
such streets commonly called parkings, any tree or trees of any variety
whatsoever within a distance of four feet (4') from any sidewalk or sidewalk
line. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 41, Art. 1, Sec. 31)
8-4-30: NAMES OF STREETS:
   (A)   Plan Of Naming Streets And Avenues: Except where the city council
finds that deviations are appropriate and beneficial to the city of Canton, the
streets of the city shall be named in accordance with the following plan: All
streets running north and south parallel to Main Street shall be known as
"avenues"; all streets east of Main Street shall be numbered First Avenue,
Second Avenue, etc.; all streets west of Main Street shall be lettered Avenue
A, Avenue B, etc.; all streets running east and west parallel to Elm Street
shall be known as "streets", and shall be named and known after some kind of
wood; all short streets running east and west shall be known as "places"; all
short streets running north and south shall be known as "courts".
   (B)   Names Of Certain Streets Designated: Except where the city council
finds that deviations are appropriate and beneficial to the city of Canton, all
short streets running east and west shall be known as "places" and all short
streets running north and south shall be known as "courts" and shall bear such
names as hereinbefore or as hereafter provided for by ordinances of the city.
(Ord. 624, 1-3-1978)
8-4-31: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, or refusing or
neglecting to conform and comply therewith, shall, where no specific penalty is
provided, be subject to a penalty of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00)
nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 873, 2-17-
1981)
8-4-32: PRIVATE DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to make or construct a private driveway for
the use of vehicular traffic into any public street in the city of Canton,
Illinois, without first having procured a permit therefor from the city
engineer of said city.
Any person desiring to make or construct such a private driveway shall pay a
twenty five dollar ($25.00) application fee to the building official who shall
forward the fee to the city clerk. Should the permit be denied, the permit fee
shall not be refunded to the applicant. The applicant shall proceed in such
private driveway construction only when a permit therefor has been received in
writing from said building official. (Ord. 1771, 9-16-2003)
The city engineer of this city shall either issue or deny the permit, herein
contemplated, within ten (10) days of the application therefor, herein
contemplated.
Any person who undertakes to make or construct such a private driveway, as
herein contemplated, without first having procured the written permit therefor,
herein contemplated, shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and that each day such a
private driveway subsists without such a permit therefor shall be deemed a
separate offense which shall be punished by fine of not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 553, 8-3-1976)
8-4-33: ENCROACHMENTS ON RIGHT OF WAY:
   (A)   Definitions:
CONSTRUCTION EASEMENT AREA: The area lying between the project right of way
limits and the platted street limits within which the city, by concurrence in
the establishment of the project right of way lines, will permit the state to
enter to perform all necessary construction operations.
ENCROACH- MENT: Any building, fence, sign or any other structure or object of
any kind (with the exception of utilities and public road signs), which is
placed, located or maintained in, on, under or over any portion of the project
right of way or the roadway right of way where no project right of way line has
been established.
PERMISSIBLE ENCROACHMENT: Any existing awning, marquee or sign advertising
activity on the property or similar overhanging structure supported from a
building immediately adjacent to the limits of the platted street where there
is a sidewalk extending to the building line and which does not impair the free
and safe flow of traffic on the highway, the permissive retention of
overhanging signs is not to be construed as being applicable to those signs
supported from poles constructed outside the project right of way line and not
confined by adjacent buildings.
PROJECT RIGHT OF WAY: Areas within the project right of way lines established
jointly by the city and state which will be free of encroachments except as
herein defined.
ROADWAY RIGHT OF WAY: Areas existing or acquired by dedication or by fee simple
for highway purposes; also, the areas acquired by temporary easement during the
time the easement is in effect.
   (B)   Unlawful To Erect And Retain: It shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation to erect or cause to be erected, to retain or cause to be
retained, any "encroachment" as defined in this section, within the limits of
the project right of way or roadway right of way where no project right of way
lines have been established.
   (C)   Addition To Regulations: This section is intended to and shall be in
addition to all other ordinances, rules and regulations concerning
encroachments and shall not be construed as repealing or rescinding any other
ordinance or part of any ordinance unless in direct conflict therewith. (Ord.
899, 10-20-1981)
8-4-34: SOLICITATION ON PUBLIC WAYS:
   (A)   Contributions:
      1.   Registration Required: No person shall stand on a public way,
including a state highway or a city street, for the purposes of soliciting
contributions from the occupant of any vehicle within the corporate limits of
the city unless said individual or individuals shall have first registered with
the city on the registration form provided by the city. Registration with the
city must be requested a minimum of fourteen (14) days prior to the planned
commencement of solicitation.
      2.   Permitted Locations: Solicitation on the state highways or public
streets within the city shall be allowed only at intersections where all
traffic is required to come to a full stop.
      3.   Safety Vest Required: All solicitors must wear a highly visible,
orange or green safety vest at all times when in the public way.
      4.   Minimum Age; Solicitors Only: All solicitors must be at least
sixteen (16) years of age. No one shall be in the public way except solicitors.
      5.   Hours Of Solicitation: All solicitation on public ways shall occur
between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M.
      6.   Soliciting Restricted: The soliciting agency or individual shall be
restricted and limited to solicitation on the public way to no more than two
(2) dates in any given calendar month and no more than four (4) days during any
calendar year.
      7.   Purpose Posted: The purpose of the fundraising event must be posted
to identify the soliciting organization. Examples: readable signs on the
collection container, identification on the safety vests of the solicitors,
etc.
      8.   Additional Requirements For Solicitation On State Highways:
         (a)   The soliciting agency or individual shall further be registered
with the attorney general as a charitable organization as provided by "an act
to regulate solicitation and collection of funds for charitable purposes,
providing for violations thereof, and making an appropriation therefore",
approved July 26, 1963, as amended; and
         (b)   The soliciting agency or individual shall further be engaged in
a statewide fundraising activity; and
         (c)   The soliciting agency or individual shall further be liable for
any injuries to any person or property during the solicitation which is
causally connected to any act of ordinary negligence of the soliciting agent.
   (B)   Penalty: Violations of this section shall be governed by title 1,
chapter 27, "General Penalty", of this code and the fee schedule that is
adopted by city council from time to time. Any person who is found to be in
violation of this chapter shall be removed from soliciting and at the city's
determination, may be suspended from being allowed to solicit on public ways
for one year. (Ord. 4049, 11-1-2016)
CHAPTER 5
TREES AND SHRUBS
SECTION:
8-5-1: Definitions
8-5-2: Permit Required
8-5-3: Planting Near Intersections
8-5-4: Trimming
8-5-5: Defacing
8-5-6: Trees Permitted
8-5-7: Exclusion
8-5-8: Penalty
8-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
Wherever in this chapter the following words or terms are used, they shall have
ascribed to them the following meanings:
BUSH OR SHRUB: A woody perennial plant smaller than a tree with close branches
arising from or near the ground.
TERRACE: The land lying between a street or roadway and sidewalk.
TREE: A perennial plant having a self-supporting main stem or trunk which
develops woody branches some distance from the ground, and grows to a
considerable height and size. (Ord. 143, 7-20-1965)
8-5-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall plant or remove any tree, bush or shrub on any terrace or land
within ten feet (10') of any sidewalk, street or roadway within the corporate
limits of Canton, without first having obtained a permit.
Any person desiring to plant or remove on any of the places above set forth
shall apply to the office of the clerk. The clerk shall furnish such person
with an application requesting the following information:
   (A)   Name and address of applicant.
   (B)   Species of tree, plant or shrub to be planted or removed.
   (C)   Sketch showing location of tree, bush or shrub to be removed or
planted, with measurements of adjacent sidewalks, streets and roadways, and
street intersections.
   (D)   Such other information as the committee on streets and alleys deem
reasonable.
The clerk shall furnish the applicant with a list of the species of trees that
may be planted.
The applicant shall return his application to the clerk who shall refer the
same to the superintendent of streets, who, if he finds the application
complies with this chapter shall then approve the same. The clerk shall then
issue a permit to the applicant who then may plant or remove said tree, plant
or shrub in compliance with the permit. The superintendent shall inspect the
premises where said tree, plant or shrub has been planted or removed to see if
the applicant has complied with the terms of the permit.
In granting said permit and in his inspection, the superintendent of streets
shall see that the provisions of this chapter are reasonably complied with and
may refer any application or inspection to the committee on streets and alleys
for its opinion. (Ord. 143, 7-20-1965)
8-5-3: PLANTING NEAR INTERSECTIONS:
The planting of any tree, bush or shrub within two feet (2') of any street,
roadway or sidewalk or within twenty five feet (25') of any street intersection
within the corporate limits of the city is prohibited. (Ord. 143, 7-20-1965)
8-5-4: TRIMMING:
All trees, shrubs and trees now in existence or which may hereafter be planted
on any premises within the corporate limits of the city bordering a public
street or roadway shall be trimmed or cut so that the limbs, stems and branches
shall not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic and no stem, limb or
branch shall be less than eight feet (8') above any sidewalk and not less than
twelve feet (12') above any street or roadway. (Ord. 143, 7-20-1965)
8-5-5: DEFACING:
No person shall injure, mar or deface any tree, bush, shrub or flower on a
public street, terrace, city park or city property. (Ord. 143, 7-20-1965)
8-5-6: TREES PERMITTED:
Permits shall be issued for the planting of the following species of trees
only: skyline locust; shade master locust; sunburst locust; crimson king maple;
Schwedleri maple; European ash; oak leaf ash; golden raintree; red bud (Judas
tree); flowering crabapple (no fruit); American hornbeam; Moraine ash; autumn
higan cherry; Fugenzo oriental cherry; paperback maple; sorrel tree (sourwood);
sweetgum; scarlet maple; sugar maple; green ash; flowering crab; Kwanzan
cherry; northern red oak; amur cork; little leaf linden; ginkgo; crimson king;
Norway maple; mountain ash; Bradford pear; Marshal, seedless ash; flowering
crab; pink crab; Vanguard crab; and Zumi crab. (Ord. 541, 4-6-1976)
8-5-7: EXCLUSION:
Due to the fact that the city has no jurisdiction of the terraces abutting
state bond issue routes numbered 9 and 78, the provisions of this chapter shall
not apply to the premises abutting said routes. (Ord. 143, 7-20-1965)
8-5-8: PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be punished by a fine not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (1975 Code)
CHAPTER 6
GRADES
SECTION:
8-6-1: Datum Plane Established
8-6-2: Sidewalks To Conform
8-6-3: New Sidewalks To Conform
8-6-4: City Engineer To Give Grade
8-6-5: Railroad Tracks To Conform
8-6-6: Bridges, Culverts, Crossings To Conform
8-6-1: DATUM PLANE ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a base or datum plane of reference to which all
city levels, and all permanent grade points, hereinafter established, shall
refer. Said base or datum plane shall be taken as a reference plane, and is
hereby established at one hundred feet (100') below the top of a bronze pin set
in a concrete post in the southwest quarter of Jones park in the public square
in the city, and being approximately at a point forty four feet (44') east of
the outer face of the curb on the west side of said Jones park, and two hundred
four and seven- tenths feet (204.7') north of the outer face of the curb on the
south end of Jones park. The permanent grades of all streets and alleys in the
city, hereinafter fixed, shall refer to said base or datum plane. The U.S.
geological survey elevation is equal to five hundred sixty two and six-tenths
feet (562.6') plus the city data. (Ord. 875, 3-17-1981)
8-6-2: SIDEWALKS TO CONFORM:
No person shall construct or lay, or cause to be constructed or laid, any
sidewalk where no grade has been established without having first obtained a
grade therefor from the city engineer, or contrary to any grade given by said
engineer, nor shall construct, or cause to be constructed, any sidewalk
contrary to any grade which may have been, or may be hereafter, established by
the council, under a penalty of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each offense,
and a further penalty of five dollars ($5.00) for each day that he shall fail
to make said sidewalk conform to the proper grade, after five (5) days' notice
so to do by the superintendent of streets. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 22, Sec. 2)
8-6-3: NEW SIDEWALKS TO CONFORM:
All new sidewalks that may be rebuilt, shall be built on and made to conform to
the grade which shall be established by the city engineer, and a record of the
sidewalk grade when established, shall be kept in a book provided for that
purpose, and permanent stone landmarks set below the frost line to keep the
grade line as established in a condition to be ascertained for the purpose of
public improvements in the city. Any person violating any of the provisions of
this section shall be subject to a penalty of not less than twenty five dollars
($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each and every
offense. (Ord. 875, 3-17-1981)
8-6-4: CITY ENGINEER TO GIVE GRADE:
When the city shall require a new sidewalk to be built and constructed, or
shall condemn an old sidewalk and require the construction of a new sidewalk,
before the same shall be required to be constructed, the city shall establish
the grade, and shall also make the grade ready for the construction of said
sidewalk, and put the same in proper condition for the laying of the sidewalk
as may be required, which said grading shall be done and prepared by general
taxation. It shall be the duty of the city engineer to establish such grade,
and the grades herein required to be prepared shall be done by and under the
supervision of the superintendent of streets of the city. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 22,
Sec. 4)
8-6-5: RAILROAD TRACKS TO CONFORM:
It shall be the duty of all railroad companies or corporations, or the owners
or proprietors of all railroad tracks, whose tracks now or hereafter may enter
or pass through the city, or whose tracks are located upon, or may hereafter be
located upon, any streets or alleys within the city, to raise or lower their
respective tracks to conform to any grade which is or may be established by the
city, or any street upon or through which said railroad tracks may run, and
where such tracks run lengthwise of any street, to keep the same not to exceed
one inch (1") above the surface of such street, and so that such streets may be
conveniently crossed at any place on such street. Any railroad or railway
company or corporation failing, neglecting or refusing to comply with the
provisions of this section, after five (5) days' notice so to do in writing by
the superintendent of streets, shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars
($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense; and the
recovery of one fine shall be no bar to future prosecution for a like failure
or neglect. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 22, Sec. 5)
8-6-6: BRIDGES, CULVERTS, CROSSINGS TO CONFORM:
All bridges, culverts and street crossings hereafter constructed upon any
street within the city shall be so constructed as to conform, as nearly as
possible, to the established grade of the street upon which said bridges,
culverts or crossings shall be located. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 22, Sec. 6)
CHAPTER 7
CEMETERIES, ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
8-7-1: Administration Of Cemetery; Accounting
8-7-2: Duties; Fees
8-7-3: Perpetual Care
8-7-4: Deeds
8-7-1: ADMINISTRATION OF CEMETERY; ACCOUNTING:
   (A)   Administration: The superintendent of buildings and grounds shall have
the care, charge, management, and control of any cemetery under the supervision
of the city. Employees of cemetery are employees of the city of Canton and
shall be under the supervision of the superintendent of buildings and grounds;
provided, however, that such care, management, and control shall be under the
supervision of the city council.
   (B)   Appraisal Of Lots: The superintendent of buildings and grounds, or his
designee, shall appraise the lots which remain unsold in the cemeteries, and
shall, from time to time, when deemed expedient reappraise such lots as remain
unsold.
   (C)   Manner Of Expending Receipts: All receipts on account of said
cemeteries shall be in custody of the city treasurer whether the same be by
appropriation by the council, donations, sale of lots or by contributions to
the perpetual care fund as hereinafter provided for said receipts arising from
the sale of lots, from donations, or from appropriations by the council and
shall be exclusively expended and applied under the direction and control of
the council in preserving, protecting, ornamenting, improving and laying out
the grounds of said cemeteries, and the avenues and walks therein. But the city
treasurer shall not expend the money belonging to the cemetery funds in advance
of the receipt thereof, nor incur any debts on account of said cemeteries,
without the prior consent of the council.
   (D)   Accounts: The city treasurer shall keep a cemetery account, in which
all monies received shall be charged, and she shall report, orally or in
writing, at the second regular meeting of the council in each month, a
statement in brief, of all receipts and expenditures. All revenues shall be
brought to the city treasurer. The mayor, city treasurer, and city clerk shall
be authorized as signators of all cemetery bank accounts. Checks must be
endorsed by two (2) of the three (3) authorized signators. (Ord. 3096, 4-8-
2015)
8-7-2: DUTIES; FEES:
   (A)   Duties:
      1.   Superintendent: The superintendent of buildings and grounds shall
have charge, control and superintendence of said cemeteries, subject to the
orders and directions of the city council, and he shall preserve and keep in
proper repair the enclosure of said cemeteries, as far as possible, to prevent
destruction or defacing of any gravestones, tablets, or monuments placed or
erected in said cemeteries. Superintendent shall be ex officio a police officer
of the city and shall have the right to make arrests for the violation of the
provisions of this chapter concerning cemeteries, or otherwise, the same as any
other police officer of the city. Said superintendent shall have charge of
copies of all plats and books concerning said cemeteries and the lots within
the same, and shall, at the request of any person wishing to purchase any of
said lots or parts of lots, point out to said person any of the lots remaining
for sale, and upon the disposal of any such lot or lots, he shall notify the
city clerk of the fact, whose duty shall be, upon payment of the price thereof
to the city treasurer, to make and execute a deed in manner and form as
hereinafter provided, to the purchaser of said lot or lots so purchased and
paid for.
      2.   Sexton: The superintendent shall oversee the operation of the
cemetery, but day to day operations shall be overseen by the sexton who reports
directly to the superintendent. The sexton, or his designee, shall have the
duty to dig, without delay, all graves in said cemeteries, for the digging of
which application shall be made to him by the owners of any lot or lots, or any
other person having the right of interment therein, and such application shall,
in all cases, be accompanied by a receipt from the city treasurer or city clerk
showing that all fees and charges for the digging of such grave and other work
incident to such interment have been paid to the city treasurer, and also by a
burial permit from city clerk as required by the provisions of this code
relative thereto. The sexton, or their designee, shall attend every interment
in person; he shall fill up and neatly trim all graves as soon as possible
after depositing the coffin therein; he shall also fill up and trim all graves
that have or may hereafter settle or sink in; he shall register the names and
ages of all persons interred in said cemeteries and the places of their
interments, subject to the inspection of any person interested, and he shall,
on or before the first Monday in each month, make out and furnish to the city
clerk, a statement, in writing, showing the number of interments made in said
cemeteries during the preceding month, with the name and age of each person so
interred; he shall also keep the alleys, walks and avenues in said cemeteries
in good order and unobstructed, so that a free passage and access may be had to
all lots, and he shall perform such other labor and services as may be
necessary and requisite to the duties of his office and as the superintendent
and/or city council so direct; he shall oversee the grading and ornamentation
of all lots, and shall perform such work and services for individual lot owners
as may be reasonable, or city council may require, and shall certify all
charges for such services to the city clerk, subject to the rules of the city
council.
   (B)   Fees: The fees to be charged for the services of cemetery staff in
connection with interments in said cemeteries, shall be set by the city council
from time to time. Said fees shall be paid to the city treasurer in advance
before said work shall be performed and receipt given therefor. A list of said
fees shall be conspicuously posted at the sexton's office or the office of the
cemeteries. All fees paid for these services shall be paid to the city
treasurer. (Ord. 3096, 4-8-2015)
8-7-3: PERPETUAL CARE:
   (A)   Gift Authorized: Any person or persons whomsoever, is and are hereby
authorized and empowered to give, donate, devise or bequeath any sum of money
not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or any funds, securities, or
property of any kind of value of which shall not be less than one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00), to city council on behalf of said cemeteries, in perpetual
trust, for maintenance, care, repair, upkeep or ornamentation of such cemetery,
or any lot or lots, or grave in such cemetery, specified in the instrument
making such gift, donation, devise or bequest. City council is hereby
authorized and empowered to receive and hold in perpetual trust any such money,
securities, funds and property given, donated, devised or bequeathed to it in
trust. City council shall have the right to convert said property into money,
and shall invest the proceeds thereof and the money so given, donated, and
bequeathed to it, as is or may be provided by the statutes of the state as
proper investments of trust funds. The principal of such trust fund shall be
kept intact and perpetually invested, and the income thereof shall be
perpetually applied for the purposes specified, in the instrument making such
gift, donation, devise or bequest, and for no other reason or purpose.
   (B)   Treasurer's Duty As To Trust Funds: The city treasurer shall have the
custody of all money and property received in trust from the cemeteries and
shall pay out the same only upon the written order of the city council and she
shall keep permanent books of record of all such trust funds and all receipts
and disbursements thereof, and for what purposes received and disbursed, and
shall annually make a report in writing to city council, under oath, showing
balances, receipts and disbursements, including a statement showing the amount
and principal of trust funds on hand and how invested, which report shall be
audited and approved by city council if found correct.
   (C)   Clerk Duties: The city clerk shall keep a permanent record of the
proceedings of the council as those proceedings pertain to the city cemeteries
and shall maintain those records in the course of her normal duties as she does
with all minutes of council meetings and according to state law. The city clerk
shall also keep a permanent record of the trust funds, from whatever sources
received, the amounts thereof, and for what purposes, respectively, and she
shall annually, at the time the city treasurer makes her report to council,
make a report under oath to council, stating therein, substantially the same
matter required to be reported by the city treasurer, which report, if found
correct shall be approved and preserved by city council. (Ord. 3096, 4-8-2015)
   (D)   Exemption Of Funds: The trust funds, gifts, devises and bequests
mentioned in this section and the income arising therefrom shall be exempt from
taxation, and from the operation of all laws of mortmain and the laws against
perpetuities and accumulations. (1959 Code § 12-8-4)
   (E)   Title To Funds: Any such trust executed to the cemetery by its name
shall vest in the city council and take effect to all intents and purposes as
if executed by city council.
   (F)   Form Of Agreement To Donor: The form of trust agreement with the
donors to said fund may be in form substantially as follows:
This agreement, made this          day of                 A.D., 20        ,
between                      and the City of Canton, County of Fulton, State of
Illinois.
Witnesseth: That the said                 has deposited with the Treasurer of
the City of Canton, the sum of $        , in consideration of which the City of
Canton hereby agrees to receive and hold said sum in trust forever, and invest
the same with other funds of a like character, and apply the income therefrom
from time to time, to the care of graves, grass and preservation of trees and
shrubs upon or in Lot #         on Block #         in Division         , in
Greenwood Cemetery, and the surplus, if any, at the end of each year, is to
remain as a sinking fund, and not to be used for any other purpose but the
taking care of the said lot and cemetery grounds.
Provided, however, that the Council or the City Treasurer shall never be held
responsible for their conduct in the discharge of such trust, except for want
of good faith, and such reasonable diligence as may be required of mere
gratuitous agents. Furthermore, the funds so received shall, when properly
invested, be deposited with the City Treasurer and held by her and her
successors in trust perpetually.
Attest:      City of Canton,
      City Clerk      Mayor
      Date      Date
(Ord. 3096, 4-8-2015)
8-7-4: DEEDS:
   (A)   Deed To Lots: All deeds to cemetery lots shall be signed in the name
of the city, by the mayor or his designee, and countersigned by the city clerk,
and executed under the corporate seal of the city and shall be substantially in
the following form:
The City of Canton, in consideration of $           paid to the City of Canton
by            does hereby in conformity with the provisions of the City in such
cases made and provided, give, grant, bargain, sell and convey to the said
                    (here insert description of lot) of                 
Cemetery, to have and to hold the same with appurtenances, unto the said
          , his heirs, and assigns forever, for the purpose of burying therein
his or their dead, and for no other purpose whatsoever; and conditioned that no
right or title under this deed shall or may be assigned or transferred without
the consent in writing of the Council; subject nevertheless, to all provisions
of the City for the government of the cemeteries of the said City of Canton and
the State of Illinois statutory regulations.
Attest:      City of Canton,
      City Clerk      Mayor
      Date      Date
(Ord. 3096, 4-8-2015)
CHAPTER 8
CEMETERIES, GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
8-8-1: Interments
8-8-2: Removing Bodies
8-8-3: Offenses Defined; Defacing Grounds
8-8-4: Rules, Regulations And Definitions Of Cemetery
8-8-5: New Cemeteries Prohibited
8-8-6: General Penalty
8-8-7: Fines; Disposition
8-8-8: Superintendent Of Buildings And Grounds Or Sexton; Notice Of Violation
8-8-9: Greenwood Cemetery
8-8-10: Maple Addition
8-8-11: Forest Lawn Addition
8-8-12: Swan's Addition
8-8-13: Shepley Addition
8-8-1: INTERMENTS:
   (A)   Interments: No body shall be interred in any lot, the title to which
is derived from the City, except by permission of and under the direction of
the Superintendent of Buildings and Grounds or the Sexton of said cemeteries;
no body shall be interred in said cemeteries by any person having the right so
to do without first filing with the Superintendent of Buildings and Grounds or
the Sexton a notice thereof, specifying the lot upon which such interment is to
be made, which notice shall also be accompanied with a burial permit from the
City Clerk showing that all fees and charges incident to such an interment have
been paid; no graves shall be made in any of the streets, avenues, walks or
alleys in said cemeteries, and every interment hereafter made in the cemeteries
shall be made in the manner hereinafter provided, and as may be provided by the
reasonable rules and regulations of the City Council. (Ord. 3098, 4-21-2015)
   (B)   No Interments On Sunday, Etc.: No interments shall be made in any
cemetery of the City on Sundays, Decoration Day, Fourth of July, Thanksgiving
Day or Christmas Day, except in cases of extreme necessity. (1959 Code § 12-11-
2)
   (C)   Manner Of Making Interments: All interments in the cemeteries shall be
at least three feet (3') deep from the surface of the ground to top of box, and
the grave dug at least twelve inches (12") from the lines of the lot, and all
vaults or ornaments that may be erected by owners of said lots shall be so
erected as not to obstruct any of the alleys, streets, walks or avenues. (1959
Code § 12-11-3)
8-8-2: REMOVING BODIES:
No person shall open, or cause to be opened, any grave, or take up or remove,
or cause to be taken up and removed, any body interred in the cemeteries,
unless in compliance with the provisions of this Code relative thereto, and
with the permission and under the direction of the Superintendent of Buildings
and Grounds or the Sexton; provided, that during the months of May, June, July,
August, September and October, no body shall be disinterred within three (3)
years after decease; and provided further, that in the cases where death was
caused by smallpox, diphtheria, scarlet fever, or other pestilential disease,
no body may be disinterred within five (5) years from the time of death. (Ord.
3098, 4-21-2015)
8-8-3: OFFENSES DEFINED; DEFACING GROUNDS:
No person shall play within the enclosure of any of the cemeteries of Canton,
at any games of any sort or description whatever, or shall hunt, discharge
firearms, or trespass upon the grounds of the cemeteries, or shall remove or
carry away, or wilfully, maliciously or negligently break, deface, destroy or
otherwise injure any monument, tombstone, vase or any other property, articles
or thing belonging to or placed or erected in the cemeteries, or shall pluck
any flowers therein, or trespass upon or maltreat any lot or grave therein, or
violate any of the established rules and regulations for the government of the
cemetery. (1959 Code § 12-11-5)
8-8-4: RULES, REGULATIONS AND DEFINITIONS OF CEMETERY:
   (A)   Definitions:
BOX: Means a grave liner or permanent outside container, consisting of a one
piece box, and a one piece lid, which is not sealed.
BURIAL OR BURIED: Means the act or result of interment, entombment, or
inurnment.
CEMETERY: Means the burial park, for earth interments; the community mausoleum,
individual mausoleum, for crypt or vault interments; and the columbarium, or
individual niches for cinerary interments. In these rules and regulations it
specifically means Greenwood Cemetery.
CONTRACTOR: Means any person, firm, or corporation engaged in setting any vault
or memorial, or performing any other work on the cemetery grounds, other than
an employee of the cemetery.
CREMATION: Means the technical heating process that reduces human remains to
bone fragments, which occurs through heat and evaporation.
CRYPT: Means a space in a mausoleum or in the ground where lawn crypts are
placed of sufficient size used, or intended to be used, to entomb cremated or
embalmed remains.
ENDOWMENT CARE FUND: Means the trust fund established by the cemetery for the
purpose of care and maintenance of the cemetery grounds and improvements
thereon.
ENTOMBMENT: Means the disposition of human remains in a mausoleum crypt.
ENTOMBMENT RIGHT: Means the right to place individual human remains or
individual cremated human remains in a specific mausoleum crypt selected by the
consumer for use as a final resting place.
GRAVE: Means a space of ground in a burial park used, or intended to be used,
for the burial of human remains.
INTERMENT: Means the disposition of human remains by earth burial, entombment,
or cremation and inurnment.
INTERMENT OR LOT SERVICES: Means the opening and closing of a particular
interment space.
INTERMENT RIGHT: Means the right to place individual human remains or cremated
remains in a specific interment space within the cemetery selected by the
consumer for use as a final resting place, and subject to the limitations set
forth herein.
INTERMENT SPACE: Means the particular grave, crypt, niche, or lawn crypt within
the cemetery to which a particular interment right relates. An owner of an
interment right does not, by virtue of such ownership, acquire ownership of the
interment space or of any land or improvements within the cemetery.
INURNMENT: Means placing cremated human remains in an urn and placing in a
niche, or in the ground.
INURNMENT RIGHT: Means the right to place individual cremated human remains in
a specific niche selected by the consumer for use as a final resting place.
LOT: Means the same as plot.
MANAGEMENT: Means the Canton City Council; Superintendent of Building and
Grounds or his designee.
MARKER: Means a memorial of granite and/or bronze and/or bronze on granite
placed level with the grade.
MAUSOLEUM CRYPT: Means a space in a mausoleum used or intended to be used above
or underground, to entomb human remains.
MEMORIAL: Means a marker, monument, vase, crypt or niche name plate for the
purpose of identification or in memory of the interred.
MONUMENT: Means a memorial of granite that extends above the surface of the
lawn and has a base and die.
NICHE: Means a space used, or intended to be used, for inurnment of cremated
remains.
OUTER BURIAL CONTAINER: Means the rigid outer container used to surround a
casket or a cremated remains container, and shall include the products commonly
known as vaults and grave liners.
OWNER: Means the owner of an interment right or rights within the cemetery, as
reflected in the records of the cemetery.
PLOT: Means space in the cemetery used, or intended to be used, for the
interment of human remains. The term includes and applies to one, or more than
one, adjoining grave and or space, one or more than one adjoining crypt or one
or more than one adjoining niche.
SPACE: Means the space on a lot for the interment of one human remains.
VAULT: Means a permanent outside container of grade better than a two (2) piece
box, which is sealed.
   (B)   General Supervision Of Cemetery:
      1.   Admission To Cemetery: The cemetery management reserves the right to
compel all persons coming into the cemetery to obey all rules and regulations
adopted by the cemetery. The cemetery management further reserves the right to
refuse admission to anyone not an interment right owner or relative of a person
buried in the cemetery, and to refuse the use of any of the cemetery facilities
at any time to any person or persons whom the management may deem objectionable
to the best interests of the cemetery.
      2.   Cemetery Management In Charge Of Funeral: All funerals, on reaching
the cemetery, shall be under the supervision of the management. The management
is hereby empowered to enforce all rules and regulations and to exclude from
the cemetery any person violating the same. The management and its assistants
shall have charge of the grounds and buildings and at all times shall have
supervision and control of all persons in the cemetery, including the conduct
of funerals, traffic, employees, interment right owners, and invitees.
      3.   Veteran's Markers: The cemetery and its employees reserve the right
to set all veteran's markers in the cemetery.
      4.   Graves - Digging: The cemetery and its personnel reserve the right
to open and close all graves in the cemetery, for interments and disinterments.
      5.   Management Shall Control Improvements: The cemetery shall have the
sole and exclusive authority with respect to the planting, sodding, surveying
and improvements within the cemetery. All improvements or alteration of
individual property in the cemetery shall be under the direction of and subject
to the consent, satisfaction and approval of the management; and, should they
be made without its consent, the management shall have the right to remove,
alter or change such improvements or alterations at the expense of the lot
owner, at any time.
The management reserves the right to remove from any lot anything that it deems
unsightly, or which in any way conflicts with the rules and regulations, or
general beauty of the cemetery. If any tree, shrub, or plant standing upon any
lot, by means of its roots, branches or otherwise, is or becomes detrimental to
adjacent lots or avenues, or if for any other reason its removal is deemed
necessary, the management shall have the right to remove such tree, shrub, or
plant, or any part thereof, or otherwise correct the condition existing as in
their judgment seems best, and without notice to any interested party.
      6.   Records Of Cemetery: The files, papers, documents, reports, ledgers,
maps, lot cards, correspondence, and other written records maintained by
Greenwood Cemetery are the sole and exclusive property of Greenwood Cemetery.
Only Greenwood Cemetery employees have access to these permanent documents.
Except where disclosure is required pursuant to the Illinois Freedom of
Information Act, information contained therein is for the exclusive use of
management, and shall be disclosed, as management deems proper. Record requests
may be subject to an administrative fee, which may be charged from time to time
by management.
      7.   Removal Of Official Records: No Greenwood Cemetery official records
shall be removed from the Greenwood Cemetery Office without management
approval, as well as no official record shall be altered or damaged in any
manner.
      8.   Work To Be Done By Cemetery: No persons, other than the duly
authorized employees of the cemetery, shall be allowed to perform any work
within the cemetery without explicit authorization issued by the cemetery
management, and any such work so authorized shall be subject to all provisions
contained herein pertaining to such activity.
All grading, landscape work and improvement of any kind, and all care on lots
shall be done and all trees and shrubs and ground cover of any kind shall be
planted, trimmed, cut or removed only by the management and appropriate City of
Canton employees. All infrastructure improvements shall be completed after
approval of management.
All openings and closings, all interments and removals, and every aspect of the
disposition of human remains shall be done by the management, exclusively.
All locating of memorial sites shall be done by the cemetery, exclusively.
   (C)   Burials And Removals:
      1.   Authorization Required: The management reserves the right to refuse
interment or removal, except on written application by the legal
representatives or proper authorities. No interment shall be permitted nor
shall a body be received unless the burial permit and proper authorization is
furnished prior to disposition.
      2.   Burial Of More Than One Body: Not more than one body, or the remains
of more than one body, shall be buried in one grave, vault, crypt, or niche,
unless such grave, vault, crypt, or niche has been purchased with the written
agreement that more than one body, or the remains of more than one body, may be
buried therein. In the event the cemetery elects to allow the interment of more
than one human remains in a particular interment space, the cemetery shall
charge a separate fee for each right of interment in a particular interment
space as well as a separate fee for each interment service provided. The
management must approve these second or third rights of interment or inurnment.
The family and the funeral home must provide all pertinent information
regarding each interment, inurnment or entombment, and appropriate signatures
must be provided for each burial. The cemetery will maintain a separate
interment record for each interment, inurnment or entombment. No more than
three (3) interments per space are allowed, as approved by management. These
interments can be one full casket interment and two (2) inurnments; or three
(3) inurnments of cremated remains. No pet remains may be interred with human
remains.
      3.   Casket Container Standards: Remains for interment shall be delivered
to the cemetery in a casket or container composed of rigid material such as
wood, fiberglass, plastic or metal and shall be of such construction so as to:
a) assure protection to the health and safety of the cemetery personnel, b)
provide proper covering for the remains and c) meet moral codes for the respect
and dignity of the deceased. A full enclosure "dome" or top piece so
constructed that in its closed position it completely shields the remains from
view at all times, with a rigid bottom, substantial enough not to deflect under
the weight of an adult human body shall be required. The management reserves
the right to make exceptions for special conditions, oversized or overweight
deceased persons, children, limbs, or pathological tissues and other reasons
determined by the management.
All babies or stillborn births, whether interred in Baby Heaven or on any other
interment right in the cemetery shall be in a retrievable container.
Receptacles of biodegradable materials shall not be permitted.
All remains entombed in mausoleums shall be in a casket or alternative
container conforming to the standards as prescribed by the cemetery. The
management may, at its discretion, require that mausoleum entombments be in a
casket or alternative container, or other container approved by the cemetery,
which is constructed and designed to be resistant to the leakage of fluids and
odors.
      4.   Casket Not To Be Opened Or Body Touched Without Consent: Once the
committal service is completed and the casket is ready to be placed, no person
shall open the casket or touch the body without the consent of the legal
representative of the deceased or an order of a court of competent
jurisdiction; provided the management may take appropriate steps to correct any
obnoxious or improper condition.
      5.   Change Of Address: It shall be the duty of the lot owner to notify
the management of any change in post office address. Notice sent to a lot owner
at the last address on file in the office of the cemetery shall be considered
sufficient and proper legal notification.
      6.   Container - Outside: All burials must be made in a two (2) piece
concrete box or vault that is not hinged of type, quality, and construction
approved by the management. The use of wooden boxes and sectional boxes shall
not be permitted.
All cremated remains of human bodies shall be buried in a permanent,
retrievable container. Inurnment or entombment shall be in a container approved
by the management. Short term storage may be permitted as provided in these
rules and regulations.
Construction shall be such that the container shall resist cracking, puncturing
or structural failure as determined by management, which decision shall be
conclusive on all third party sellers and installers.
      7.   Disinterment: No disinterment or removal shall be made except by the
management on request of the person(s) with legal authority to direct the same,
or by court order prior to time of removal. At least seventy two (72) hours'
notice shall be given prior to any removal. The removal will be made at the
convenience of the management, with consideration to inclement weather, weather
predictions, and interment schedules. The management may defer an interment or
disinterment until a more appropriate time for any reason. All fees associated
with any disinterment shall be paid in full prior to the service being
provided.
The cemetery shall exercise due care in making disinterments, but shall assume
no liability for damage to any body, casket, outer burial receptacle, or urn in
making a disinterment. When a disinterment is to be made from one grave to
another grave and an outer burial container was not used for the original
interment, an outer burial container meeting the cemetery's specifications must
be furnished by the owner or next of kin for the new interment.
The cemetery may require that all persons attending an interment or
disinterment remain at safe distance, as determined by the management, from the
interment space during the interment or disinterment.
      8.   Errors May Be Corrected: The management reserves, and shall have,
the right to correct any errors that may be made by it either in making burials
or removals, or in the description, either by canceling such conveyance and
substituting and conveying in lieu thereof other interment property, of equal
value and similar location as far as possible, or as may be selected by the
management, or by refunding the amount of money paid on account of said
purchase. In the event the error shall involve the burial of the remains of any
person in such property, the management reserves, and shall have, the right to
remove and bury the remains in such other property of equal value and similar
location as may be substituted and conveyed in lieu thereof. The management
shall also have the right to correct any errors made by placing an improper
inscription, including an incorrect name and/or date, either on the memorial or
on the container for cremated remains. The cemetery shall have no liability as
a result of any errors of the type described herewith other than its obligation
to take the remedial actions described.
      9.   Holidays: As a Municipal cemetery, the holidays observed by the City
of Canton will be observed by the cemetery. These include, but are not limited
to, days in observance of New Year's Day, Martin Luther King's Birthday,
Presidents' Day, Good Friday, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day. When any holiday falls, or
is observed, on a Saturday or Monday, arrangements for an interment must be
provided by the last weekday preceding the holiday.
      10.   Identity: The management assumes no duty for identity of the
remains of the deceased, and can give no assurance that the remains interred
are that of the person shown on the interment authorization executed and
delivered to the management. The management relies upon the representation of
family, funeral director, or others making such statements of identity for
interment authorization, burial permits, or death certificates, and shall have
no obligation to independently establish or verify the identity of the remains.
      11.   Interment Of Pets: No pets shall be interred in the cemetery,
either alone or with human remains.
      12.   Interment - Right Of Descent: If no interment is made in an
interment lot which has been transferred by deed or certificate of ownership to
an individual owner, or if all remains previously interred are lawfully
removed, upon the death of the owner, unless he has disposed of the lot either
in his will by a specific devise or by a written declaration filed and recorded
in the office of the cemetery authority, the interment rights descend to the
heirs at law of the owner subject to the rights of interment of the decedent
and his surviving spouse provided for in these rules and regulations.
      13.   Interment Space - Location: When instructions from the lot owner
regarding the location of an interment space in a lot cannot be obtained, or
are indefinite, or when for any reason the interment space cannot be opened
where specified, the management may, in its discretion, open it in such
location in the plot as it deems best and proper, so as not to delay the
funeral; and the management shall not be liable in damages for any error so
made.
      14.   Inurnment Container Specifications: All cremated remains to be
inurned in the cemetery shall be placed in a sealed, permanent, retrievable
container of a type, quality and construction approved by the management. A
temporary cremation container by definition is not a permanent retrievable
container. The use of paper, cardboard, or other similar biodegradable
materials shall not be permitted.
      15.   Laws: In addition to being subject to these rules and regulations,
all burials and removals are made subject to the orders and laws of the
properly constituted authorities of the City, County and State.
      16.   Liability - No Liability For Damage During Removal: The cemetery
shall not be liable for damage to any casket, burial case, or urn occurring
during the removal thereof.
      17.   Lot Sale Policy: All interment rights on pinned or platted lots
within Greenwood Cemetery are considered "for sale" unless determined by
Greenwood Cemetery to be unusable due to physical barriers such as trees,
roots, infrastructure, utilities, etc. No useable lots or blocks may be held,
reserved or restricted for the convenience of any family or individual, unless
that family or individual owns the interment rights for said lot(s) or block.
Greenwood Cemetery may at its discretion allow a maximum of a thirty (30) day
"courtesy hold" without a deposit, on a lot(s) for a family needing time to
make a purchase decision.
      18.   Lot Owners - Property Rights Of: Only the right to inter is
conveyed. Greenwood Cemetery retains all other interest in the space, crypt, or
niche conveyed. All interment rights conveyed to individuals are the sole and
separate property of the owner named in the instrument of conveyance.
Successors in interest shall be determined as follows: The spouse of an owner
of any lot containing more than one interment space has a vested right of
interment of his/her remains in the lot and any person thereafter becoming the
spouse of the owner has a vested right of interment of his/her remains in the
lot if more than one interment space is unoccupied at the time the person
becomes the spouse of the owner.
No conveyance or other action of the owner without the written consent of
joinder of the spouse of the owner divests the spouse of a vested right of
interment, except that a final decree of divorce between them terminates the
vested right of interment unless otherwise provided in the decree.
In a conveyance to two (2) or more persons as joint tenants, each joint tenant
has a vested right of interment in the lot conveyed. Upon the death of a joint
tenant, the title to the lot held in joint tenancy immediately vests in the
survivors, subject to the vested right of interment of the remains of the
deceased joint tenant.
A vested right of interment may be waived and is terminated upon the interment
elsewhere of the remains of the person in whom vested.
An affidavit by a person having knowledge of the facts setting forth the fact
of the death of the owner and the name of the person or persons entitled to the
use of the lot is complete authorization to the cemetery to permit the use of
the unoccupied portions of the lot by the person entitled to the use of it.
An affidavit by any person having knowledge of the facts setting forth the fact
of the death of one joint tenant and establishing the identity of the surviving
joint tenants named in the deed to any lot, when filed with the cemetery, is
complete authorization to the cemetery to permit the use of the unoccupied
portion of the lot in accordance with the directions of the surviving joint
tenants or their successors in interest.
When there are several owners of a lot, or of right of interment in it, they
may designate one or more persons to represent the lot and file written notice
of designation with the management. In the absence of such notice or of written
objection to its so doing, the cemetery is not liable to any owner for
interring or permitting an interment in the lot upon the request or direction
of any co-owner of the lot.
No vested right of interment gives to any person the right to have his/her
remains interred in any interment space in which the remains of any deceased
person having a prior vested right of interment have been interred, without
acquisition of a second/third right of interment.
      19.   Notice: Forty eight (48) hours' notice, Sundays and holidays
excluded, must be given to the management before any burial. The management is
authorized to refuse interment in, or the erection of any memorial work on any
lot against which there is an unpaid balance or no endowment care. The
potential waiver of the required notice will be considered on a case by case
basis and will be subject to additional fees.
No disinterment or removal shall be made except by the management on request of
the person(s) with legal authority to direct the same, or by court order prior
to time of removal. At least seventy two (72) hours' notice shall be given
prior to any removal. The removal will be made at the convenience of the
management, with consideration to inclement weather and weather predictions.
The management may defer an interment until a more expedient time for any
reason.
      20.   Protection Against Loss Or Damage: The management shall have the
right to maintain guard at the cemetery at any time of its choosing. The
management shall have no liability for loss or damage and especially from
damage caused by the elements, and act of God, common enemy, thieves, vandals,
strikers, malicious mischief makers, explosions, accidents, invasions,
insurrections, riots, or order of any military or civil authority, whether the
damage be direct or collateral, including the loss of human remains, under any
circumstances.
      21.   Right To Replat, Regrade, And Use Property: The management shall
have the right and privilege, at any time and from time to time, to resurvey,
enlarge, diminish, replat, alter in shape or size, or otherwise change all or
any part, portion or subdivision of the property hereby mapped and platted,
including the right to lay out, establish, close, eliminate, or otherwise
modify or change the location of roads, walks, or drives, and amend maps or
plats, and to use the same for the erection of buildings, or for any purposes
or uses connected with, incident to or convenient for the care, preservation or
preparation for the interment of human remains or other cemetery purposes,
together with easements and right-of-way over and through said premises for,
and the right and privilege of installing, maintaining and operating pipeline,
conduits or drains for sprinklers, drainage, electric or communication lines,
or for any other purposes.
The management shall have the right to use cemetery property not sold to
individual lot owners for the burial of human remains, or for anything
necessary, incidental or convenient thereto. The management reserves to itself
the perpetual right of ingress and egress over the cemetery for the purpose of
passage to and from other lots.
      22.   Removal For Personal Gain Prohibited: Removal of a body or cremated
remains so that a space, lot, crypt, or niche may be sold or used for personal
gain is not allowed. Removal contrary to the express or implied wish of the
original owner is forbidden, unless the cemetery is directed to do so by court
order.
      23.   Scattering: The scattering of cremated remains is prohibited both
on common cemetery property and on grave spaces/lots where interment rights are
owned. All cremated remains are to be interred in retrievable containers, with
complete cemetery records afforded for each inurnment.
      24.   Scheduling A Service: Services are scheduled to accommodate the
family and the clergy in a time frame where both the funeral home and the
cemetery can best serve the family. The cemetery cannot properly serve a family
if multiple services are scheduled for the same area at the same time. Prior to
scheduling a burial the funeral home must contact the cemetery or designated
cemetery personnel to assure that the cemetery can accommodate the service at
the time desired. Services cannot be scheduled without the concurrence of all
parties.
      25.   Service Charges - Payment Of: The charges for the cemetery service
must be paid at the time of the issuance of the order of burial or removal,
unless payment arrangements are made with the management prior to the service,
and proper signatures obtained on any documentation the management may require.
      26.   Statement Of Employees And Sales Agents: The contract, deed, and
these rules and regulations, and any amendments thereto shall be the sole and
only agreement between the cemetery and the lot owner. The statements of any
employee and/or sales agents shall in no way bind the management.
      27.   Substitution In The Event Of Size: Spaces and crypts are laid out,
designed, and constructed based upon recognized industry standards. In the
event, because of an oversized or overweight deceased person, or because of
disfigurement, such human remains cannot be interred within the confines of
such standard spaces or crypts, then the management reserves the right to
relocate the human remains, and to substitute the interment site to accommodate
such circumstances.
      28.   Time And Charges: All burials and removals must be made at the time
and in the manner and subject to the payment of such charges as fixed by the
management. All charges shall be paid a minimum of twenty four (24) hours in
advance of the service, or arrangements satisfactory to the management made for
their payment. Additional charges shall be made on burials occurring other than
at authorized hours and for standard rates.
      29.   Telephone Orders: The management shall not be held responsible for
any order given by telephone, or for any mistake occurring from the want of
precise and proper instructions as to the particular space, size and location
in the lot where interment is desired.
      30.   Transfer Of Interment Rights: Transfers of interment rights are
accomplished through the execution of a quit claim. This quit claim must be
approved by cemetery management. Burials cannot be made on interment rights
that have not been duly transferred with an approved quit claim that has been
filed with the City Clerk. Please contact cemetery office for detailed
instruction.
      31.   Warranties: No express or implied warranties are given with respect
to burial rights conveyed to the owner, including but not limited to,
suitability for a particular use, or other qualities of memorials, markers,
monuments, outer burial containers, or crypts. No agent, servant, employee, or
representative of the cemetery has the authority to alter this disclaimer. To
the extent that any express or implied warranty may be given or extended by the
manufacturer or supplier, then the cemetery assigns to the owner any such
representations or warranties for the purpose of providing privity with said
manufacturer or supplier.
   (D)   Conduct Of Persons Within The Cemetery:
      1.   Advertising And Notices: No advertising, notices, or signs of any
kind shall be allowed in the cemetery, unless placed by the management.
      2.   Cemetery Hours - Grounds And Office Open: The cemetery is open daily
from dawn until dusk. The cemetery and/or office may be opened or closed as
deemed necessary by management. Any person found on the grounds from dusk until
dawn may be considered a trespasser. All persons are reminded that the grounds
are devoted to the sacred burial of the dead, and the provisions and penalties
of the law, as provided by statutes, will be strictly enforced.
      3.   Children: Children under sixteen (16) years of age shall not be
permitted within the cemetery, or its buildings, unless accompanied by an
adult, or with specific permission of the management.
      4.   Conduct: Boisterous or unseemly conduct that would disturb the quiet
and good order of the cemetery shall not be permitted in the cemetery, or in
any of its buildings. Walking, jogging, and bicycling are permitted on streets
and roads during times the cemetery gates are open.
      5.   Consumption Within Cemetery: The possession or consumption of
illegal drugs or alcoholic beverages within the cemetery is strictly forbidden.
      6.   Firearms: No firearms shall be permitted within the cemetery except
on special permit from the management or duly constituted authorities.
Management permits exceptions to this for law enforcement personnel, U.S.
military honor guards at military committal services.
      7.   Improprieties: It is of the utmost importance that there should be
strict observance of all of the proprieties of the cemetery, whether embraced
in these rules or not, as no improprieties shall be allowed, and the management
shall have power to prevent improper assemblages.
      8.   Limitations - Other: All persons are prohibited from gathering
flowers, either wild or cultivated, or breaking trees, shrubbery or plants, or
disturbing birds or other animal life.
The cemetery reserves to itself and to those lawfully entitled thereto, a
perpetual right of ingress and egress over interment spaces for the purpose of
passage to and from other interment spaces. Except as may be necessary to gain
access to other interment spaces within the cemetery, persons within the
cemetery grounds shall use only the avenues, walkways and roads. All persons
are strictly forbidden to break or injure any tree or shrub, or mar any
landmark, marker or memorial or in any way deface the grounds of the cemetery.
      9.   Loitering Prohibited: No person shall be permitted to loiter in the
cemetery, or in any of its buildings.
      10.   Pets: No pets shall be permitted in the cemetery except on a leash
and in the control of the owners. Owners walking dogs in the cemetery are
expected to carry supplies to pick up any solid waste left by their animal on
cemetery property, and remove this waste from the cemetery entirely.
Guide dogs for the visually impaired are permitted.
      11.   Rubbish: The throwing of rubbish on the roads, drives, paths,
parking lots, or on any part of the grounds, or in the buildings, is
prohibited.
      12.   Rules - Enforced By: The management, its employees, and all others
designated by management are hereby empowered to enforce all rules and
regulations, and to exclude from the property of the cemetery any person
violating the same. The management shall have charge of the ground and
buildings, and at all times shall have supervision and control of all persons
in the cemetery, including the conduct of funerals, traffic, employees, lot
owners, tourists, and visitors.
      13.   Smoking: Anyone smoking on the grounds of the cemetery is expected
to make sure the tobacco is extinguished properly. Smoking in the public
buildings is prohibited.
      14.   Soliciting Or Peddling: Soliciting or peddling the sale of any
commodity by third persons is prohibited within the confines of the cemetery,
except with the expressed permission of the management. No sign indicating that
a space, lot, crypt, niche, or other structure is for sale will be permitted on
the grounds.
      15.   Trespassers On Cemetery: The management deems the cemetery to be
sacred and must be treated accordingly by all who visit. The right is reserved
by management to refuse entrance to any person, to expel from the grounds
anyone violating the rules, and to refuse admittance of any material or
merchandise.
      16.   Vehicles: Vehicles shall not be driven through the grounds of the
cemetery at a speed greater than fifteen (15) miles per hour, and must be kept
on the right hand side of the cemetery roadway. Vehicles are not allowed to
park or to come to a full stop in front of an open grave unless such
automobiles are in attendance at the funeral. Vehicles are prohibited on common
cemetery green property and on all walks.
No unlicensed vehicles are permitted in the cemetery, unless owned by the
cemetery and operated in performing the duties of the cemetery, without written
authorization of the management.
   (E)   Cemetery Memorial Regulations:
      1.   Cemetery - Not Responsible: The management takes reasonable
precaution to protect lot owners, and the property rights of lot owners within
the cemetery, from loss or damage; but the cemetery distinctly disclaims all
responsibility for loss or damage from causes beyond its reasonable control,
and, especially, from damage caused by the elements, acts of God, a common
enemy, thieves, vandals, strikers, malicious mischief makers, riots, or orders
of any military or civil authority, whether the damage be direct or collateral
(other than as herein provided.)
      2.   Craftmanship - Bronze: Memorials shall be free from scale, sand
holes, pits, pinholes and other imperfections, which mark the appearance of or
impair the usefulness and stability of the finished memorial tablet. All
ornaments, letters and background shall be clean and sharp and all edges true
and accurate. Ornaments and letters must be handchased, tooled and burnished
appropriately for a memorial tablet.
      3.   Design And Finish:
         (a)   Memorial dealers shall be required to furnish the management for
approval a blue print or sketch of the proposed memorial, specifying size,
location on lot, inscription, quality of stone, and purchaser name of said
stone. Lot owner must approve monument purchased by 3rd party before monument
installation.
         (b)   Management shall have authority to reject any plan or design for
any memorial which, on account of size, design, inscription, kind or quality of
stone is (in the opinion of the management) unsuited to the lot on which it is
to be placed.
         (c)   The management reserves the right to stop all work of any
nature, whenever, in its opinion, property preparations therefor have not been
made; or when tools and machinery are insufficient or defective; or when work
is being executed in such a manner as to threaten life or property; or when the
monument dealer has been guilty of misrepresentation; or when any reasonable
request on the part of the management is disregarded; or when work is not being
executed according to specifications; or when any person employed on the work
site violates any rule of the cemetery.
         (d)   The completed work is subject to the approval of the management,
and, if unsatisfactory, may be removed.
         (e)   The name or inscription on each marker must correspond with the
name and record in the office of the cemetery, and no changes shall be made
thereon except upon request of the proper parties and by permission of the
cemetery.
         (f)   Duplication of the design of any memorial shall not be permitted
in a location sufficiently near to the original that the duplication is readily
noticeable without the written consent of the person(s) with legal authority
and the expressed consent of the management of the cemetery.
         (g)   No memorial showing drill or tool marks, or staining from
removal of rubber mat used for sand engraving, shall be considered as first
grade workmanship.
         (h)   Dealer's names shall not appear on any marker.
      4.   Errors In Placing Of Memorials: The management reserves and shall
have the right to correct any error that may be made by its employees or by any
other person or persons in the location or placing of a memorial in the
cemetery.
      5.   Foundations: All monuments must be set on a concrete foundation of
no less than thirty six inches (36") deep. All excavations shall be inspected
and approved by management before concrete is to be poured. Foundations shall
be poured at time of excavation. Grass marker excavations must take place day
of grass marker installation. The cemetery reserves the right to enforce a six
(6) month grave settling time before foundation excavation and installation.
For purposes of foundation flanges, polished granite shall be the only
permissible material for foundation flanges, and the installation of concrete
foundation flanges is prohibited.
      6.   Materials:
         (a)   No lot owner shall erect or place, or cause to be erected or
placed, on any lot in the cemetery, any memorial until it is first approved by
the management, and all charges related to the lot have been paid.
         (b)   The bottom beds of all bases and markers must be cut level and
true, and the sides of all bases shall not be polished.
         (c)   While the cemetery will exercise all possible care to protect
raised lettering, carving or ornaments on any memorial, or other structure, or
any lot, it disclaims responsibility for any damage or injury thereto.
         (d)   No coping, curbing, fencing, hedging, borders, or enclosures of
any kind shall be allowed around any lot or memorial; and no rock, bark or like
material shall be allowed around any memorial, monument, marker, or bench; and
no walks of brick, cinders, tile, stone, marble, terra-cotta, sand, cement,
gravel or wood shall be allowed on any lot. The management reserves the right
to remove the same if so erected, planted and placed.
         (e)   No adornments shall be used as memorials or added to memorials
that are breakable, such as glass, ceramics, terra cotta, resin, etc.
         (f)   Monuments shall not be secured to bases as this enhances the
possibility of damaging the monuments.
         (g)   Any memorial benches shall be approved by management for both
design and location, shall be placed on a concrete foundation provided by the
cemetery, for which such fees are paid in full, and be constructed of first
grade granite.
      7.   Memorial Installation: For the protection of all lot owners, the
granite quality, size, finish, color and engraving of all memorials must be
approved by the management before any work is commenced. All memorials must
conform to the specifications of the particular section where it is to be
installed. Any proposed memorial that management deems to be detrimental to the
appearance, uniformity, or safety of the section will not be permitted;
however, recommendations will be made as to necessary changes that would then
conform to the regulations. Memorial restrictions for each section are shown on
appendix A on file in the City, and no deviation therefrom will be authorized
without the explicit approval of management of the cemetery.
Before any person, other than cemetery personnel, does any work on any marker
or lot, authorization shall be obtained from the cemetery office. No memorial
shall be installed without this authorization. In every case the charges due
the cemetery shall be paid in advance or arrangements satisfactory to the
management are made concerning payment, including, but not limited to, any
other outstanding charges on that particular lot, space, crypt, or niche.
Any recognized monument dealer may be approved by the management to enter on
any section, lot, or space for the purpose of installation of memorials.
In addition, the monument dealer shall provide to the management of the
cemetery proof of general liability, workers' compensation and products
liability insurance satisfactory to the management. Said insurance
certification shall provide that the insurance carrier must give thirty (30)
days' written notice to the management in the event the insurance is canceled
by the monument dealer.
Memorials shall be installed at such times as the management may permit,
dependent upon committal services and the maintenance activities of the
cemetery. No memorial installation shall take place on blocks where interments
are scheduled for that day, until such time as the interments are completed.
Any monument dealer performing installations of memorials shall insure that the
cemetery grounds are not injured by the installation, and that all excess
materials, rubbish, and other waste is cleaned up and removed from the
premises, and that the grass, or other ground cover is restored; and to insure
that the memorial was not damaged in installation.
Upon inspection by the management of the cemetery, any damage to the grounds of
the cemetery must be corrected and the grounds restored. In the event this is
not done to satisfaction, the management shall do whatever necessary to restore
the cemetery premises to their condition prior to installation, and shall
charge back against the monument dealer the costs of correctional restoration.
Any balances owed to the management of the cemetery by the monument dealer
shall be remitted within thirty (30) days of receipt of the itemized statement,
or the management shall prohibit the memorial dealer access to the cemetery
until such time as the balance is paid in full.
Memorial installation requires experience and often times special equipment. No
person, firm or corporation, other than recognized and approved monument
dealers or management shall be permitted to install memorials in the cemetery.
Any monument dealer who refuses or fails to comply with these rules and
regulations shall not be given the privilege to enter on the cemetery grounds
for installation purposes until compliance is affected.
No final date can be engraved on a memorial marker unless the remains are
actually interred at the gravesite lot. In the event a marker has been placed
and an interment has not, or will not take place at that specific grave lot,
and inscription stating "In Memory of" may be placed on the marker, so as to
not falsely represent an interment within that lot. With an inscription of "In
Memory of" both the birth date and final date may be inscribed. This
inscription will allow cemetery staff to know that the remains are not at the
grave site and no official record interment will be on file.
      8.   Memorials - Granite: The following standards must be met with
granite memorials.
         (a)   The size and dimensions of granite memorials must be within the
guidelines of each block of the cemetery and meet the approval of the
management of the cemetery.
         (b)   Granite memorials must consist of good, sound, durable stock and
shall be free from seams or any imperfections.
         (c)   All memorials must have sawed bottoms; monument bases shall not
have polished sides.
         (d)   All granite memorial markers (not bases) must be a minimum of
four inches (4") in thickness, with granite markers five feet (5') or longer
being a minimum of six inches (6") in thickness.
         (e)   All granite markers will be set level with the grade.
         (f)   In ground vases or memory rings containing vases, either free
standing, within a cremorial, or adjacent to or upon a flush marker or adjacent
to an upright marker will not be allowed. Vases constructed of bronze or
granite will be allowed if mounted and recessed upon the bases of upright
memorial markers and shall not protrude beyond the base. Footstones will be
allowed in instances where cremains are interred on an existing grave with no
space on the existing headstone to memorialize the inurned. Footstones shall
not exceed 2-0 x 1-0 in size and shall be placed on a prepared footing with
granite thickness not to be less than four inches (4").
      9.   Miscellaneous: Should any memorial become unsightly, dilapidated, or
a menace to visitors, the management shall have the right either to correct the
condition or to remove the same, at the expense of the lot owner.
No marker shall be removed from the cemetery, except by the management, unless
with written order of the owner and permission granted by management.
No sign or advertising of any description except that placed by the management
shall be permitted within the cemetery.
There shall be no more than one upright monument marking a grave.
The cemetery shall in no way be liable for any delay in the fulfillment of any
contract or obligation, including, but not limited to maintenance, care,
memorial work or construction, which may arise from causes beyond its control,
and especially from delays caused by the elements, acts of God, common enemy,
thieves, vandals, strikes, malicious mischief, explosions, unavoidable
accidents, invasions, insurrections, riots, or order of any military or civil
authority.
      10.   Producers And Retail Dealers:
         (a)   Retail dealers to secure approval of the management must agree
to use only first grade granite and must guarantee the memorial to be executed
in first grade workmanship, with the agreement that should faults develop
within five (5) years due to the setting, treatment or handling of the same by
the memorial dealer, such memorial will be replaced by such memorial dealer
without cost to the cemetery or lot owner.
         (b)   Letter cutters, persons or firms who engage in the business of
cleaning memorials (not connected with established retail dealers already doing
business at the cemetery), and all other persons or firms, must provide
satisfactory evidence to the management of their ability to properly perform
the work for which they have been engaged before being allowed to commence work
in the cemetery. In addition, these persons or firms shall provide to the
management of the cemetery proof of general liability, workers' compensation,
and products liability insurance satisfactory to the management. Said insurance
certification shall provide that the insurance carrier must give thirty (30)
days' written notice to the management in the event the insurance is canceled.
         (c)   Persons engaged in erecting memorials, or other structures, are
prohibited from attaching ropes to monuments, trees, shrubs, or from scattering
their material over adjoining lots, or from blocking streets, avenues, or
pathways, or from leaving their material on the grounds longer than is
absolutely necessary. They must do as little injury to the grass, trees and
shrubs as possible, and must remove all debris and restore the ground and sod
to its original condition.
         (d)   Damage done to lots, walks, drives, trees, shrubs or other
property by dealers or contractors, or their agents, shall be repaired by the
management and the cost of such repair shall be charged to the dealers or
contractor.
         (e)   No materials, equipment, machinery, or other things for the
setting of memorials may be brought into the cemetery until required for
immediate use; nor, when a funeral procession or funeral is in that part of the
cemetery.
         (f)   While a funeral or interment is being conducted nearby, all work
of any description shall cease.
         (g)   Approaching the bereaved and soliciting memorial business within
the cemetery is not permitted.
         (h)   Contractors must adhere to City employee dress code. No music is
to be played from vehicles or boom boxes while working in the cemetery.
   (F)   Decorations:
      1.   Certain Ornaments Prohibited: The placing of boxes, shells, toys,
metal designs, frames, ornaments, chairs, settees, wood or iron cases, glass,
anything breakable, and similar articles upon lots shall not be permitted, and,
if so placed, may be removed.
The cemetery is not responsible for theft or damage to any personal property,
including artifacts, personal effects, etc., placed on or near interment spaces
or elsewhere in the cemetery.
      2.   Cleanup: A minimum of two (2) times a year the cemetery shall have a
cemetery cleanup when decorations will be removed according to the following
dates and guidelines.
Decorations to be retained should be removed prior to and during these seven
(7) day periods.
The scheduled general cleanup dates and specifications are:
April 1st - April 7th: All decorations will be removed from the grave site.
This includes flowers in vases and saddles. All shepherds’ hooks will also be
removed.
July 15th - July 21st: Ground level decorations will be removed.
The cemetery shall not condone or allow the removal of memorial decorations
from graves by persons other than the family of the deceased, with exception
being the employees of the cemetery in the operation of their duties.
      3.   Floral Regulations: The management shall have the authority to
remove all floral designs, flowers, weeds, trees, shrubs, plants, or ground
cover of any kind from the cemetery as soon as, in the judgment of the
management, such becomes unsightly, dangerous, detrimental or diseased, or when
it does not conform to the standards maintained. Shrubs or bushes encroaching
upon the interment rights of others or too tall to shape and trim shall be
removed at the discretion of the management. In the event of any such removal,
the cemetery shall have no obligation to replace the removed tree, shrub, or
plant.
         (a)   Greenwood Cemetery strives to ensure the safety of both visitors
and our workers. We thank you for abiding by the following rules and
regulations.
            (1)   For the safety of all in the cemetery no glass containers,
statuary, ceramics, terra cotta, resin, exposed wire, toys, balloons, pinwheels
or breakable items are permitted at any time. They will be removed and
discarded.
            (2)   No more than three (3) floral arrangements per interment
right are allowed. The excess will be removed and discarded.
            (3)   Grave blanket, half blankets, wreaths, and bouquets are
allowed during non-mowing season only, and as long as the blankets have plastic
spikes. Blankets with metal spikes are not allowed.
            (4)   Anything deemed by the management to be breakable and a
possible hazard shall be removed for the safety of all.
            (5)   Monuments and flush markers are placed at the very head/top
of each grave. Flowers and shepherd's hooks are not to be placed above/behind
the monument or marker. This would, in effect, be in someone else's grave.
            (6)   Temporary cones, wreaths and sprays are only permitted if
placed directly in line with the monuments, either at the side or in front of
the monument or marker. Flowers incorrectly placed on another grave will be
removed and discarded.
            (7)   Shepherd's hooks are only allowed in areas with upright
monuments and only one shepherd's hook per monument is permitted. Shepherd's
hooks are not allowed in garden areas where markers are flush with the ground.
            (8)   No coping, curbing, fencing or borders of any kind or any
rock, bark, or like materials are allowed around graves, monuments or markers.
            (9)   Temporary markers are not allowed.
            (10)   No plantings are allowed other than what is planted by the
cemetery staff.
            (11)   Floral arrangements that are affixed to Styrofoam must be
secured to the tripod or base supporting them. A single wire stuck into the
Styrofoam does not secure the floral arrangement.
            (12)   The cemetery is not responsible for theft or damage to any
personal property or floral arrangements placed on or near interment rights or
elsewhere in the cemetery.
            (13)   Please observe the speed limit of fifteen (15) miles per
hour and do not drive or park on the grass or sidewalks.
            (14)   Thank you for your cooperation.
         (b)   The management shall not be responsible for lost, misplaced, or
broken flower vases. The management shall not be responsible for any ground
level wreath, spray, floral decorations, plants, or decorations of any kind
damaged by the elements, thieves, vandals, or routine maintenance. The
management reserves the right to regulate the method of decorating lots so that
a uniform beauty may be maintained. Management reserves the right to remove any
and all arrangements that, in its opinion, are in inferior condition or out of
season.
      4.   Plantings: The cemetery shall have sole and exclusive authority with
respect to the planting, sodding, surveying, and improvements within the
cemetery.
No plantings of any trees, shrubs, flowers or bulbs will be allowed in the
cemetery without the written permission of the management and without
specification by management as to the kind and location of such planting. Any
placed without permission is subject to removal by management.
In every case the charges therefor shall be paid in advance or arrangements
satisfactory to the management made concerning payment, including but not
limited to, any other outstanding charges on that particular lot or space.
The management shall provide for the planting of all nursery items unless other
arrangements satisfactory to the cemetery are made. Plantings shall be made at
such times as the management may permit, dependent upon committal services and
the maintenance activities of the cemetery.
      5.   Potted Flowers: Potted flowers are not permitted on graves or any
part of a lot at any time, without the written approval of the management.
   (G)   Transfer Or Assignments:
      1.   Indebtedness: The management may refuse to consent to a transfer or
an assignment so long as there is any indebtedness due the management from the
original lot owner or from anyone else in connection with an interment,
purchase of the lot, or for any other reason.
      2.   Interment Rights Conveyed By Deeds: Interment rights will be
conveyed to the purchaser(s) by a Cemetery Deed. No deed for any interment
right shall be issued nor shall any right of ownership pass to the purchaser
(s), until the purchase price is paid in full.
      3.   Recording Of Lots And Burials: Complete records of all lot owners
and interments will be kept at the cemetery office. Because the cemetery is a
Municipal cemetery and City records are public, information about property
owners and interments shall be provided to those who inquire. Record requests
may be subject to an administrative fee, which may be charged from time to time
by management.
      4.   Transfer And Assignments: For the protection of lot owners of the
cemetery, and to prevent unauthorized transfers and interments, the management
shall have complete records of the ownership of all lots in the cemetery.
Therefore, the following restrictions are necessary and mandatory concerning
sales, transfers, and assignment of all lots: No person shall sell, transfer or
assign any lot or any interest therein without complying with this rule, and
all sales, assignments and transfers contrary to the terms of this rule are
void and of no effect, and will not be recognized by the management. Any person
desiring to sell, transfer or assign any lot, or any interest therein, shall
convey, transfer and assign such lot or their interest unto the cemetery, and
the management will, after checking its records or making such other
investigation as it may deem necessary, issue to the person(s) to whom the lot
owner desires to sell, transfer or convey such lot, or any interest therein, a
Cemetery Deed. Any sale, transfer, or assignment of interment rights must
follow any restrictions within the cemetery.
Interment rights shall be purchased solely for the purpose of personal or
family interment or the interment of the person designated in the purchase
agreement, and not for purposes of speculation. The price received for the sale
of any lots, graves, crypts, or niches cannot exceed the current selling price
of like property by the cemetery.
   (H)   Modifications And Amendments:
      1.   Amendments: The management may, and it hereby expressly reserves the
right, at any time or times, to adopt new rules and regulations, or to amend,
alter or repeal any rule, regulation, article, section, paragraph or sentence
in these rules and regulations.
      2.   Exceptions And Modifications: No waiver of any violation of these
rules and regulations shall operate as a waiver of any subsequent violation of
the same rule or regulation or as a waiver of any other rule or regulation, or
the violation thereof.
Special cases may arise in which the literal enforcement of a rule may impose
unnecessary hardship. The management therefore, reserves the right, without
notice, to make exceptions, suspensions, or modifications in any of these rules
and regulations when, in its judgment, the same appear advisable; and such
temporary exception, suspension or modification shall in no way be construed as
affecting the general application of such rules.
      3.   Severability: If any rule or regulation or part thereof shall be
declared invalid, such declaration shall not affect or invalidate the remaining
rules and regulations or parts thereof herewith established.
   (I)   Monument And Marker Regulations And Restrictions:
      1.   Definitions:
   DEPTH: Measurement of the thickest part of the monument from front to back.
"Front of the monument" is defined as that side of the monument facing the foot
or interior of the coffin.
   HEIGHT: Measurement from the ground vertically in a ninety degree (90°), or
right angle to the uppermost part of the monument.
   WIDTH: Measurement of the monument from side to side, left to right, at the
most distant lateral points as one faces the front of the monument.
      2.   Upright Monument Maximum Dimensions:
 
Single grave 40"W x 16"D x 36"H
Double grave 60"W x 16"D x 36"H
 
      3.   Flush Marker Maximum Dimensions:
 
Single grave 40"W x 12"D
Double grave 60"W x 18"D
 
      4.   Baby Heaven Maximum Dimensions:
18"W x 10"D
      5.   New Military Section And New County: Restricted to flat bronze
markers (milt.) and flush markers (County).
      6.   Oversized Monuments: Oversized monument requests will be evaluated
on a case by case basis. If approved, an oversized monument fee of four hundred
dollars ($400.00) must be paid to the cemetery before monument installation.
(Ord. 4125, 12-18-2018; amd. Ord. 4279, 2-15-2022)
8-8-5: NEW CEMETERIES PROHIBITED:
No cemetery or burying ground shall hereafter be established within the
corporate limits of the City, or within one mile thereof, nor shall any
cemetery or burying ground heretofore established within the City be extended
or enlarged; any cemetery so established, extended or enlarged is hereby
declared a nuisance and shall be abated under the direction of the Board of
Health. (Ord. 4125, 12-18-2018)
8-8-6: GENERAL PENALTY:
Any person who shall be guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than twenty five dollars
($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense; and
shall also be liable in a separate suit for the costs and expenses of repairing
any injury or damage named in section
8-8-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 4125, 12-18-2018)
8-8-7: FINES; DISPOSITION:
All fines, forfeitures or penalties imposed or recovered under the provisions
of this chapter, less the expense in recovering the same, shall be paid over to
the City Treasurer to be carried to the Perpetual Care Fund and to be used in
the maintenance, improvement and support of the cemeteries. (Ord. 4125, 12-18-
2018)
8-8-8: SUPERINTENDENT OF BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS OR SEXTON; NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Buildings and Grounds or the
Sexton to give notice to the Mayor, or his designee of every violation of the
provisions of this chapter, which in any manner comes to his knowledge, and it
shall be the duty of the Mayor, or his designee to prosecute promptly all
persons who shall be guilty of such violations of this chapter. (Ord. 4125, 12-
18-2018)
8-8-9: GREENWOOD CEMETERY:
   (A)   Description: The premises heretofore conveyed by the Canton Cemetery
Company to the City in trust for cemetery purposes known and described as
follows:
A part of the northwest quarter of section thirty four town seven north range
and range four east of the fourth principal meridian, and bounded as follows:
Beginning at the southwest corner of said quarter section and running thence
east fifty three and one-eighth poles to a stake, thence north twenty four
poles to stake, thence west fifty three and one-eighth poles to stake, thence
south twenty four poles to place of beginning, containing seven and ninety six
hundredths acres; also a part of the northwest quarter of section thirty-four
in the same township above named and described and bounded as follows:
Beginning at the southwest corner of said section running thence west forty
rods, thence north twenty rods, thence east forty rods, thence south twenty
rods to the place of beginning, containing five acres more or less; and also a
part of said section thirty- four bounded as follows: Beginning at a stone five
chains north and five chains west of the center of said section thirty-four,
running thence west four chains and ninety-two links, thence north one degree
east six chains and 60 links, thence north 83 degrees and 4 chains, thence
south 7 chains and twenty links to the place of beginning, containing three and
thirty-eight hundredths acres more or less, be and the same are, set apart and
dedicated to cemetery purposes and uses, to be kept, controlled and directed by
the city, and that the survey and plat of the burial ground above described
duly recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds of Fulton County,
Illinois, shall be the legal and established survey and plat of said burial
ground hereinafter named.
   (B)   Name: Said burial ground as described in the preceding subsection of
this section, shall be called and known hereafter by the name of Greenwood
Cemetery.
   (C)   Rights Of Purchasers: The purchasers or assigns of any lot, under the
provisions of this chapter, or heretofore purchased from the Canton Cemetery
Company, shall not be dispossessed of the same for nonpayment of any taxes,
fines or penalties that may be imposed by any provision of this Code, and any
such lot may be alienated by the purchaser, or his heirs or assigns, but the
same shall not be used for any purpose except for the burial of the dead in
conformity with the regulations now in force, or which shall hereinafter be
enacted by ordinance of the City, and the owner of any lot may permit, under
such regulations, others to bury their dead on such lot.
   (D)   Use Of Funds: All money arising from the sale of any cemetery lots in
Greenwood Cemetery shall be reserved as a fund to be appropriated exclusively
to the fencing and ornamentation of said cemetery and for the employing of a
Sexton in the manner hereinafter provided, to take care of the same and to
perform such other duties incident hereto as the City Council may from time to
time ordain in making such improvements therein as shall become proper or
necessary, or the City Council shall direct. (Ord. 4125, 12-18-2018)
8-8-10: MAPLE ADDITION:
   (A)   Description: The following described territory:
A part of the southwest quarter of section thirty-four, town seven north, range
four east of the fourth principal meridian, in the county of Fulton and the
state of Illinois, described as follows: commencing at the center of said
section thirty-four running thence west 941.4 feet, thence south 614 feet,
thence east 941.4 feet, thence north 614 feet to the place of beginning,
heretofore purchased by the city of Canton for cemetery purposes and use, and
to be kept, controlled, and directed by the city.
   (B)   Name, City Council To Have Charge Of: The said cemetery described in
subsection (A) of this section shall be known and designated as Maple Addition
to Greenwood Cemetery, and shall be under the charge and control of the City
Council as hereinbefore established, and shall be subject to all provisions of
this chapter relating to cemeteries so far as they shall apply to the same.
   (C)   Perpetual Care And Improvement Fund: Forty percent (40%) of the
purchase price of all lots in said Maple Addition shall be set apart by the
City Council as a Perpetual Care Fund for said lots and said fund to be
controlled and invested as provided for in this Code in the case of perpetual
care funds. (Ord. 4125, 12-18-2018)
8-8-11: FOREST LAWN ADDITION:
   (A)   Description, Name: That tract of land lying immediately south of
division A of Greenwood Cemetery, immediately east of Maple Addition to
Greenwood Cemetery, and immediately north of St. Joseph's Cemetery, heretofore
acquired by the City for cemetery purposes, is hereby set apart and dedicated
to cemetery purposes and uses, to be kept, controlled and directed by the City,
and to be known and designated as, Forest Lawn Addition to Greenwood Cemetery.
   (B)   City Council To Have Charge Of: The said cemetery described in
subsection (A) of this section shall be known and designated as Forest Lawn
Addition to Greenwood Cemetery and shall be under the charge and control of the
City Council as hereinbefore established, and shall be subject to all of the
provisions of this chapter relating to cemeteries so far as they shall apply to
the same.
   (C)   Perpetual Care And Improvement Fund: Forty percent (40%) of the
purchase price of all lots sold in said Forest Lawn Addition shall be set apart
by the City Council as a Perpetual Care Fund for said lots and the said fund to
be controlled and invested as hereinafter provided in the case of perpetual
care funds. (Ord. 4125, 12-18-2018)
8-8-12: SWAN'S ADDITION:
   (A)   Description: The following described property, situated in the County
of Fulton and the State of Illinois:
A part of the southwest quarter of section 34, township 7 north, range 4 east
of the 4th principal meridian, a more detailed description being: Beginning 614
feet south of the section 34, township and range aforesaid, thence west 471
feet, thence south 50 feet, thence east 471 feet, thence north 50 feet to the
place of beginning, known and designated as Swan's Addition to Greenwood
Cemetery is hereby set apart and dedicated to cemetery purposes and uses, to be
kept, controlled, and directed by the city.
   (B)   Name, City Council To Have Charge Of: The cemetery described in
subsection (A) of this section shall be known and designated as Swan's Addition
to Greenwood Cemetery and shall be under the charge and control of the City
Council as hereinbefore established, and shall be subject to all of the
provisions of this chapter, relating to cemeteries so far as they shall apply
to same.
   (C)   Perpetual Care And Improvement Fund: Forty percent (40%) of the
purchase price of all lots sold in said Swan's Addition shall be set apart by
the City Council as a Perpetual Care Fund for said lots and said fund to be
controlled and invested as provided in this Code in the case of perpetual care
funds. (Ord. 4125, 12-18-2018)
8-8-13: SHEPLEY ADDITION:
   (A)   Description, Name: The following described property, situated in the
County of Fulton and State of Illinois:
A tract of land located in the Southwest Quarter of section Number 34, in
Township Number 7 North, Range Number 4 East of the Fourth P.M., more
particularly described as beginning 661.5 feet South of the Northeast corner of
said quarter section, running thence South 84 degrees 41 minutes, West 1475
feet to a stake, thence South 5 degrees 19 minutes East 435.6 feet to a stake,
thence South 85 degrees 34 minutes, East 500 feet, thence South 89 degrees 21
minutes, East 480 feet, thence South 4 degrees 30 minutes, East 90 feet, thence
North 84 degrees 41 minutes, East 500 feet, thence North 4 degrees 30 minutes,
West 661.5 feet to a point of beginning, containing 19 acres of land, situated
in the town of Canton, county of Fulton, and state of Illinois, excepting that
part of said premises describes as follows: Beginning at a state set 5 feet
North of an iron pin set at the Southeast corner of the North Half of the
Southwest Quarter of section 34, in township 7 North and Range 4 East of the
Fourth Principal Meridian, thence North 4 degrees 30 minutes, West 120 feet to
a stake, thence South 84 degrees 41 minutes, West 500 feet, to a stake, thence
South 4 degrees 30 minutes, East 120 feet to a stake, thence North 84 degrees
41 minutes, East 500 feet to the place of beginning, situated in the County of
Fulton, and the state of Illinois, be known and designated as Shepley Addition
to Greenwood Cemetery is hereby set apart and dedicated to cemetery purposes
and uses, to be kept, controlled, and directed by the city.
   (B)   Name, City Council To Have Charge Of: The cemetery described in
subsection (A) of this section shall be known and designated as Shepley
Addition to Greenwood Cemetery and shall be under the charge of and control of
the City Council as hereinbefore established, and shall be subject to all the
provision of this Code relating to cemeteries so far as they shall apply to
same.
   (C)   Perpetual Care And Improvement Fund: Forty percent (40%) of the
purchase price of all lots sold in said Shepley Addition shall be set apart by
the City Council as a Perpetual Care Fund for said lots and said fund to be
controlled and invested as hereinafter provided for in the case of perpetual
care funds. (Ord. 4125, 12-18-2018)
CHAPTER 9
WATER AND SEWER DEPARTMENTS
SECTION:
8-9-1: Departments Established
8-9-2: Water Treatment Plant Operator
8-9-3: Duties Of Chief Operator, Water Treatment Plant
8-9-4: Sewage Treatment Plant Operator
8-9-5: Duties Of Chief Operator, Sewage Treatment Plant
8-9-6: Cashier Of Water And Sewer Departments
8-9-7: Rules And Regulations
8-9-8: Duties Of Public Works And Buildings Committee
8-9-9: Authorized Manpower Levels
8-9-10: Canton Lake Dam; Revolving Fund; Operation And Maintenance
8-9-1: DEPARTMENTS ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established departments of the city to be known and designated
as the water department and sewer department; the functions and purpose of said
departments shall be the proper operations, maintenance, improvement and
administration of the combined water and sewer systems of the city, together
with the buildings and grounds utilized in connection therewith. (Ord. 876, 3-
17-1981)
8-9-2: WATER TREATMENT PLANT OPERATOR:
There shall be employed one chief operator for the operation of the water
treatment plant, who shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the advice
and consent of the council, on the first Tuesday in May and shall serve for the
term of one year. (Ord. 876, 3-17-1981)
8-9-3: DUTIES OF CHIEF OPERATOR, WATER TREATMENT PLANT:
Subject to the limitations and conditions hereinafter provided, the chief
operator is hereby vested with full authority and charged with full
responsibility for the proper operation of said water treatment plant. He shall
have full authority and supervision of the operators thereof, which he shall
employ by and with the advice and consent of the mayor and it shall be his duty
to instruct such operators in the proper performance of their duty. The chief
operator shall prepare all reports and data, make recommendations to the public
works and buildings committee of the council and shall work in cooperation with
the proper state and federal departments for the better maintenance, operation
and improvement of said water treatment plant. It shall be the duty of said
chief operator to attend all regular meetings of the public works and buildings
committee of the council and such other meetings as may be required. (Ord. 876,
3-17-1981)
8-9-4: SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT OPERATOR:
There shall be employed one chief operator for the operation of the sewage
treatment plant, who shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the advice
and consent of the council, on the first Tuesday in May and shall serve for the
term of one year. (Ord. 876, 3-17-1981)
8-9-5: DUTIES OF CHIEF OPERATOR, SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT:
Subject to the limitations and conditions hereinafter provided, the chief
operator is hereby vested with full authority and charged with full
responsibility for the proper operation of said sewage treatment plant. He
shall have full responsibility and supervision of the operators thereof, which
he shall employ by and with the advice and consent of the mayor and it shall be
his duty to instruct such operators in the proper performance of their duty.
The chief operator shall prepare the reports and data, make recommendations to
the public works and buildings committee of the council and shall work in
cooperation with the proper state and federal departments for the better
maintenance, operation and improvement of said sewage treatment plant. It shall
be the duty of said chief operator to attend all regular meetings of the public
works and buildings committee of the council and such other meetings as may be
required. (Ord. 876, 3-17-1981)
8-9-6: CASHIER OF WATER AND SEWER DEPARTMENTS:
   (A)   Cashier Of Water And Sewer Departments: There shall be employed one
person as cashier of the water and sewer departments who shall be appointed by
the mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the council, and at the same
time as the appointment of other city officers and employees.
   (B)   Bond Of Cashier Of Water And Sewer Departments, Departments To Pay
Same: Before entering into the duties herein prescribed, the said cashier shall
provide a good and sufficient bond in the penal sum of two thousand dollars
($2,000.00), with the City as obligee therein, and conditioned for the faithful
accounting of all monies that may come into the possession or control of said
person by virtue of said employment as cashier and further conditioned for the
full and faithful performance of the duties herein prescribed for said office.
Said bond shall be approved by the Council. The cost of said surety bond shall
be considered as a maintenance charge of said office and shall be paid by the
City from the revenues of said departments.
   (C)   Duties Of Cashier: The cashier of the Water and Sewer Departments
shall maintain an office in the City building as provided for said departments;
shall be in attendance therein at all times as may be prescribed by the Public
Works and Buildings Committee; shall receive payments of water and sewer
accounts; shall provide for the billing of customers of said departments; shall
do the necessary bookkeeping and accounting as is now prescribed for said
departments or as may hereinafter be so prescribed. It shall be the duty of the
cashier to make a monthly report to the Council as to all of the receipts and
disbursements of said departments and the operating, maintenance and
improvement expenses thereof.
   (D)   Office Hours Of Cashier: The cashier of the Water and Sewer
Departments shall maintain office hours from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. until
five o'clock (5:00) P.M. from Monday through Friday. (Ord. 876, 3-17-1981)
8-9-7: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
All persons appointed or employed under the provisions of this chapter shall be
under the direct supervision, control and authority of the Public Works and
Buildings Committee and such rules, orders and instructions as said committee
shall, from time to time, deem necessary to be issued for the proper operation,
maintenance, and improvement of said combined water and sewer systems of the
City shall be strictly adhered to by any persons appointed or employed
hereunder. (Ord. 876, 3-17-1981)
8-9-8: DUTIES OF PUBLIC WORKS AND BUILDINGS COMMITTEE:
It is hereby provided that the public works and buildings Committee shall take
charge of and supervise the operation, maintenance and improvement of the water
and sewer systems of the City, establish such hours and rules of employment
therein as said committee shall deem necessary and expedient and to generally
exercise diligence in the proper, efficient and economical operation of said
departments. (Ord. 876, 3-17-1981)
8-9-9: AUTHORIZED MANPOWER LEVELS:
The Water and Sewer Departments and the cashier of said departments are hereby
authorized the following manpower levels:
   (A)   Water Department: Two (2) full time meter readers, and six (6) water
treatment plant full time employees holding such licenses as may be required by
law. (Ord. 946, 9-7-1982)
   (B)   Sewer Department: Nine (9) full time employees holding such licenses
as may be required by law. (Ord. 1484, 10-3-1995)
   (C)   Cashier: One full time employee.
   (D)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to deny the
various departments authority to hire part time personnel on an "as needed"
basis. However, no part time personnel shall be hired without appointment of
the Mayor and advice and consent of the proper committee. (Ord. 946, 9-7-1982)
8-9-10: CANTON LAKE DAM; REVOLVING FUND; OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE:
There is hereby established a Revolving Fund to be utilized solely for the
operation and maintenance of Canton Lake Dam and, if necessary, for breaching
of the structure. Said fund shall be maintained at an amount of money not less
than twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). Said maintenance and
construction of Canton Lake Dam shall be regulated by the Illinois Department
of Natural Resources Rules for Construction and Maintenance of Dams (17 Ill.
Adm. 3702) or as hereinafter may be amended. (Ord. 4106, 5-1-2018)
CHAPTER 10
WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM; RATES
SECTION:
8-10-1: Meters Required
8-10-2: Manner Of Setting Meters, Stop Boxes
8-10-3: Sewer And Water Taps
8-10-4: Meter Installation Charge
8-10-5: Water And Sewer Rates
8-10-6: Payment Of Bills
8-10-7: Application Required; Owner Responsible
8-10-8: Discontinuance Of Service
8-10-9: Cashier To File Lien
8-10-10: Cashier To Render Bills
8-10-11: Funds Kept Separate
8-10-12: Waterworks And Sewerage Fund
8-10-13: Duty Of City Treasurer
8-10-14: County Recorder Of Deeds
8-10-15: Building Permits Required
8-10-16: Builders Using Water
8-10-17: Access To Premises For Inspection
8-10-18: Applications, How Made
8-10-19: Supply Lines
8-10-20: Failure Of Meter
8-10-21: Building Official To Repair
8-10-22: Putting Down, Repairing Pipes
8-10-23: Water Use Permit
8-10-24: Tap Water Mains
8-10-25: Fluoride In Water Supply
8-10-26: Appeals
8-10-27: Penalty
8-10-1: METERS REQUIRED:
Any person using water furnished by the city or making any connection with any
service water supply pipe of the city shall connect their service pipes with a
meter of standard pattern previously approved by the city so that all water
consumed shall be passed through such meter and be accurately measured and the
amount definitely ascertained. (Ord. 1267, 12-5-1989)
8-10-2: MANNER OF SETTING METERS, STOP BOXES:
All meters placed in connection with the city waterworks system shall be set
under the direction of the building official in some convenient place in the
cellar, or (if there is no cellar) on the first floor of the building served,
to be approved by the building official. In tapping city water mains, a stop
box or a cutoff shall in every case be set on the service pipe, the top of
which shall be flush with the surface of the ground, and at the outer edge of
the street sidewalk in front of the premises being served. Any person removing,
destroying or covering over any such stop box shall be subject to a penalty of
not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense plus the city's cost of restoration of the same. The
water tap fee includes, but is not limited to: a) the actual cost of the
equipment plus twenty percent (20%); b) city labor for the tapping of the water
line; and c) city inspection fee. The city billing clerk will maintain the
schedule of the water tap fees. (Ord. 3097, 4-8-2015)
8-10-3: SEWER AND WATER TAPS:
In every case when any person desires to make a connection with any water or
sewer main of the city, such connection shall be made in the following manner:
   (A)   Water Taps; Tap Fees And Installation Procedure For Water Service: The
property owner shall first make written application to the city for tappage and
installation of form as provided by the city. Thereafter, the property owner
desiring such connection shall cause all excavation and preparation for the
same to be made at his sole expense and in accordance with applicable codes.
The city will make the actual tap and install the corporation stop in
accordance with the following fee schedule and charge the same to the owner.
The owner shall supply all copper tubing for the service connection. The owner
shall cause all copper pipe, the curb stop and box, and remaining pipe to the
building to be installed at his sole expense and in accordance with applicable
city codes. If tappage involves excavation in a road right of way, such
excavation shall be backfilled with granular fill and to the city's
satisfaction. If a boring is necessary to cross paved streets, such boring
shall be done at the owner's expense and to the city's satisfaction. The city
will install the water meter as soon as construction permits. No water shall be
used until the water meter is installed by the city, except as hereinafter
provided. If any water is to be used prior to the installation of the water
meter, charges therefor shall be in accordance with section
8-10-16 of this chapter. Such fee shall be for a ninety (90) day period, and in
all cases, shall be paid in advance of each such ninety (90) day period. In
cases where the building site is already served by a water tap, the appropriate
tap fees shall be charged to the owner. The water tap fees include, but are not
limited to: 1) the actual cost of the equipment plus twenty percent (20%); 2)
city labor for the tapping of the water line; and 3) city inspection fee. The
city billing clerk will maintain the schedule of the water tap fees. In no case
shall the work and installation of lines, tappage and other associated
excavation be backfilled prior to the city's inspection and approval of such
work and tappage.
   (B)   Sewer Taps; Tap Fees And Installation Procedure For Sewer Service:
Sewer tap fees shall be charged to each property owner desiring sewer service
in accordance with the fee schedule maintained by the city billing clerk. All
fees shall be paid in advance. The sewer tap fee will be determined by the
public works director.
The property owner shall first make written application to the city for tappage
and installation on forms provided by the city. Thereafter, the property owner
desiring such connection shall cause all excavation and preparation for the
same to be made at his sole expense and in accordance with applicable codes.
The property owner shall cause his plumber to make the actual tap; then a
saddle must be used. The saddle must first be approved by the city engineer or
plumbing inspector and then installed to his satisfaction.
The owner shall, at his sole expense, cause all excavation and backfill to be
done. If the tap is made in road right of way, such excavation shall be
backfilled with a granular material and to the city's satisfaction. If a boring
is necessary to cross paved streets, such boring, backfill and patching of
pavement shall be done at the owner's sole expense and to the city's
satisfaction. In no case shall the work and installation of lines, tappage, and
other associated excavation be backfilled prior to the city's inspection and
approval of such work and tappage. The city will assist in locating existing
city owned sewers; provided, however, that the property owner requesting
tappage and sewer service shall be solely responsible for the cost of such work
and the physical completion of the work.
   (C)   Water And Sewer Tap Fees Outside The Corporate Limits Of The City: The
fees for water and sewer taps for locations outside the corporate limits of the
city shall be double those described in subsections (A) and (B) of this
section. (Ord. 3097, 4-8-2015)
8-10-4: METER INSTALLATION CHARGE:
The cost of all meters shall be paid by the consumer in advance, who shall also
pay the cost of installing the same.
The cost of replacing all meters, which in the opinion of the proper city
officers need replacement, shall be paid for by the consumer.
All meters before being set in must be tested and approved by the building
official. No meter shall be removed for any purpose from any supply pipe by any
person whatsoever, without first obtaining a written permit from the building
official. Anywhere any meter is removed by such consent, it must be replaced
within ten (10) days, and before being replaced it must be tested by the
building official. (Ord. 3097, 4-8-2015)
8-10-5: WATER AND SEWER RATES:
   (A)   Definitions: Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the
meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT:
    Administrator: The administrator of the U.S. environmental protection
agency.
    Federal Act: The federal clean water act 1  as amended, (Pub. L. 95-217).
    Federal Grant: The U.S. government participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by title II - grants for
construction of treatment works or the act and implementing regulations.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT:
    Approving Authority: The corporate authorities of the city of Canton,
Illinois.
    City: The city of Canton, Illinois.
    Ordinance: This ordinance.
    Superintendent: The superintendent of wastewater facilities and/or
wastewater treatment works of the city, or, his or their authorized deputy,
agent, or representative.
NPDES PERMIT: Any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by the
administrator, or, where appropriated by the director, after enactment of the
federal clean water act to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to
section 402 of the federal act.
PERSON: Any and all persons, natural or artificial including any individual,
firm, company, municipal, or private corporation, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
SEWER TYPES, AND APPURTENANCES:
    Building Drain: That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved
point of discharge, beginning five feet (5') (1.5 m) outside the inner face of
the building wall.
    Building Sewer: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer
or other place of disposal.
    Combined Sewer: A sewer which is designed and intended to receive
wastewater, storm, surface and ground water drainage.
    Easement: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
    Pretreatment: The treatment wastewaters from sources before introduction
into the wastewater treatment works.
    Public Sewer: A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the
city. It shall also include sewers within or outside the city boundaries that
serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the city sanitary (or
combined) sewer system, even though those sewers may not have been constructed
with city funds.
    Sanitary Sewer: A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a
continuation of both, and into which storm, surface, and ground waters or
polluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
    Sewer: A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids,
including storm, surface and ground water drainage.
    Sewerage: The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage.
    Storm Sewer: A sewer that carries storm, surface and ground water drainage
but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
    Storm Water Runoff: That portion of the precipitation that is drained into
the sewers.
    Wastewater Treatment Works: An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used synonymous
with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or "pollution
control plant".
SHALL: Is mandatory; "may" is permissible.
STATE GOVERNMENT:
    Director: The director of the Illinois environmental protection agency.
    State Act: The Illinois anti-pollution bond act of 1970.
    State Grant: The state of Illinois participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by the Illinois anti-pollution
bond act and for making such grants as filed with the secretary of state of the
state of Illinois.
USER TYPES:
    Basic User Charge: The basic assessment levied on all users of the public
sewer system.
    Capital Improvement Charge: A charge levied on users to improve, extend or
reconstruct the sewage treatment works.
    Commercial User: Shall include transit lodging, retail and wholesale
establishments or places engaged in selling merchandise, or rendering services.
    Control Manhole: A structure located on a site from which industrial wastes
are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop. The
purpose of a "control manhole" is to provide access for the city representative
to sample and/or measure discharges.
    Debt Service Charge: The amount to be paid each billing period for payment
of interest, principal and coverage of (loan, bond, etc.) outstanding.
    Industrial Users: Shall include establishments engaged in manufacturing
activities involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials of
substance into products.
    Institutional/Governmental User: Shall include schools, churches, penal
institutions, and users associated with federal, state, and local governments.
    Local Capital Cost Charge: Charges for costs other than the operations,
maintenance and replacement costs, i.e., debt service and capital improvement
costs.
    Replacement: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
are designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes
replacement.
    Residential User: All dwelling units such as houses, mobile homes,
apartments, permanent multi-family dwellings.
    Sewerage Fund: The principal accounting designation for all revenues
received in the operation of the sewerage system.
    Surcharge: The assessment in addition to the basic user charge and debt
service charge which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in
strength than the concentration values established in this chapter.
    Useful Life: The estimated period during which the collection system and/or
treatment works will be operated.
    User Charge: A charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost of
operation, maintenance and replacement.
    User Class: The type of user "residential, institutional/governmental,
commercial", or "industrial" as defined herein.
    Wastewater Service Charge: The periodic charge levied on all users of the
wastewater facilities. The service charge shall be computed as outlined in this
chapter and shall consist of the total or the basic user charge, the local
capital cost and a surcharge, if applicable.
WASTEWATER AND ITS CHARACTERISTICS:
    BOD (Denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand): The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees Celsius (20°C), expressed in
milligrams per liter.
    Effluent Criteria: Defined in any applicable "NPDES permit".
    Floatable Oil: Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
    Garbage: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of
food.
    Industrial Waste: Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharge,
permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or
business establishment or process or from the development, recovery or
processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
    Major Contributing Industry: An industrial user of the publicly owned
treatment works that: 1) has a flow of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons or more
per average workday; or 2) has a flow greater than ten percent (10%) of the
flow carried by the municipal system receiving the waste; or 3) has in its
waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in standards issued under
section 307(a) of the federal act; or 4) is found by the permit issuant
authority, in connection with the issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly
owned treatment works receiving the waste, to have significant impact, either
singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on that treatment
works or upon the quality of effluent from that treatment works.
    Milligrams Per Liter: A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater
constituent. It is 0.001 grams of the constituent in 1,000 milligrams of water.
It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it
is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and wastewater
analysis.
    ppm: Parts per million by weight.
    pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA division
of laboratories manual of laboratory methods.
    Population Equivalent: A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or
other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is one
hundred (100) gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.17 pounds of BOD and 0.2
pounds of suspended solids.
    Properly Shredded Garbage: The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27 centimeters)
in any dimension.
    Sewage: Used interchangeably with "wastewater".
    Slug: Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of low exceeds for any
period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times
the average twenty four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal
operation.
    Suspended Solids (SS): Solids that either float on the surface of, or are
in suspension in water, sewage, or industrial waste, and which are removable by
a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the IEPA divisions of
laboratories manual of laboratory methods.
    Unpolluted Water: Water quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
    Wastewater: The spent water of a community. From this standpoint of course,
it may be a combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any
industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface
water, and stormwater that may be present.
    Water Quality Standards: Defined in the water pollution regulations of
Illinois.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES: The structures, equipment, and processes required to
collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport
effluent to a watercourse.
WATERCOURSE AND CONNECTIONS:
    Natural Outlet: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other
body of surface or ground water.
    Watercourse: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently. (Ord. 1289, 8-21-1990)
   (B)   Water Rates: There shall be and there are hereby established rates or
charges for the use of and for service supplied by the waterworks system of the
city based on the amount of water used, as shown by the water meters, as
follows. (Ord. 1267, 12-5-1989)
   (C)   Water Rate Schedule:
      1.   Minimum Charge: The minimum charge per month shall be increased each
year as follows:
 
From And After Minimum Base Charge
July 1, 2014   $6.00
May 1, 2015    6.50
May 1, 2016    7.50
May 1, 2017    8.50
May 1, 2018    9.50
 
      2.   Volume Surcharge: In addition to the minimum charge at all times
there shall be a surcharge for water delivered to the customer as measured by
the meter on the premises per one hundred (100) cubic feet.
This includes a ten cent ($0.10) increase on the operation and maintenance
(O&M) portion of the rate. A ten cent ($0.10) increase will take effect May 1
of each year following until the Canton city council approves a city ordinance
stating otherwise.
Therefore the rates shall increase as follows:
 
From And After Operation And Maintenance Debt Service Total
July 1, 2014   $1.70                     $3.45        $5.15
May 1, 2015    1.80                      3.45         5.25
May 1, 2016    1.90                      3.45         5.35
May 1, 2017    2.00                      3.45         5.45
May 1, 2018    2.10                      3.45         5.55
 
      3.   Outside Users: All users outside the city limits of the city of
Canton shall pay two hundred percent (200%) of the operation and maintenance
rate, except as otherwise provided by the city council.
   (D)   Sewer Rates: Users of the sewer system of the city of Canton shall be
charged for the use of said sewers and for treatment of said sewage based upon
the amount of water used as measured by water meters as hereinafter provided.
   (E)   Sewer Rate Schedule:
      1.   Minimum Charge: The minimum charge per month shall be increased each
year as follows:
 
From And After Minimum Base Charge
July 1, 2014   $6.00
May 1, 2015    6.50
May 1, 2016    7.50
May 1, 2017    8.50
May 1, 2018    9.50
 
      2.   Volume Surcharge: In addition to the minimum charge at all times
there shall be a surcharge for each month per one hundred (100) cubic feet of
water based upon the volume of water used as shown by the water meter.
This includes a ten cent ($0.10) increase on the operation and maintenance
(O&M) portion of the rate. A ten cent ($0.10) increase will take effect May 1
of each year following until the Canton city council approves a city ordinance
stating otherwise.
Therefore the rates shall increase as follows:
 
From And After Operation And Maintenance Debt Service Total
July 1, 2014   $1.312                    $2.338       $3.65
May 1, 2015    1.412                     2.338        3.75
May 1, 2016    1.512                     2.338        3.85
May 1, 2017    1.612                     2.338        3.95
May 1, 2018    1.712                     2.338        4.05
 
Sewer users who do not purchase water from the city of Canton shall be charged
a volume surcharge according to the foregoing rates based upon metered water
use or metered sewer use (if available) or by an estimate of water used as
determined by the superintendent.
   (F)   Reserved. (Ord. 3065, 6-3-2014)
   (G)   Extra Strength Surcharge: Service charges and volume charges as
specified in subsection (E) of this section shall be considered to be payment
for collection and treatment of all sewage of strengths up to concentrations of
two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l) BOD and two hundred forty
milligrams per liter (240 mg/l) suspended solids. An additional extra strength
surcharge shall be charged in the event that a user discharges wastes of
strengths in excess of two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l) BOD and two
hundred forty milligrams per liter (240 mg/l) suspended solids as shown below.
 
BOD $0.120/#
SS  0.125/#
 
These surcharges shall be applicable to 1989. Beyond 1989, the city will
determine annually, costs per pound for treatment of excess concentrations of
BOD and suspended solids for the purposes of assessing extra strength
surcharges as those users who may be discharging such wastes. The unit costs,
for this purpose, will be computed on the following basis:
      1.   The total annual cost of collection and treatment shall be
determined from information contained in the official audit prepared for the
last preceding fiscal year. In determining the amount of audited expenses
allocable to the operation of the sewer department, the following items will be
considered:
         (a)   One-half (1/2) the total expense of the combined waterworks and
sewerage system for accounting and collection costs.
         (b)   One-half (1/2) the total expense of the combined waterworks and
sewerage system for general and administrative costs.
         (c)   Total audited value for sewer expense, including all operation
and maintenance expenses for the sewerage system and for sewage treatment.
         (d)   Sixty two percent (62%) of the past year's principal and
interest costs on 1963 waterworks and sewerage revenue bonds so long as said
bonds are outstanding.
         (e)   Principal and interest cost on all outstanding general
obligation sewer bonds and obligations so long as said bonds and obligations
are outstanding.
In addition to the items listed above obtained from the official audit, an item
of depreciation shall be included. This item shall be determined at twenty
percent (20%) of a total annual depreciation amount as approved by region V,
United States environmental protection agency for the various items included in
all improvements to the sewage treatment facilities to the extent such
improvements are not fully depreciated.
      2.   The annual average daily dry weather flow, BOD and suspended solids
for untreated wastes received at the treatment plants, computed from treatment
records by omitting values for days in which rainfall contributed to flow.
Values for BOD and for suspended solids shall be computed on the basis of the
total number of pounds received at the treatment plants.
      3.   From data obtained in subsections (G)1 and (G)2 of this section, the
total annual cost per pound of BOD treatment and per pound of suspended solids
treated shall be computed.
In making these calculations, the total annual cost obtained as outlined in
subsection (G)1 of this section shall be apportioned as follows:
40 percent of total assigned to volume
30 percent of total assigned to BOD
30 percent of total assigned to suspended solids
      4.   In calculating extra strength surcharges applicable to any
particular user, data shall be obtained pertaining to the volume of wastes
discharged and to the BOD and suspended solids applicable to such wastes.
Credit shall be given for BOD up to two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l)
and for suspended solids up to two hundred forty milligrams per liter (240 mg/
l) being included under the service charge and volume charge. For strengths in
excess of two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l) BOD and two hundred forty
milligrams per liter (240 mg/l) suspended solids, charges per pound shall be
made in accordance with the results of calculations as outlined in subsection
(G)3 of this section for the billing period.
Extra strength surcharges determined for the preceding year shall be applied
until a new determination is made of the unit costs for BOD and suspended
solids and of volume and strength of wastes discharged by a user.
In the event that a change in sewage volume or strength is considered to have
taken place, the city will have the right to obtain updated information on
volume and strengths of a user's discharge and to make adjustments in the
number of pounds applicable for surcharge. Should a user desire to have extra
strength surcharges adjusted, arrangements may be worked out with the
superintendent for additional sampling analyses and surcharge computations,
with the user paying for the cost of such additional measurement, analyses and
calculations as determined by the superintendent. (Ord. 1267, 12-5-1989)
   (H)   Outside City Limits: Debt service charges for sewer service outside
city limits shall be two hundred percent (200%) of the debt service portion of
the sewer rate inside city limits. (Ord. 1287, 7-17-1990)
   (I)   Annual Review: Following each annual audit of the fiscal year ending
April 30, the city will review, on the basis of the past year's audit and
volumes and strengths of wastes treated, the sewer rates, including service
charges, volume charges, and extra strength surcharge. Revisions will be made,
if appropriate, to take effect as soon as practicable. (Ord. 1267, 12-5-1989)
   (J)   Water Rate Amendments: In addition to the foregoing charges, the water
rates shall be amended from time to time by city staff with prior council
approval following annual review to reflect the actual cost, including
administrative expenses, of special electrical costs or expenses incurred by
the city in the operation and maintenance of the city water well(s) at not to
exceed twenty cents ($0.20) per one hundred (100) cubic feet of water per well
when in operation. Such actual costs shall be spread evenly and billed to city
water customers in the same manner as the foregoing charges are spread and
billed. Such special or extraordinary costs or expenses shall be immediately
reduced or removed as the actual cost or expense to the city is reduced or
removed, except that if a pump runs for fifty percent (50%) or more of a
billing cycle, the surcharge shall be billed for the entire billing cycle.
(Ord. 1267, 12-5-1989; amd. Ord. 1689, 3-20-2001)
   (K)   Remediation Water:
      1.   Dischargers of remediation water as limited in subsection 8-19-31(M)
of this title shall pay a charge to be called a "remediation water charge" of
three cents ($0.03) per gallon for each gallon of such wastewater delivered
and/or discharged to the City under the provisions of this subsection. Such
charges shall be in lieu of flow, BOD and TSS charges as established herein.
The doubling of wastewater treatment bills for outside sources (not within the
City limits) shall be applicable to the above charges.
      2.   Charges for sampling and analyses undertaken by the City for
inspection shall be borne by the party requesting the discharge. (Ord. 1454, 3-
7-1995)
 
Notes
1 1. 33 USC 466 et seq.
8-10-6: PAYMENT OF BILLS:
Said rates or charges for the services shall be payable on the fifteenth day of
the month following the month of billing. The owner of the premises shall be
liable to the City to pay for the service to such premises provided, however,
with the approval of the City, the said owner may require the tenant to pay
therefor, but the primary liability shall not shift from the owner to the
tenant. In addition to the owner, the occupant or the user of the service
thereof shall be secondarily liable to pay for the service to such premises.
All bills for service shall be billed no later than the last day of the billing
month and shall be payable no later than the close of business on the fifteenth
day thereafter. If payment of the full amount of the bill is made after said
fifteenth day, a penalty of twenty percent (20%) of the amount of the bill will
be added to the amount of the outstanding balance. (Ord. 3097, 4-8-2015)
8-10-7: APPLICATION REQUIRED; OWNER RESPONSIBLE:
No water shall be turned on for use in or upon any premises until an
application therefor in writing has been made for that purpose and filed with
the City Water Department stating the purpose for which the water is to be
used. Every application for water services shall constitute an agreement by the
applicant to pay for all water used on the premises through said service and to
comply with all ordinances, rules, and regulations then in effect or that may
thereafter be adopted. The City may deny water service to any applicant when
such applicant owes the City through the Water Department for a delinquent bill
for service to another premises. Should the City become aware that the turnoff
request by a landlord is being utilized as a punitive matter in a dispute with
a tenant who is current in payment of his or her water charges, the City will
not become an arbitrator of the dispute, but may in its discretion deny or
grant such request. (Ord. 4088, 11-7-2017)
8-10-8: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
   (A)   If the rates or charges for such services are not paid by the
fifteenth day of the month following the month of mailing of the bill for such
service, such service shall be immediately discontinued without further notice
and shall not be reinstated until all past due bills, including the penalties
thereon, are paid in full.
   (B)   If City has disconnected water service due to nonpayment, there will
be a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) which must be paid in advance to have the
service reinstated. The outstanding bill must be paid in full before utilities
will be turned back on by City. (Ord. 3097, 4-8-2015)
8-10-9: CASHIER TO FILE LIEN:
If any bill, including penalties and interest thereon, is not paid in full
within fourteen (14) days following the fifteenth day after the month of
mailing of the bill, the cashier may cause a notice of lien to be filed with
the Recorder of Deeds of Fulton County, Illinois, and against the premises
which received such service, all as provided by Illinois law. The notice of
lien may be filed after the end of the month following the fifteenth day after
the last day of the billing month. Such lien shall not be removed until all
past due bills, penalties, and interest thereon, and all actual costs of filing
and removing such lien claims are first paid in advance. (Ord. 3097, 4-8-2015)
8-10-10: CASHIER TO RENDER BILLS:
It is hereby made the duty of the cashier of the City, or qualified personnel
appointed by the Mayor, to render bills for service and for all rates and
charges in connection therewith and to collect all monies due thereon. (Ord.
3097, 4-8-2015)
8-10-11: FUNDS KEPT SEPARATE:
All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the combined waterworks
and sewerage system shall be held by the Clerk or qualified personnel appointed
by the Mayor, to render bills for service and for all rates and charges in
connection therewith and to collect all monies due thereon, separate and apart
from his private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the City
and all of said sum, without any deducting whatever, shall be delivered to the
City Treasurer on the same day such revenues and monies are received. (Ord.
1267, 12-5-1989)
8-10-12: WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE FUND:
The city treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the combined waterworks
and sewerage system and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of
such system as the same may be delivered to the treasurer and deposit the same
in a separate fund designated as the "waterworks and sewerage fund of the city"
and said treasurer shall administer such fund in every respect in the manner
provided by the provisions of the Illinois municipal code, effective July 1,
1961, and all laws amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto, and as
provided in all outstanding, applicable bond ordinances as the same may from
time to time exist. (Ord. 1267, 12-5-1989)
8-10-13: DUTY OF CITY TREASURER:
The city treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep
proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall
be made of all transactions relative to the sewerage system and the water
system and at regular annual intervals he shall cause to be made an audit by an
independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the sewerage system and the water system. The Illinois
environmental protection agency shall have access to all records of the system.
(Ord. 1267, 12-5-1989)
8-10-14: COUNTY RECORDER OF DEEDS:
A copy of this chapter, properly certified by the city clerk, shall be filed in
the office of the recorder of deeds of Fulton County, Illinois, and shall be
deemed notice to all owners of real estate of their liability for service
supplied to any user of the service of the combined waterworks and sewerage
system of the city on their properties. (Ord. 1267, 12-5-1989)
8-10-15: BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED:
No sewer or water service from the city shall be extended to, for or on behalf
of any person or facility within the corporate limits of the city unless and
until a building permit has first been procured therefor as required by the
applicable provisions of this code.
No sewer or water service from the city shall be extended to, for or on behalf
of any person or facility outside the corporate limits of the city unless and
until a building permit has first been procured as required by the applicable
provisions of this code in like instances within the corporate limits of the
city. (Ord. 1267, 12-5-1989)
8-10-16: BUILDERS USING WATER:
Whenever builders, brick masons, plasterers or contractors use the water of the
city in and about their work, the same shall be metered and be charged for at
the regular rate. During the winter, whenever builders, brick masons,
plasterers or contractors use the water of the city, they shall pay forty five
dollars ($45.00) for residential construction and one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) for commercial construction. (Ord. 3097, 4-8-2015)
8-10-17: ACCESS TO PREMISES FOR INSPECTION:
All officers and employees connected with the city waterworks, the building
official or any person by him authorized, and the public works, water and sewer
committee, or any member thereof, shall have free access at all reasonable
hours to the premises where water is used, to make necessary examinations and
inspections. (Ord. 1267, 12-5-1989)
8-10-18: APPLICATIONS, HOW MADE:
Applications for water or sewer connections must be made in writing to the
water and sewer department upon forms provided by the city. All applications
shall contain the legal description and common address of the property to which
service is requested to be made and shall be signed by the owner of such
property or by the owner's authorized agent, with satisfactory proof of such
agency required. In such application, the owner of the real property or his
authorized agent, must agree to be governed by the provisions of this code in
force at the time of the application, and as the same may thereafter be
amended. The making of such written application shall be prima facie proof of
the owner's agreement to be so governed and shall be conclusive proof of such
agreement in a court of law. (Ord. 1267, 12-5-1989)
8-10-19: SUPPLY LINES:
Hydrants, plugs, stop boxes, service pipes, stopcocks, meters and related
equipment, and all attachments and fixtures connected therewith shall be kept
in good repair and condition by the owner or occupant of the premises upon
which they are situated, at their own expense. It is expressly provided that no
claim shall be made or allowed against the city or any of its officers or
employees on account of breaking of said water apparatus, or on account of the
stoppage of the supply of water by reason of accident to the plumbing machinery
or mains, or for the necessary alteration of the same. The building official
shall have free access at all times upon the premises of the consumer for the
purpose of reading the meter; or he or they may remove a meter at any time for
repair or for testing its accuracy, and when any meter shall be found to be
incorrect in measurement and unfit for further use, such meter shall be
replaced at once by one that is approved by the building official at the
expense of the owner thereof.
Whenever a leak develops in the water system on the property of any person, the
building official shall immediately give notice in writing of the leak to the
person owning the property or the person occupying the same. Then unless said
owner or occupant repairs said leak within twenty four (24) hours after
receiving said notice, the city shall have the right to turn off said water if
such can reasonably be done. In the event the water cannot be turned off and
said leak is not repaired within twenty four (24) hours after receiving said
notice, the city shall have the right to go upon the property and make said
repairs and to charge the cost of the same to the owner of said property, which
said cost shall be added to the water bill of said owner and shall be
collectible in the same manner as the bill for water consumption. (Ord. 3097,
4-8-2015)
8-10-20: FAILURE OF METER:
If a meter fails to register the quantity of water consumed, the quantity shall
be determined and charge made, as the building official shall determine, or the
public works, water and sewer committee may direct. No deductions shall be made
from the bills on account of leakage. (Ord. 1267, 12-5-1989)
8-10-21: BUILDING OFFICIAL TO REPAIR:
All meters now in use and connected, and all those hereafter to be placed in
connection with the city waterworks system, are hereby declared to be fixtures,
and shall be set and kept in good repair at the expense of the consumer. Any
meter found in need of repair shall be replaced or removed by the city and
repaired by the city or a licensed plumber at the cost of the consumer for the
actual cost of repairs and labor.
Whenever it becomes necessary to repair the service pipe between the city main
and any meter on account of leakage, or for other cause, such repair shall be
done under the supervision of the building official who shall be notified of
the same, and such pipe shall be replaced in accordance with the provisions of
this code, which cost shall be borne by the consumer. (Ord. 3097, 4-8-2015)
8-10-22: PUTTING DOWN, REPAIRING PIPES:
In putting down and repairing pipes, the streets or alleys shall be open in the
manner which will occasion the least inconvenience to the public and admit of
the uninterrupted passage of water along the gutter of the street. No
excavation in the street or other public place shall be left open overnight,
except by permission of the superintendent of streets, and every precaution
shall be taken to ensure public safety. The street and pavement shall be
restored to as good condition as it was in previous to making the excavation,
and all dirt and rubbish shall be immediately removed upon completion of the
work, under the direction and approval of the superintendent of streets. (Ord.
1267, 12-5-1989)
8-10-23: WATER USE PERMIT:
Any person who shall use water from any hydrant, stopcock or other fixture,
without first having obtained a permit from the building official; or any
person or persons having discontinued or been shut off from the use of water
from the city waterworks system who shall again commence the use of such water
without again having obtained a permit for so doing, or any person who shall
turn on the supply of city water without permission of the building official,
or any person who shall use water from the city waterworks system without
consent of the proper authorities, shall be subject to a penalty of not less
than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for each and every offense. (Ord. 1267, 12-5-1989)
8-10-24: TAP WATER MAINS:
   (A)   City Shall Tap Water Mains Before Streets Are Paved: In all paving
districts, special service areas, or special assessment districts required to
be paved where water mains are laid, the city shall, as soon as practicable,
tap said water mains in front of each building or lot with a five-eighths inch
(5/8") tap, and from such tap lay a connection with a three-fourths inch (3/4")
copper tubing, or red brass pipe toward such building or lot within the curb
line at which place there will be placed a stop box. The said pipe shall be
laid as near as practicable of the same depth as the water main which it
connects, and all the dirt taken from the ditches made to make such taps and
lay such pipes shall be tamped back to fit condition for paving, and shall be
done as expeditiously as possible and so as to proceed in advance of the paving
contractors.
   (B)   Owners May Have Extra Taps Put In: The owners of buildings or lots
fronting upon any street required to be paved, where water mains are laid, may
have extra taps put in or an extra large pipe used by first paying the extra
expense caused by such extra taps and pipe, which costs shall be computed by
the building official or meter reader.
   (C)   Cost Of Tapping, Permit: The owners of buildings or lots fronting upon
any street where taps are required to be made before paving such street as
provided above, shall pay the actual cost of the same, with ten percent (10%)
annual interest added until such connection is made, which said sum shall be
paid to the cashier of the water department before a permit shall be issued to
connect and use water from said tap, and when said sum is paid, the cashier of
the water department shall issue a permit upon such person complying with the
provisions of this code.
   (D)   Work Shall Be Done Under The Supervision Of The Building Official: All
taps and connections shall be put in under the direction and supervision of the
building official, who shall see that the work is properly done and that all
material is of suitable quality for which the same is used.
   (E)   Separate Tap For Each Consumer: Every person shall have and maintain a
separate and independent tap or connection with the city water main for each
building or premises for which water is furnished, and no person shall
hereafter be permitted to connect his service pipe with the service pipe of any
other consumer, and no such taps or connections heretofore made shall be
repaired or extended, but whenever the same shall become in need of repairs, or
any extension shall be made, such service pipe shall be connected directly with
the city main, in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. (Ord.
3097, 4-8-2015)
8-10-25: FLUORIDE IN WATER SUPPLY:
Upon receiving the approval of the state department of public health, and until
further direction of the council, the water department of the city is hereby
authorized and directed to provide the means and to proceed with the addition
of approximately one and not more than one and two-tenths (1.2) parts of
fluoride to every million parts of water distributed in the water supply system
of the city. (Ord. 1267, 12-5-1989)
8-10-26: APPEALS:
Any person who disagrees with the methods used or computations made shall be
entitled to a written summary of same within ten (10) days of receipt of a
written request for same. Any disagreement over the methods used or in the
computations thereof shall be either affirmed or remedied within ten (10) days
by the superintendent of the water department or the community services
director of the city after a formal written appeal detailing the alleged
discrepancies. (Ord. 3097, 4-8-2015)
8-10-27: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions or requirements of this
chapter, or shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply therewith, shall have the
water turned off from his premises, and shall, where no penalty is expressly
provided, be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00)
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. (Ord.
3097, 4-8-2015)
CHAPTER 10.1
EMERGENCY WATER CONSERVATION PLAN
SECTION:
Division 1. Generally
8-10.1-1: Scope
8-10.1-2: Declaration Of Policy
8-10.1-3: Authorization
8-10.1-4: Application Of Chapter
Division 2. Conservation Stages
8-10.1-5: Compliance; Guidelines
8-10.1-6: Stage 1, Voluntary Conservation
8-10.1-7: Stage 2, Mandatory Compliance - Water Alert
8-10.1-8: Stage 3, Mandatory Compliance - Water Warning
8-10.1-9: Stage 4, Mandatory Compliance - Water Emergency
Division 3. Enforcement; Implementation
8-10.1-10: Implementation Of Water Conservation Stages
8-10.1-11: Presumption
8-10.1-12: Mandatory Conservation Stage Implementation
8-10.1-13: Review Board; Variances; Permits And Compliance Agreements
8-10.1-14: Penalty
8-10.1-15: Excess Water Use; Billing
8-10.1-16: Additional Requirements And Restrictions
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
8-10.1-1: SCOPE:
There is hereby established a city of Canton emergency water conservation plan.
(Ord. 1231, 2-21-1989)
8-10.1-2: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
It is hereby declared that, because of the water conditions from time to time
prevailing in the city, the general welfare requires that the water resources
available to the city be put to the maximum beneficial use to the extent to
which they are capable, and that the waste or unreasonable use, or unreasonable
method of use of water be prevented, and the conservation of such water is to
be extended with a view to the reasonable and beneficial use thereof in the
interests of the people of the city and for the public health and welfare.
(Ord. 1231, 2-21-1989)
8-10.1-3: AUTHORIZATION:
The mayor, or his designee, is hereby authorized and directed to administer and
implement the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1231, 2-21-1989)
8-10.1-4: APPLICATION OF CHAPTER:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all persons, customers, and
property utilizing city water wherever situated. (Ord. 1231, 2-21-1989)
DIVISION 2. CONSERVATION STAGES
8-10.1-5: COMPLIANCE; GUIDELINES:
No customer of or person who uses water from the city water utility shall
knowingly make, cause, use, or permit the use of water received from the city
for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, governmental, or any
other purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of this chapter, or in an
amount in excess of that use permitted by the conservation stage in effect
pursuant to this chapter.
The city engineer shall continually review and suggest guidelines which shall
set forth the criteria for determining when a particular conservation stage is
to be implemented and terminated. Such guidelines shall be updated when, in the
opinion of the engineer, the conditions of the utility system have changed so
as to necessitate such update. Said guidelines shall be available for
inspection at the city clerk's office during normal business hours. (Ord. 1231,
2-21-1989)
8-10.1-6: STAGE 1, VOLUNTARY CONSERVATION:
Customers of or persons who use the water utility of the city are requested to
voluntarily limit the amount of water used during stage 1, voluntary
conservation to that amount absolutely necessary for health, business, and
outdoor water use. (Ord. 1231, 2-21-1989)
8-10.1-7: STAGE 2, MANDATORY COMPLIANCE - WATER ALERT:
During stage 2, mandatory compliance - water alert, the following restrictions
shall apply to all customers of or persons who use the water utility of the
city:
   (A)   All outdoor irrigation by sprinklers shall occur only between the
hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and seven
o'clock (7:00) P.M. to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on a designated outdoor
water use day which shall be once every seven (7) days. Irrigation by handheld
hoses, drip irrigation, or handheld buckets is permitted anytime. The above
restrictions do not apply to the irrigation of commercial nurseries, commercial
sod farms, and similarly situated commercial establishments. Said
establishments will be requested to curtail all nonessential water use.
   (B)   The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes, and
other types of mobile equipment is prohibited except on designated outdoor
water use days between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight to ten
o'clock (10:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. to twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight. Such washing, when allowed, shall be done with a handheld bucket or a
handheld hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle for quick rinses.
However, this restriction does not apply to the washing of the above listed
vehicles or mobile equipment when conducted on the immediate premises of a
commercial carwash or a commercial service station. Furthermore, this
restriction shall not apply to the washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers,
boats, airplanes and other types of mobile equipment (such as garbage trucks
and vehicles to transport food and perishables) when said washing is necessary
on a more regular and frequent basis in order to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the public. (The washing of each individual automobile, truck,
trailer, boat, airplane and/or any other type of mobile equipment in violation
of the terms and conditions of this restriction constitutes a separate
violation under this chapter.)
   (C)   The washing or sprinkling of foundations is prohibited except on
designated outdoor water use days between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00)
P.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight.
   (D)   The filling or adding of water to swimming and/or wading pools is
prohibited except on designated outdoor water use days between the hours of
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and seven o'clock
(7:00) P.M. to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight. However, this restriction does
not apply to public swimming pools and wading pools.
   (E)   The operation of any ornamental fountain or other structure making
similar use of water is prohibited.
   (F)   The use of water for irrigation of golf greens and tees is prohibited
except on designated outdoor water use days between the hours of twelve o'clock
(12:00) midnight and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. to
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight. The irrigation of golf course fairways is
absolutely prohibited. This restriction does not apply to the irrigation of any
golf course or fairways which utilizes wastewater effluent or raw water, or to
the irrigation of golf course fairways pursuant to the terms and conditions of
an approved compliance agreement issued by the review board.
   (G)   The use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited to firefighting
related activities and/or other activities necessary to maintain the health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of Canton. This restriction does not apply
to businesses which require the use of water for land development and building
construction processes. Pursuant to written approval by the water department,
said businesses shall be allowed to purchase and draw water from fire hydrants
designated for such use by the water department.
   (H)   1. The following uses of water are defined as "waste of water" and are
absolutely prohibited:
         (a)   Allowing water to run off into a gutter, ditch, or drain; or
         (b)   Failing to repair a controllable leak; or
         (c)   Washing sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts,
patios, or other paved areas, except to alleviate immediate health or fire
hazards.
      2.   Provided, however, that none of the stage 2 restrictions shall apply
to the following uses of water:
         (a)   The routine and necessary use of water, other than for landscape
irrigation, by a governmental entity in pursuant of its governmental functions
for the benefit of the public, such as for capital improvement construction
projects and for the cleaning of streets to prevent debris and harmful
substances from entering water systems via storm sewers;
         (b)   The routine and necessary use of water, other than for landscape
irrigation, for land development (e.g., roadway base preparation, flushing of
utility lines, dust control, concrete and asphalt work) and for building
construction processes;
         (c)   The necessary use of water for the routine maintenance and/or
repair of water distribution facilities, residential and commercial plumbing
and permanently installed landscape irrigation systems;
         (d)   The use of water necessary to irrigate large, landscaped areas
in commercial and institutional establishments as authorized by the terms and
conditions of an approved compliance agreement issued by the review board. In
no event, however, shall a compliance agreement be approved if the terms and
conditions therein do not meet or exceed the purpose and intent of the
emergency water conservation plan;
         (e)   The use of water necessary for the establishment of specially
permitted landscaping in new, residential and commercial developments, as set
forth in terms and conditions of a permit issued by the review board; and
         (f)   The use of water pursuant to the approved terms and conditions
of a variance granted by the review board.
   (I)   The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes, or
other types of mobile equipment upon the immediate premises of a commercial
carwash, commercial service station, or private fleet washing facility shall
occur only between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and five o'clock
(5:00) P.M. (Ord. 1231, 2-21-1989)
8-10.1-8: STAGE 3, MANDATORY COMPLIANCE - WATER WARNING:
During stage 3, mandatory compliance - water warning, the following
restrictions shall apply to all customers of or persons who use the water
utility of the city: All elements of stage 2 shall remain in effect in stage 3
except that:
   (A)   All outdoor irrigation of vegetation by individual sprinklers shall
occur only between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00)
A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on designated
outdoor water use days. All outdoor irrigation of vegetation by permanently
installed automatic sprinkler systems shall occur only between the hours of
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on designated
outdoor water use days. Irrigation by handheld buckets is permitted anytime.
   (B)   The watering of golf course tee areas and fairways is prohibited
unless done with treated wastewater, reused water, or raw water.
   (C)   The uses of water excluded from the restrictions under stage 2 and
listed under subsections
8-10.1-7(H)2(e) and (H)2(f) of this chapter as allowable uses of water are
prohibited unless specifically approved and authorized pursuant to a variance
or permit granted under stage 3; except that permits for the use of water
necessary for the establishment of landscaping in new, residential and
commercial developments shall only be issued to licensed landscape
professionals. The authority to use water under the terms and conditions of a
variance or permit shall be null and void upon implementation of stage 4 of the
emergency water conservation plan. A new and separate application for variance
or permit must be submitted for approval upon implementation of stage 4.
   (D)   The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes, and
other types of mobile equipment is prohibited except on designated outdoor
water use days between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:
00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. Such
washing, when allowed, shall be done with a handheld bucket or a handheld hose
equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle for quick rinses. However, this
restriction does not apply to the washing of the above listed vehicles or
mobile equipment when conducted on the immediate premises of a commercial
carwash or a commercial service station.
Furthermore, this restriction shall not apply to the washing of automobiles,
trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes and other types of mobile equipment (such as
garbage trucks and vehicles to transport food and perishables) when said
washing is necessary on a more regular and frequent basis in order to protect
the health, safety and welfare of the public. (The washing of each individual
automobile, truck, trailer, boat, airplane and/or any other type of mobile
equipment in violation of the terms and conditions of this restriction
constitutes a separate violation under this chapter.)
   (E)   All restaurants are prohibited from serving water to their customers
except when specifically requested by the customer.
   (F)   All water customers are restricted to seventy five percent (75%) of
the average monthly water consumption attributable to that customer for the
twelve (12) month period preceding implementation of the city water
conservation plan. (Ord. 1231, 2-21-1989)
8-10.1-9: STAGE 4, MANDATORY COMPLIANCE - WATER EMERGENCY:
During stage 4, mandatory compliance - water emergency, the following
restrictions shall apply to all customers of or persons who use the water
utility of the city. All elements of stage 3 shall remain in effect in stage 4,
except that:
   (A)   All outdoor irrigation of vegetation by handheld hoses, drip
irrigation, or handheld buckets shall occur only between the hours of six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.
to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on designated outdoor water use days. Irrigation
using individual sprinklers or sprinkler systems is prohibited.
   (B)   The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes, and
other types of mobile equipment not occurring upon the immediate premises of a
commercial carwash or a commercial service station and not in the immediate
interest of the public health, safety, and welfare is prohibited.
   (C)   The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes, or
other types of mobile equipment upon the immediate premises of a commercial
carwash or a commercial service station in the immediate interest of the public
health, safety, and welfare, shall occur only between the hours of twelve
o'clock (12:00) noon and five o'clock (5:00) P.M.
   (D)   Commercial nurseries, commercial sod farms, greenhouses, and similarly
situated commercial establishments shall water only on designated days between
the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. and shall
utilize only handheld hoses, drip irrigation systems, or handheld buckets.
   (E)   The filling, refilling, or adding of water to swimming and/or wading
pools is prohibited.
   (F)   The draining and filling of public swimming and wading pools is
prohibited; said pools shall be closed.
   (G)   The operation of any ornamental fountain or similar structure is
prohibited.
   (H)   All restaurants are prohibited from serving water to their customers
except when specifically requested by the customer.
   (I)   The uses of water excluded from the restrictions under stage 2 and
listed thereunder as allowable uses of water in subsections
8-10.1-7(H)2(e) and (H)2(f) of this chapter are prohibited unless specifically
approved and authorized pursuant to a variance or permit granted under stage 4;
except that no permits shall be issued for the use of water necessary for the
establishment of landscaping in new, residential and commercial development.
   (J)   All water customers are restricted to fifty percent (50%) of the
average monthly water consumption attributable to that customer for the twelve
(12) month period preceding implementation of the city water conservation plan.
   (K)   City water mains shall be pressurized only to the extent necessary to
keep water in the mains at a pressure sufficient to maintain the public health,
safety and welfare. (Ord. 1231, 2-21-1989)
DIVISION 3. ENFORCEMENT; IMPLEMENTATION
8-10.1-10: IMPLEMENTATION OF WATER CONSERVATION STAGES:
Implementation of water conservation stages shall be automatic by operation of
law based upon the following chart:
 
Conservation Stage                    Implemented
Stage 1: Voluntary conservation       When water level at Canton Lake reaches 8
                                      feet below Canton Lake Dam overflow
Stage 2: Mandatory compliance - water When water level at Canton Lake reaches
alert                                 10 feet below Canton Lake Dam overflow
Stage 3: Mandatory compliance - water When water level at Canton Lake reaches
warning                               11 feet below Canton Lake Dam overflow
Stage 4: Mandatory compliance - water When water level at Canton Lake reaches
emergency                             12 feet below Canton Lake Dam overflow
 
The water superintendent or his designee shall daily measure the water level at
Canton Lake Dam (at or near the water intake structure) and shall daily advise
the mayor or his designee of the water level at Canton Lake.
Water conservation stages shall be automatically implemented by operation of
law as the water level at Canton Lake Dam reaches eight feet (8') below the
level at which water normally overflows the Canton Lake Dam spillway.
Successive conservation stages shall be initiated by operation of law as the
water level at Canton Lake Dam reaches successively lower levels as set forth
in the foregoing chart. (Ord. 1231, 2-21-1989)
8-10.1-11: PRESUMPTION:
For purposes of this chapter, it shall be presumed that a person, corporation,
or association in whose name the water utility of the city is or was last
billed or who is receiving the economic benefit of said water supply has
knowingly made, caused, used or permitted the use of water received from the
city for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, governmental or any
other purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of this chapter, or in an
amount in excess of the use permitted by the conservation stage in effect, or
in a manner contrary to the terms and conditions of a valid variance, permit or
compliance agreement issued by the review board, if the water has been used in
a manner contrary to any provision of this chapter, or in an amount in excess
of the use permitted by the conservation stage in effect or in a manner
contrary to the terms and conditions of a valid variance, permit or compliance
agreement issued by the review board. (Ord. 1231, 2-21-1989)
8-10.1-12: MANDATORY CONSERVATION STAGE IMPLEMENTATION:
The city engineer shall monitor the projected supply and demand for water by
its customers on a daily basis from the date of implementation of this chapter,
and shall recommend to the mayor and city council the extent of the
conservation required through the implementation or termination of particular,
conservation stages in order for the department to prudently plan for and
supply water to its customers. Thereafter, the mayor may order that the
appropriate stage of water conservation be implemented or terminated in
accordance with the applicable provisions of this chapter. Said order shall be
made by public announcement and shall be published a minimum of one time daily
in a newspaper in general circulation and shall become effective immediately
upon such publication. Publication shall continue on a daily basis until such
time as all restrictions are removed. (Ord. 1231, 2-21-1989)
8-10.1-13: REVIEW BOARD; VARIANCES; PERMITS AND COMPLIANCE AGREEMENTS:
A review board shall be immediately established by mayoral appointment to
review hardship and special cases which cannot follow the letter of this
chapter. It is the purpose of the review board to review hardship or special
cases and to determine whether or not said case warrants a variance, permit or
compliance agreement. Said board shall consider the facts of each case and
decide whether to grant a variance or a permit or to enter into a compliance
agreement within five (5) working days of the receipt of a properly completed
"application for variance/permit/compliance agreement" form. A variance shall
be granted only for reasons of "economic hardship" which is defined as a threat
to an individual's or business' primary source of income. (But under no
circumstances shall inconvenience or the potential for damage of landscaping be
considered an economic hardship which justifies a variance.) The board shall
authorize only the implementation of equitable water use restrictions which
further the purpose and intent of the emergency water conservation plan. The
special water use restrictions authorized by the board in each special or
hardship case shall be set forth on the face of the variance, permit or
compliance agreement. A fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per permit
application for these variances, permits or compliance agreements shall be
assessed to defray administrative costs.
A variance, permit or compliance agreement issued under stage 2 of the
emergency water conservation ordinance shall not be valid upon implementation
of stage 3 or stage 4 of said ordinance. A variance, permit or compliance
agreement expires under its own terms and conditions and/or when another stage
of the emergency water conservation ordinance is in effect. A separate
application for a variance, permit or compliance agreement must be submitted at
each stage of the emergency water conservation plan.
Any person, corporation, or association who is issued a variance, permit or
compliance agreement and makes use of the water utility of the city pursuant to
said variance, permit or compliance agreement shall provide proof of said
variance, permit or compliance agreement upon demand by any peace officer or
person authorized by the city to enforce this chapter. Upon conviction of a
person, corporation or association of violating any provision of this chapter,
the review board may revoke any permit, variance, or compliance agreement
previously granted. However, the board shall notify the applicant of the
proposed revocation five (5) working days before taking such action, and
applicant shall be given the opportunity to be heard by the review board prior
to its taking such action. (Ord. 1231, 2-21-1989)
8-10.1-14: PENALTY:
Any person, corporation, or association violating any provision of this chapter
shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction, shall be punished by
a fine not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not to exceed two hundred
dollars ($200.00) for each violation. Each day or portion thereof a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate violation. The violation of each
provision, and each separate violation thereof, shall be deemed a separate
offense, and shall be punished accordingly. However, compliance may be further
sought through injunctive relief in the district court. (Ord. 1231, 2-21-1989)
8-10.1-15: EXCESS WATER USE; BILLING:
Any person, corporation, association, or bulk water purchaser (to include
municipal bulk purchasers) who use water in excess of the reduced monthly
average imposed in stage 3 or in stage 4 of this chapter shall be billed by the
city for such excess water use at triple the normal rate applied to such
person, corporation, association or bulk water purchaser for such excess use.
All other water used in conformity with this chapter shall be billed at the
normal rate(s). All such charges shall be billed as part of the consumer's
regular water bill. Failure to pay such bill when due, to include triple
charges for excess water use, shall result in the imposition of the normal late
payment charge and ultimate termination of water use in conformity with the
applicable provisions of this code. The excess water use billing rates
established by this section are in addition to the penalties provided by
section
8-10.1-14 of this chapter. (Ord. 1231, 2-21-1989)
8-10.1-16: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
   (A)   Implementation of stage 3, mandatory compliance - water warning, shall
be implemented and fully enforced commencing at seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. local
time on Thursday, July 6, 1989.
   (B)   As of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. local time on Thursday, July 6, 1989,
the bulk purchases of water supplied by or through the city shall be limited to
an aggregate of two hundred fifty (250) gallons per day per household. Further,
the price to be charged for each unit of bulk sales, or portion thereof, shall
be three (3) times the normal cost.
   (C)   Except for existing sanitation uses at Lake Canton, no water shall be
taken by any person directly from Lake Canton or from any other municipal water
source. A violation of this subsection shall be subject to the penalty provided
by section
8-10.1-14 of this chapter.
   (D)   Effective as of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. local time on Thursday, July
6, 1989, each city water account shall be allowed four hundred (400) cubic feet
(2,992 gallons) of water per billing period (every 2 months) which shall not be
subject to the rationing requirements of stages 3 and 4 of this chapter.
   (E)   The mayor may, by executive order, establish other and/or further
rules and regulations as may by the mayor seem reasonably necessary to the
implementation of this chapter and to the implementation of this section.
Specifically, executive order no. 89-01 issued on or about June 28, 1989, is
hereby approved by the city council. (Ord. 1250, 7-5-1989)
CHAPTER 11
LAKE CANTON
SECTION:
8-11-1: Definitions
8-11-2: Boating, License Required
8-11-3: Committee On Lake, Buildings And Grounds
8-11-4: Guardian Of Lake Canton
8-11-5: Fees Held In Special Fund
8-11-6: Rules And Regulations, Boating
8-11-7: Rules And Regulations, Bathing
8-11-7-5: Rules And Regulations, Public Campgrounds
8-11-7-6: Zebra Mussel Policy
8-11-8: Erect Buoys
8-11-9: Close Roads Near Lake
8-11-10: No Trespassing Near Lake
8-11-11: Skating, Coasting On Ice
8-11-12: Fishing
8-11-13: Houseboats Prohibited
8-11-14: Sanitary Provisions
8-11-15: Noises Prohibited
8-11-16: Power To Regulate
8-11-17: Abandoned Boats
8-11-18: Leases
8-11-19: Spraying Of Weeds (Rep. by Ord. 1385, 2-2-1993)
8-11-20: Off Road Vehicles
8-11-21: Sewage Disposal
8-11-22: Rules And Regulations, Roadways And Parking
8-11-22-1: No Parking Places
8-11-22-2: No Overnight Parking
8-11-22-3: Speed Restrictions
8-11-22-4: Penalty
8-11-23: Rules And Regulations, Litter And Trash
8-11-24: Usage Of City Of Canton's Boat Dock And Dock Slips
8-11-25: Rules And Regulations, Dock And Boat Slips
8-11-26 through 8-11-29: Reserved
8-11-30: Enforcement
8-11-31: Penalty
8-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
INTAKE: The place where the water supply for the City is taken from the
reservoir.
LAKE PATROL OFFICER: Any persons authorized by the Canton City Council to
primarily enforce the rules and regulations related to the use and enjoyment of
City lakes and campgrounds.
RESERVOIR, LAKE, LAKE CANTON OR CANTON LAKE: The artificial lake and water
impounded therein by means of the water supply dam heretofore constructed by
the City of Canton in Canton and Orion Townships, Fulton County, Illinois.
(Ord. 2025, 1-4-2011)
8-11-2: BOATING, LICENSE REQUIRED:
   (A)   The Canton City Council hereby establishes that all persons operating
boats or watercraft on Lake Canton shall first pay fees and obtain licenses as
follows:
 
Boat Motor Horse Power (HP)                  City Resident Nonresident Daily
0 (including electric motors less than 1 HP) $10.00        $15.00      $5.00
Under 20                                     $25.00        $30.00      $8.00
20 - 39                                      $50.00        $70.00      $13.00
40 - 90                                      $75.00        $90.00      $18.00
91 - 149                                     $100.00       $120.00     $20.00
150+                                         $125.00       $150.00     $25.00
 
   All of the foregoing licenses are annual licenses running from April 1
through March 31 of the calendar year, excepting only the daily licenses as
above set forth. The daily license rates apply equally to city residents and
nonresidents. The daily license is valid for not more than twenty-four (24)
consecutive hours from the time of its issuance.
   (B)   Limitations On Licenses:
      1.   No license shall be issued for any boat or watercraft temporarily or
permanently equipped with multiple engines, inboard/outboard (sterndrive)
engines, or V-drive engines/propulsion systems.
      2.   No license shall be issued for any boat or watercraft equipped with
sleeping facilities.
      3.   All licenses shall be obtained by making application with the
cashier of the Water and Sewer Department at the City Building, 2 North Main
Street, Canton, Illinois, or by making application with others authorized by
the city council and each person applying for a license, as aforesaid, shall
present evidence to show that the boat or craft is properly registered with the
state, if required.
      4.   All owners and operators of boats and watercraft operated on Lake
Canton shall carry liability and property damage insurance on each such boat or
craft.
      5.   For purposes of this section, “city resident” is defined as all
persons whose principal residence is within the corporate limits of the city;
or, who own lake lot leases and who are current on lease payments and who are
otherwise in full compliance with their lease provisions. The address as set
forth on the applicant's driver's license shall be prima facie proof of
residence.
      6.   Citizens of the age of sixty-five (65) or over will receive a twenty
five percent (25%) discount of the boat license fees set forth in Section (A).
      7.   Bass clubs will receive a fifty percent (50%) discount of the daily
rate license fees, set forth in Section (A), for the duration of the bass
tournaments. (Ord. 2025, 1-4-2011; amd. Ord. 4191, 4-21-2020)
8-11-3: COMMITTEE ON LAKE, BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS:
   (A)   The committee on lake, buildings and grounds shall see that the public
buildings, when necessary, are properly insured, maintained in a proper state
and condition of repair and shall report to the city council such improvements
as they may deem necessary.
   (B)   The committee on lake, buildings and grounds shall have jurisdiction
of all recreational and development activities on Lake Canton and the land
owned by the city surrounding said lake. Said committee shall have the right to
make reasonable rules and regulations regarding such activities which shall
have the same effect as ordinances duly enacted by the city council. (Ord.
2025, 1-4-2011)
8-11-4: GUARDIAN OF LAKE CANTON:
   (A)   Office Created: There is hereby created the office of guardian of Lake
Canton who shall be appointed by the mayor by and with the advice and consent
of the council. Before entering upon the duties of his office, he shall take
the oath prescribed by law for city officers and execute a bond to the city in
the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) with such sureties as the
council shall approve for the faithful performance of the duties of his office.
   (B)   Salary: The guardian of Lake Canton shall receive a monthly salary of
two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each of the months of April through September
(inclusively) for each year.
   (C)   Duties: The guardian of Lake Canton shall patrol Lake Canton to see
that the provisions of this code and the rules and regulations pertaining to
Lake Canton are observed and perform such other duties as the lake development
committee or the council may require. (Ord. 2025, 1-4-2011)
8-11-5: FEES HELD IN SPECIAL FUND:
Boat license fees, camping fees and lot rental fees shall be held in special
fund and made available for such legitimate expenditures as may be subject,
however, to the approval of the council. (Ord. 2025, 1-4-2011)
8-11-6: RULES AND REGULATIONS, BOATING:
The following rules and regulations governing boating on Lake Canton be, and
the same are hereby adopted by the city council, and said rules and regulations
shall have the same force and effect as ordinances validly enacted:
   (A)   Rules And Regulations Governing Boating On Lake Canton:
      1.   All boats or watercraft shall be licensed as required by the
provisions of this code now in force or hereafter enacted.
      2.   Except for persons leasing lots on Lake Canton all boats or
watercraft shall be loaded and unloaded from the ramp or dock provided by the
city at the entrance of the lake. Loading and unloading at other places around
the lake are prohibited.
      3.   No boat or watercraft shall operate at a speed in excess of thirty
(30) miles an hour.
      4.   No boat or watercraft shall operate in an unsafe or careless manner.
      5.   Boats and watercraft shall operate around the lake in a
counterclockwise direction.
      6.   No boat or watercraft shall operate within fifty feet (50') of any
person who is fishing.
      7.   Boats or watercraft pulling skiers must travel in a counterclockwise
direction and shall not crisscross or circle the lane of traffic and shall keep
clear of the docks, starting points and beaches at all times.
      8.   No boats or watercraft shall be parked on or near the dock or ramp
except for the loading or unloading or exchanging of passengers.
      9.   No boats or watercraft shall be operated within that area near the
intake or spillway and which is so marked with markers.
      10.   No vehicles shall be parked on the point of the boat loading area
or in any other area where there are "no parking" signs.
      11.   All boats or watercraft shall be equipped with such safety devices
as required by the provisions of this code or the statutes of the state.
      12.   All boats or watercraft operated between sunset and sunrise shall
be equipped with lights that can be clearly observed from any quarter by an
approaching boat and that meet all provisions of the state statute. A "no wake"
period is in effect between sunset and sunrise for all boats and watercraft.
      13.   Skiers must wear a lifesaving device. Ski starts shall be from a
designated area. Boats pulling skiers shall have two (2) occupants, one to
drive and the other to watch the skier and ski rope. Ski ropes shall be pulled
into the boat after a skier has fallen. Skiers shall not be dropped off within
two hundred feet (200') of a ramp or gas dock. Operators of boats pulling
skiers shall be responsible for occupants and safety equipment. No skier shall
swim to shore from the drop off point except where necessary to save his life.
      14.   All sailboats over twelve feet (12') in length shall be registered
in compliance with the statutes of the state of Illinois.
      15.   All watercraft shall carry approved coast guard lifesaving devices
for each person on said craft, and an approved lifesaving device shall be on
board of each watercraft for each waterskier being towed by said watercraft.
      16.   All motorboats which use fuel having a flashpoint of one hundred
ten degrees Fahrenheit (110°F) or less shall have at least two (2) ventilator
ducts, fitted with cowls or their equivalent for the efficient removal of
explosive or inflammable gases from the bilges of every engine and fuel tank
compartment. There shall be at least one exhaust duct installed so as to extend
from the open atmosphere to the lower portion of the bilge and at least one
intake duct installed, so as to extend to a point at least midway to the bilge
or at least below the level of the carburetor air intake. The cowl shall be
located and trimmed for maximum effectiveness and in such a manner as to
prevent displaced fumes from being recirculated.
      17.   No persons under the age of ten (10) may operate any motorized
vessel, including watercraft. Persons at least ten (10) but less than twelve
(12) may operate a motorized vessel, including personal watercraft only if they
are accompanied by and under direct supervision of a parent, guardian or person
at least eighteen (18) who is designated by the parent or guardian. Persons at
least twelve (12) but less than eighteen (18) may operate a motorized vessel,
including personal watercraft, only if: they complete a boating safety course
and possess a boating safety education card accepted by the department of
natural resources or they are accompanied by and under direct control of a
parent, guardian or person at least eighteen (18) who is designated by the
parent or guardian. Persons eighteen (18) years old and older are not subject
to operator age restrictions. (Ord. 2025, 1-4-2011)
8-11-7: RULES AND REGULATIONS, BATHING:
No person shall enter Lake Canton for the purposes of bathing, swimming or
wading except in such areas hereinbefore or hereinafter specified by the city
council.
The following rules and regulations governing swimming and the beach area at
Lake Canton be, and the same are hereby adopted by the city council of the city
of Canton, and said rules and regulations shall have the same force and effect
as ordinances validly enacted:
   (A)   Rules And Regulations Governing Swimming At Lake Canton:
      1.   Swimming shall be between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M.
and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., and only when a lifeguard is present.
      2.   Alcoholic liquors are prohibited on the beach.
      3.   No vehicles shall be parked on the roadways leading to the beach.
      4.   Profane language on the beach is prohibited.
      5.   All garbage and trash shall be placed in suitable containers and
there shall be no littering of the beach with trash or refuse.
      6.   Sand fights and other misconduct are prohibited on the beach.
      7.   No pets shall be allowed on the beach.
      8.   Nonswimmers shall not go into the water above their shoulders.
      9.   No smoking shall be allowed in the water.
      10.   No bottles or other glass containers shall be permitted on the
beach.
      11.   Picnicking on the beach is prohibited.
      12.   Orders given by the lifeguard shall be obeyed.
Any person who shall violate this section or any provision thereof shall be
ordered from the beach by the lifeguard or any other authorized person and
shall forfeit his privileges on said beach for the remainder of the day and if
said person fails to leave said beach as ordered he shall be subject to a fine
of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00). (Ord. 651, 5-16-1978)
8-11-7-5: RULES AND REGULATIONS, PUBLIC CAMPGROUNDS:
   (A)   Lake Canton Campground Rules:
      1.   Camping shall be in designated areas only.
      2.   Effective June 1, 2018, camping fees, payable in advance, shall be:
         (a)   (1)   For residents of the City of Canton:
 
           Tent With Camping With Camping With    Camping With Camping With
Tent Daily Electric  Electric     Electric Weekly Electric     Electric Season
                                                  Monthly
$10.00     $12.00    $14.00       $95.00          $300.00      $1,620.00
 
            (2)   For nonresidents:
 
           Tent With Camping With Camping With    Camping With Camping With
Tent Daily Electric  Electric     Electric Weekly Electric     Electric Season
                                                  Monthly
$11.00     $13.00    $15.00       $100.00         $335.00      $1,800.00
 
For purposes of this subsection, "resident" is defined as all persons whose
principal residence is within the corporate limits of the City of Canton; or,
who have lake lot leases and who are current on lease payments and otherwise
are fully in compliance with their lease provisions. The address as set forth
on the applicant's driver's license shall be prima facie proof of residence.
      3.   Checkout time is one o'clock (1:00) P.M.
      4.   All trailers must be a minimum of twenty five feet (25') apart.
      5.   No loud, disturbing or excess noise is permitted between ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
      6.   Overnight guests must adhere to all rules; campground closes at
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. for guests.
      7.   No outside refrigerators are permitted.
      8.   All pets must be confined on a leash. No doghouses are permitted.
      9.   All boats or watercraft operated between sunset and sunrise shall be
equipped with lights that can be clearly observed from any quarter by an
approaching boat and that meet all provisions of the State Statute. A "no wake"
period is in effect between sunset and sunrise for all boats and watercraft.
      10.   All boats shall be launched and retrieved at the boat dock only.
      11.   No rubber rafts shall be launched or retrieved at the campground
area or at the beach area.
      12.   No swimming is permitted except as otherwise provided in this Code.
      13.   All persons are to stay out of boats tied up at the campground
area.
      14.   Children are to be supervised on the dock.
      15.   All fish heads, entrails and other refuse and garbage shall be
rolled in paper, placed in a double plastic bag, sealed and then deposited in a
designated trash barrel, or dumpster.
      16.   Fishing shall be by pole and line only. No trotlines are permitted.
      17.   No public picnics are allowed in campgrounds, campers only.
      18.   No fireworks are allowed in camping areas; anyone doing so will be
asked to vacate immediately.
      19.   Campsites are limited to one picnic table per site.
      20.   There will be a twenty five dollar ($25.00) check charge for any
returned checks, and camper will be required to pay in cash thereafter.
Any person who shall violate this section or any provision thereof shall be
ordered from the campground and shall forfeit his campground privileges for the
remainder of the permit period, without refund of the camping fee. If any such
person fails or refuses to leave the campground, he shall be subject to a fine
of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each such failure or refusal. (Ord. 4108, 5-15-2018)
8-11-7-6: ZEBRA MUSSEL POLICY:
   (A)   Anyone who in the past seven (7) days has had their boat in the
Illinois River or any other waters other than Canton Lake, must, before
launching in the lake, wash their boat and trailer with a high pressure washer
and visually inspect the underside of both for zebra mussels. Live wells and
bilge areas must also be inspected.
   (B)   Failure to comply with this policy for zebra mussels will result in a
fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each and every incident and the
current boat sticker will be revoked for the remainder of the year. (Ord. 1384,
2-2-1993)
8-11-8: ERECT BUOYS:
The Water and Sewer Committee of the Council of the City shall have the right
to erect and maintain a system of buoys across the lake in such places as they
shall determine, from time to time, are necessary to properly control the
traffic on said lake and for those who use water from the lake. Such system of
marking off divisions of said lake shall be as follows:
   (A)   A string of buoys shall be strung across the lake, more or less
parallel to the dam, at the lower part of the lake, at such a distance up the
lake as the committee thinks best. In this portion of said lake, which shall be
known as Zone A, no boats shall be permitted to operate at any time.
   (B)   A second string of buoys shall be strung across the lake northeast of
the point known as Claudon's Point to a point known as Fireman's Point. Between
this set of buoys and the first string of buoys aforementioned, strung near the
dam, shall be known as Zone B.
   (C)   All boats operating in Zone B shall operate with closed throttles with
a speed not to exceed five (5) miles per hour.
   (D)   The portion of the lake above the string of buoys extending from a
point northeast of Claudon's Point to Fireman's Point, as aforesaid, shall be
and is hereby set apart for water skiing and large motors. This portion of the
lake shall be known as Zone C. (Ord. 56, 4-17-1962)
8-11-9: CLOSE ROADS NEAR LAKE:
The roads adjoining the lake, commonly referred to as the "inlet" and "outlet"
road, gate entrance to Zink Farm will be closed seasonally from November 15 to
March 1 of each year. The gates may be closed at other times under the
direction of the Public Works Director, if necessary for public safety. (Ord.
2032, 5-3-2011)
8-11-10: NO TRESPASSING NEAR LAKE:
No person shall enter any area marked with no trespassing signs, including, but
not limited to, that area south of the spillway for Lake Canton and north of
the public highway running east and west south of Lake Canton; the dam, fields
where biosolids have been applied and the Kilroy lift station.
No person shall move, mark, deface or destroy any sign placed on or around Lake
Canton.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be
subject to a fine not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 2032, 5-3-2011)
8-11-11: SKATING, COASTING ON ICE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to skate, slide, coast or otherwise play
upon the ice of said lake, or attempt to use the ice for any purpose
whatsoever, except on that part of the lake described as follows:
All of that part of the northeastern part of said Lake Canton lying east and
north of a straight line drawn from a point on the west side of Youth Acres
property and the most distant point south on said property, thence running
northeasterly to a point on the tip of the projection of land extending out
into the said lake, on the west and south side of Beecham's Bay;
which ice on said waters may be used for purposes herein set forth, at such
times as the ice is of sufficient thickness to support people on said ice.
Any person convicted of any violation of this section shall be fined not less
than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord.
98, 1-7-1964)
8-11-12: FISHING:
Any person fishing in Lake Canton shall use a pole and line only, and any
person who shall fish in said lake by any other method or any other manner
shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 251, 5-21-1968)
8-11-13: HOUSEBOATS PROHIBITED:
No boat or craft commonly known as a houseboat or craft on which the occupants
have sleeping accommodations shall be permitted on the lake. (1959 Code § 44-3-
6)
8-11-14: SANITARY PROVISIONS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to introduce into the body of
water known as Canton Lake or any watercourse that flows, directly or
indirectly, into said lake any of the following materials:
      1.   Sewage, treated or untreated;
      2.   Discharge from any privy, cesspool, septic tank or septic field;
      3.   Industrial waste;
      4.   Garbage, manure or putrescible material;
      5.   Human excrement or urine;
      6.   Poisonous substances;
      7.   Dirt, clay, rocks or other solid material;
      8.   Herbicide, pesticide or other chemicals;
      9.   Lawn waste including leaves;
      10.   Paint or paint remover;
      11.   Any substance that may render the water harmful to humans;
      12.   Any substance that may render the water harmful to animals.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to deposit any of the substances listed in
subsection (A) of this section where such materials may be washed into the lake
or a watercourse flowing directly or indirectly into said lake. (Ord. 1385, 2-
2-1993)
8-11-15: NOISES PROHIBITED:
No boat or craft shall be used, or operated, nor any horn, or sound device
sounded as to create a nuisance or disturb the peace or quiet of any
neighborhood. (1959 Code § 44-3-8)
8-11-16: POWER TO REGULATE:
The city shall at all times have power and authority to prohibit, restrict or
otherwise limit or regulate the keeping, maintenance or operation of any or all
boats and craft on the waters of the lake should it become necessary to do so
in the interest of the public health or safety, or for the protection or
improvement of the lake or any other cause. (1959 Code § 44-3-9)
8-11-17: ABANDONED BOATS:
Any boat or craft found abandoned or adrift in the lake or any unlicensed boat
or craft thereon shall be taken up by the city and the city shall have a lien
thereon for all license fees therefor and the expenses of taking, towing,
keeping, advertising and selling of the same for all damages caused by such
craft to property of the city, and may enforce such lien by advertisement and
sale of such craft in like manner as chattel mortgages may be foreclosed under
the laws of this state. Nothing herein shall be construed as exonerating the
owner or operator of any boat or craft from personal liability to the city, or
any other person, for any damage or injury caused by such boat or craft. (1959
Code § 44-3-10)
8-11-18: LEASES:
The council, by ordinances, may lease any area surrounding Lake Canton, as
provided by the laws of the state. (1959 Code § 44-3-11)
8-11-19: SPRAYING OF WEEDS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1385, 2-2-1993)
8-11-20: OFF ROAD VEHICLES:
No vehicle, whether powered by an internal combustion engine or otherwise,
shall be operated upon or driven or placed on any real property owned by the
city at Lake Canton with the sole exceptions of property subject to a valid and
existing lease agreement and excepting roadways designed and maintained for the
public use. (Ord. 1255, 7-18-1989)
8-11-21: SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
   (A)   After January 15, 2000, all new construction on lands or lots
bordering Lake Canton may not proceed until the plans for sewage and water have
been submitted to and approved by the Fulton County health department.
   (B)   All private sewage disposal systems existing on January 15, 2000, on
lands and lots bordering or adjacent to Lake Canton shall be inspected by the
Fulton County health department pursuant to objective standards which consider
all pertinent factors. The health department shall determine if existing
systems may continue to be used or whether modification is needed.
   (C)   If the existing private sewage disposal systems are inadequate and a
private sewage disposal system absorption field or seepage bed cannot be
installed the replacement shall be by the only alternate system hereafter
permitted at Lake Canton, the class 1 aerobic treatment method, provided,
however, that no aerobic system discharge will be permitted within five hundred
feet (500') of the pumping area (intake).
   (D)   The Fulton County health department shall have the inherent power to
inspect, test and/or monitor any and all new and existing private sewage
disposal systems, aerobic or otherwise and to order modification to any system
if needed.
   (E)   In all instances the owner of the leasehold improvement is responsible
for the maintenance of any sewage system aerobic or otherwise. Maintenance of
an aerobic sewage disposal system must be provided on a continuous basis by a
manufacturer authorized service technician designated for the type of unit
being serviced. Maintenance of all other approved private sewage disposal
systems must be provided so as unhealthy or nuisance conditions do not occur.
   (F)   Hookups which would transmit kitchen waste from garbage disposal or
food grinder units into the aerobic treatment systems are prohibited. Such
kitchen waste shall be directed first into a solids retention tank that is
approved by the Fulton County health department. The solids retention tank
effluent may then be introduced to the aerobic treatment unit.
   (G)   There shall be no direct discharge of any type of sewage effluent into
Lake Canton. A minimum setback of ten feet (10') from the lake must be provided
from the discharge point to the shore of the lake at normal pool level. From
the point of discharge to the lake a gravel or stone surface drainage receiving
bed must be provided to eliminate nuisance conditions and to control soil
erosion.
   (H)   It shall be unlawful in any area surrounding or adjacent to Lake
Canton to allow effluent to collect or accumulate so as to be comparable to
standing water or create nuisance conditions.
   (I)   A procedure guide for aerobic treatment units shall be promulgated by
the Fulton County Health Department including minimum sizes for solids
retention tanks and for chlorination retention tanks. Such procedures shall
have the same force and effect as if set forth fully in this section. (Ord.
1648, 12-21-1999)
8-11-22: RULES AND REGULATIONS, ROADWAYS AND PARKING:
8-11-22-1: NO PARKING PLACES:
It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand at any time anywhere other
than the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the directions of a policeman or traffic control
device:
   (A)   Campground;
   (B)   Designated parking areas;
   (C)   Sites marked with "Roadside Parking" signs. (Ord. 2032, 5-3-2011)
8-11-22-2: NO OVERNIGHT PARKING:
Except for vehicles registered to a licensed user of the campground, no
overnight parking shall occur between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.,
and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. 2032, 5-3-2011)
8-11-22-3: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle on any City owned street at
Canton Lake, at a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour. Appropriate
signs shall be posted showing such speed limits.
The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed the applicable maximum
speed limit does not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed when
approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching and going around a
curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding
roadway or when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other
traffic by reason of weather or highway conditions; and speed shall be
decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle on
or entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of
all persons to use due care. (Ord. 2032, 5-3-2011)
8-11-22-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this section
8-11-22 shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) or more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. (Ord. 2032, 5-3-2011)
8-11-23: RULES AND REGULATIONS, LITTER AND TRASH:
It shall be illegal for any individual to dump, abandon, deposit, dismantle or
burn upon any public property or right-of-way, highway, park, street, parkway
or waters of the City, any trash, litter, garbage, ashes, junk, junk or wrecked
motor vehicles or parts thereof, or miscellaneous waste. (Ord. 2032, 5-3-2011)
8-11-24: USAGE OF CITY OF CANTON'S BOAT DOCK AND DOCK SLIPS:
The Canton City Council hereby establishes that only those persons who shall
first pay the fees described herein and possessing a valid license may use or
have contact with the boat dock and corresponding slips. The fees for said
usage shall be as follows:
 
Dock Usage Time Period Fees
Yearly license         $800.00 per year
Monthly license        200.00 per month
Weekly license         75.00 per week
Daily license          15.00 per day
 
All of the foregoing licenses are on a first come first serve basis and are
issued annually running from April 1 through March 31 of the calendar year,
excepting only the daily licenses as above set forth. The daily license rates
apply equally to City residents and nonresidents. The daily license is valid
for not more than twenty four (24) consecutive hours from the time of its
issuance. Additionally, certain licenses, including that of monthly, weekly
and/or daily licenses may or may not be available for purchase and use as there
are twelve (12) boat slips total available through the installed dock. The City
cannot guarantee availability depending on the sales of the yearly licenses
issued on a yearly basis. The license detailed herein shall be in addition to
the license as required by section
8-11-2 of this chapter. The licenses issued herein may be revoked at any time
for any reason deemed appropriate by the City of Canton.
   (A)   Limitations On Licenses:
      1.   Licenses issued and those using same for use of the dock and boat
slips shall follow all rules as seen in sections
8-11-2,
8-11-6,
8-11-7,
8-11-7-5 of this chapter and all other applicable rules and regulations
applicable to Canton Lake.
      2.   All licenses shall be obtained by making application with the
cashier of the Water and Sewer Department at the City building, 2 North Main
Street, Canton, Illinois, or by making application with others authorized by
the City Council and each person applying for a license, as aforesaid, shall
present evidence to show that the boat or water craft is properly registered
with the State, if required.
      3.   All owners and operators of boats and water craft operated on Lake
Canton shall carry liability and property damage insurance on each such boat or
water craft and on any personal property associated with said boat or water
craft.
      4.   As part of purchasing and being issued a license, all licensees
(those issued a license or those operating a boat or water craft under issuance
of a license) individually, for itself, its heirs, administrators, executors,
agents, does hereby agree that it will indemnify, defend and hold City of
Canton, its agents, servants, employees, shareholders, directors, officers and
attorneys harmless of and from any claims, demands, controversies, actions,
rights of action, personal injury, property damage, including, but not limited
to, damage or injury to persons or property relative to use of the dock and/or
boat slips and any boat or water craft utilized or coming into contact with the
City's dock or boat slips and personal property with same, attorney's fees,
expert witness fees, court costs and/or reasonable litigation expenses arising
out of or in consequence of the use of the license described herein or personal
injury or property damage involving the dock, its slips or any boat or water
craft and related personal property and waive any and all actions, whether
legal, equitable or administrative brought, provoked, procured, caused or
commenced, directly or indirectly by licensee, its agents, personal
representatives, spouse, children, any Federal agency and/or entity, and any
State agency and/or entity against City, its agents, servants, employees,
shareholders, directors, officers and attorneys. (Ord. 4137, 4-16-2019)
8-11-25: RULES AND REGULATIONS, DOCK AND BOAT SLIPS:
The following rules and regulations governing usage of the Canton Lake dock and
boat slips, and the same are hereby adopted by the City Council, and said rules
and regulations shall have the same force and effect as ordinances validly
enacted:
   (A)   Rules And Regulations Governing Dock And Boat Slips On Lake Canton:
      1.   There shall be no swimming or fishing within the vicinity of the
dock or boat slips.
      2.   There shall be no sleeping on the boat or water craft affiliated
with the dock and boat slips and there shall be no sleeping on the dock.
      3.   There shall be no camping on the dock.
      4.   No one on or near the dock and boat slips shall act in an unsafe or
careless manner.
      5.   No one shall erect a tent or other structure on the dock or near the
dock.
      6.   No one who is not an owner or authorized user via an issued license
shall be allowed on the dock or near the boat slips. (Ord. 4137, 4-16-2019)
8-11-26 through 8-11-29: RESERVED:
8-11-30: ENFORCEMENT:
The lake patrol officer shall have the power to issue citations, notices to
appear, sign complaints and do all other acts and deeds reasonably necessary to
effectuate the requirements of this chapter. Appointment of a person or persons
as lake patrol officer does not deny to any Canton police officer the power to
enforce this chapter. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by a
lake patrol officer or any other law enforcement official having proper
jurisdiction. (Ord. 1791, 3-2-2004)
8-11-31: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 1255, 7-18-1989)
CHAPTER 12
PARKS
SECTION:
8-12-1: General Care Of Parks
8-12-2: Park Custodian
8-12-3: Park Names
8-12-4: Regulations Of Parks
8-12-5: Depredations
8-12-6: Billposting
8-12-7: Keep Off Grass
8-12-8: Penalty
8-12-1: GENERAL CARE OF PARKS:
The committee on public grounds and buildings shall have general charge and
supervision of all public parks, and shall look after the preservation, repair
and improvement of the same. (Ord. 1984, 7-21-2009)
8-12-2: PARK CUSTODIAN:
   (A)   Office Created: There is hereby created the office of park custodian,
who shall be appointed by the mayor by and with the advice and consent of the
council at the first meeting of the council in May of each year, and shall hold
his office for the term of one year and until his successor is appointed and
qualified.
   (B)   Oath, Bond: Before entering upon the duties of his office he shall
take and subscribe the oath required by law for city officers, and file a bond
in the penal sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) with sureties to be approved
by the council, conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of his
office.
   (C)   Duties: It shall be the duty of the park custodian to take charge and
care of Jones park, to see that it is kept clean and in good order, that the
grass is cut at such times as may be necessary, that the leaves and rubbish are
kept well raked up and disposed of, and all buildings, fixtures, trees, shrubs,
railings, fountains and other property therein are properly cleaned, kept and
cared for. He shall have the powers of a policeman, and shall see that the
provisions of this chapter relating to parks are properly enforced. (Ord. 1984,
7-21-2009)
8-12-3: PARK NAMES:
The several public parks, squares and grounds in the city shall be known and
designated by the names applied thereto respectively on the map of the city or
that may be designated by ordinance. (Ord. 1984, 7-21-2009)
8-12-4: REGULATIONS OF PARKS:
   (A)   No person shall enter or leave any public park of the city except by
its proper entranceways.
   (B)   No person shall enter Jones park or remain therein from the hour of
nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. until six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. 1984, 7-21-2009)
8-12-5: DEPREDATIONS:
Neither cattle, horses, goats, swine, poultry or other animals shall be turned
or taken into any one of the said parks by any person. All persons are
forbidden to carry firearms, or to throw stones or other missiles within any
one of said parks, or to cut, break or in any way injure or deface the trees,
shrubs, plants, turf or any of the buildings, fountains or fixtures of said
parks. (Ord. 1984, 7-21-2009)
8-12-6: BILLPOSTING:
No person shall post or otherwise use or fix any bills, notice or other papers
upon any structure, tree, building or thing within either of said parks, nor
upon any enclosure thereof. (Ord. 1984, 7-21-2009)
8-12-7: KEEP OFF GRASS:
No person shall go upon the grass, lawn or turf of the parks of the city,
except when and where the word "common" is posted, indicating that persons are
at liberty at that time and place to go on the grass, unless it be upon
holidays and days of public gatherings in said parks, and not then if forbidden
so to do by the park custodian or any policeman. (Ord. 1984, 7-21-2009)
8-12-8: PENALTY:
Whoever shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or shall fail to
obey the lawful orders of the park custodian given in enforcement of the
provisions hereof, shall be subject to a penalty of not less than three dollars
($3.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. (Ord.
1984, 7-21-2009)
CHAPTER 13
PUBLIC COMFORT STATIONS
SECTION:
8-13-1: Establishment
8-13-2: Custodian
8-13-3: Use Of Restroom
8-13-4: Certain Acts Prohibited
8-13-5: Disposition Of Funds
8-13-6: Penalty
8-13-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby established in the city a public comfort station located at 21
South Main Street in the city. It shall be open to the public from the hours of
nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. until nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. on each and every day
of the week except on Saturday it shall remain open until eleven o'clock (11:
00) P.M. During the hours that the public comfort station shall remain open,
the toilet, lavatory and restroom facilities shall be available to the general
public. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 34, Sec. 1)
8-13-2: CUSTODIAN:
   (A)   Appointment: There is hereby created the office of custodian of the
public comfort station. Said custodian shall be appointed by the mayor by and
with the consent of the council for a term of one year and until his successor
has been duly appointed and qualified. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 34, Sec. 2)
   (B)   Duties: The custodian of the public comfort station shall have charge,
control and superintendence of the public comfort station, subject to the
orders and directions of the committee on public grounds and buildings of the
council. He shall preserve and keep in proper repair the building and prevent
destruction or defacement of the said building and the furnishings therein. The
custodian shall keep the toilets and washrooms in a clean condition and shall
wash the windows of said building and shall maintain the fires heating said
building. The custodian shall be an ex officio police officer of the city and
shall have the right to make an arrest for the violations of the provisions of
this code concerning public comfort stations, or otherwise, the same as any
other police officer of the city. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 34, Sec. 3)
8-13-3: USE OF RESTROOM:
The restroom of said public comfort station may be used by organizations for
charitable or public benefit purposes provided said organization obtains
consent of the committee on public grounds and buildings of the city. (R.O.
1959, Ch. 34, Sec. 4)
8-13-4: CERTAIN ACTS PROHIBITED:
No person shall be permitted in the public comfort station who is drunk or
disorderly and no person shall mark or otherwise deface the building or
furnishings of the public comfort station. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 34, Sec. 5)
8-13-5: DISPOSITION OF FUNDS:
All fines and penalties imposed by virtue of this chapter for a breach of the
same, shall at the end of every month, be paid over by the proper officer who
shall collect the same, to the city treasurer, for the use of the public
building and grounds fund, and shall form part of the revenue thereof. Any
revenue received as rent or otherwise on the building shall be paid into the
public grounds and building fund. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 34, Sec. 7)
8-13-6: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (R.O. 1959, Ch. 34, Sec. 6)
CHAPTER 14
PUBLIC LIBRARIES
SECTION:
8-14-1: Defacing Books
8-14-2: Injury To Buildings
8-14-3: Failure To Return Books
8-14-1: DEFACING BOOKS:
Any person who shall intentionally cut, tear, deface or injure, or who shall
write upon any book, newspaper, magazine, plate, engraving or other thing of
value belonging to the Parlin public library or any other public library within
the city, shall be fined in a sum not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 35, Sec.
1)
8-14-2: INJURY TO BUILDINGS:
Any person who shall commit any injury upon any building or buildings of the
Parlin public library or any other public library in the city, or upon the
grounds, furniture, fixtures or other property thereof, shall be fined in a sum
not less than three dollars ($3.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 35, Sec. 2)
8-14-3: FAILURE TO RETURN BOOKS:
Any person who shall fail to return any book, periodical or paper, or fail to
pay the penalty for injury to any book, periodical or paper belonging to the
Parlin public library or any public library of the city, according to the
requirements of the bylaws in force for the government of such library or
libraries, shall be fined a sum not less than three dollars ($3.00) nor more
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 35, Sec.
3)
CHAPTER 15
RAILROADS
SECTION:
8-15-1: Speed Of Trains
8-15-2: Obstructing Streets (Rep. by Ord. 1922, 3-4-2008)
8-15-3: Lights At Night
8-15-4: Loading, Unloading
8-15-5: Bells, Whistles
8-15-6: Steam, Escape
8-15-7: Shunting Of Cars
8-15-8: Flagmen At Crossings, Gates
8-15-9: Conform To Street Grades
8-15-10: Repair Crossings, Bridges
8-15-11: Penalty
8-15-1: SPEED OF TRAINS:
No railway company shall by itself, agent or employees, run any passenger train
upon or along any railroad track within the corporate limits of the city at a
greater rate of speed than fifteen (15) miles an hour, nor shall any such
corporation by itself, agent or employees, run any freight car or cars upon or
along any railroad track within the city at a greater rate of speed than
fifteen (15) miles per hour. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 37, Sec. 1)
8-15-2: OBSTRUCTING STREETS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1922, 3-4-2008)
8-15-3: LIGHTS AT NIGHT:
Any locomotive engine, railroad car or train of cars running in the nighttime
on any railroad track in the city shall have and keep, while so running, a
brilliant and conspicuous light on the forward end of such locomotive engine,
car or train of cars. If such engine or train be backing, it shall have a
conspicuous light on the rear car or engine, so as to show the direction such
car or train is moving. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 37, Sec. 4)
8-15-4: LOADING, UNLOADING:
No person owning or operating railroad cars shall be allowed to deposit or
place in the street, any lumber or other material, nor shall they load or
unload any car from the street, nor erect or maintain any switch house or other
building upon any street, highway or alley within the city. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 37,
Sec. 5)
8-15-5: BELLS, WHISTLES:
   (A)   Whistles, Use Limited: No railroad company shall cause or allow the
whistle of any locomotive engine to be sounded within the city, except
necessary brake signals, and such as may be absolutely necessary to prevent
injury to life or property. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 37, Sec. 6)
   (B)   Bells To Be Rung: The bell of each locomotive engine shall be rung
continually while said engine is running within the city. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 36,
Sec. 7)
8-15-6: STEAM, ESCAPE:
No person in charge of any locomotive engine shall cause or allow the cylinder
cock or cocks, safety valve, or other valve of any locomotive engine to be
opened so as to permit steam to escape therefrom at any time while running upon
or along any railroad track where the engine is within one hundred feet (100')
of any street railroad crossing or viaduct; provided, that when any such engine
shall be standing at any such place in the city, and for six (6) revolutions of
the driving wheels after being put in motion, the said cocks may be opened to
allow condensed steam to escape. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 37, Sec. 8)
8-15-7: SHUNTING OF CARS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or shunt any passenger or freight
cars across any public street or highway at the street grade without an engine
attached to such car or cars, except when a flagman is stationed at such public
street or highway. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 37, Sec. 10)
8-15-8: FLAGMEN AT CROSSINGS, GATES:
Whenever any railroad company shall, in pursuance of a resolution or order of
the council, be notified to keep a conspicuous light of any kind at any point
on its track, crossed or intercepted by any street or avenue of the city, or to
keep a watchman or flagman at any such point, for the protection of persons and
property against injury at such crossing, or to erect and maintain gates or
signal bells at any such crossing, it shall be the duty of such company or
corporation, at its own expense, to place and keep such light as required, or
to station and maintain such flagman, whose duty it shall be at all times to
signal and warn persons traveling in the direction of the railroad crossing
when there is danger from the approach of locomotive engines, or train, or to
erect and maintain such gate or signal bell.
Any such company or corporation failing or refusing to comply with any of the
requirements of this section, after being duly notified as aforesaid, in
writing, by the city engineer, superintendent of streets or the chief of
police, shall thereafter be liable to a fine of not less than twenty five
dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense;
and every day of such failure or refusal to comply shall be deemed a separate
offense. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 37, Sec. 11)
8-15-9: CONFORM TO STREET GRADES:
It shall be the duty of all railroad companies or corporations whose tracks now
run within, or may hereafter enter or pass through, the corporate limits of the
city, to raise or lower their respective railroad tracks to conform to any
grade which is or may be established by the council or city engineer, for any
street, avenue or alley, upon, along or through which said tracks may be laid
or run, and where such tracks run lengthwise with any street, avenue or alley,
to keep the same on a level with the street or alley surface, so that they may
be conveniently crossed at any place on such street or alley, and to make and
keep open and in repair suitable ditches, drains, sewers and culverts along and
under their respective railroad tracks, so that the natural drainage of the
adjacent property shall not be impeded, and to construct and keep in repair
suitable and convenient crossings at the intersections of their said tracks
with any street, avenue or alley in the city, and to so construct and lay down
their said tracks and crossings as to interfere as little as possible with
ordinary travel over or upon the streets, avenues or alleys occupied or used by
them. Any such railroad company or corporation failing, neglecting or refusing
to comply with any of the above requirements of this section, within thirty
(30) days after written notice to do so, given by the superintendent of streets
or city engineer, shall hereafter be subject to a fine of not less than twenty
five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each day
it shall continue to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with said notice. (R.O.
1959, Ch. 37, Sec. 12)
8-15-10: REPAIR CROSSINGS, BRIDGES:
   (A)   Repair Of Street Crossings And Bridges: Whenever any street crossing,
culvert or bridge, shall be needed upon the line of any railroad within the
city, or shall need to be altered or repaired, and the same shall have been
ordered by the council, it shall be the duty of the superintendent of streets
to give to the railroad company notice, in writing, of the work to be done and
the place where required, and every railroad company or corporation neglecting
or refusing to construct, alter or repair any such crossing, culvert or bridge,
within thirty (30) days after the service of such notice, shall thereafter be
subject to a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than fifty
dollars ($50.00) for each and every day of such neglect or refusal; provided,
that private switch tracks shall be kept up and maintained by the owners
thereof. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 37, Sec. 13)
   (B)   City May Repair At Expense Of Railroad Company, When: In the event of
any railroad company or corporation failing or refusing to construct, alter or
repair any crossing, culvert or bridge along the line of their railroad, when
duly notified to do so as provided in the preceding subsection, the council may
order such crossing, culvert or bridge to be constructed, altered or repaired
at the expense of the city, and such company or corporation shall thereupon be
liable to the city, in an action at law, for the cost and expense thereof, in
addition to the penalty imposed in the preceding subsection. And when any
street, avenue or alley in the city, upon, along or through which any railroad
track now is or may be hereafter laid, operated or used, shall be ordered
paved, by ordinance of the council, it shall be the duty of every such railroad
company or corporation to pave all that portion of said street or alley
included in the space between the rails of its track or tracks and for one foot
(1') on the outer edge of said rails in the same manner as the remaining
portion thereof is paved, or in such other manner and with such other materials
as shall be by ordinance required, and in case of default on the part of any
such company or corporation to comply with the above requirements hereof, the
council of the city may cause such railroad track or tracks to be taken up, and
said pavement to be laid pursuant to ordinance, and every railroad company or
corporation shall be liable to the city for the cost and expense of paving said
portion or portions of such street, avenue or alley aforesaid, together with
lawful interest thereon from the time of completion of the work, and upon the
failure or refusal of such railroad company or corporation to pay such costs or
assessment, and interest, the same may be recovered of such company or
corporation by suit, in the name of the city, before any court of competent
jurisdiction. (R.O. 1959, Ch. 37, Sec. 14)
8-15-11: PENALTY:
Any person or corporation owning or operating any railroad within the city who
shall, by himself or by or through any of its agents, servants or employees, or
any other person, violate or fail to observe any of the foregoing provisions of
this chapter, where no specific penalty is provided, shall for each violation
or failure to observe the same, be fined not less than twenty five dollars
($25.00) nor exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00). (R.O. 1959, Ch. 37, Sec.
15)
CHAPTER 16
STRIP MINING
(Rep. by Ord. 1866, 5-2-2006)
CHAPTER 17
EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCIES
SECTION:
8-17-1: Establishment
8-17-2: Coordinator
8-17-3: Functions
8-17-4: Service As Mobile Support Team
8-17-5: Agreements With Other Political Subdivisions
8-17-6: Emergency Action
8-17-7: Compensation
8-17-8: Reimbursement By State
8-17-9: Purchases And Expenditures
8-17-10: Oath
8-17-11: Office
8-17-12: Appropriation; Levy Of Taxes
8-17-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created the city of Canton, Illinois, emergency services and
disaster agencies (ESDA) to prevent, minimize, repair, and alleviate injury or
damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other
hostile action, or from natural or manmade disaster, in accordance with the
Illinois emergency services and disaster act of 1975.
This ESDA shall consist of the coordinator and such additional members as may
be selected by the coordinator. (Ord. 527, 1-20-1976)
8-17-2: COORDINATOR:
The coordinator of the city ESDA shall be appointed by the mayor and shall
serve until removed by same.
The coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration, training, and operation of the ESDA, subject to the direction
and control of the mayor as provided by statute.
In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve as the
coordinator, the mayor or any person designated by him, shall be and act as
coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided in this chapter. (Ord.
527, 1-20-1976)
8-17-3: FUNCTIONS:
The city ESDA shall perform such ESDA functions within the city as shall be
prescribed in and by the state ESDA plan and program prepared by the governor,
and such orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the governor,
and in addition shall perform such duties outside the corporate limits as may
be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other political
subdivision, municipality, or quasi-municipality entered into as provided by
the state ESDA act of 1975. (Ord. 527, 1-20-1976)
8-17-4: SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM:
All or any members of the city ESDA organization may be designated as members
of a mobile support team created by the director of the state ESDA as provided
by law.
The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated by the coordinator
of the city ESDA organization.
Any member of a mobile support team who is a city employee or officer while
serving on call to duty by the governor, or the state director, shall receive
the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights, and immunities incident
to such employment or office. Any such member who is not a paid officer or
employee of the city, while so serving, shall receive from the state reasonable
compensation as provided by law. (Ord. 527, 1-20-1976)
8-17-5: AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS:
The coordinator of ESDA may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other cities
or political subdivisions of the state, but no such agreement shall be
effective until it has been approved by the mayor and by the state director of
ESDA. (Ord. 527, 1-20-1976)
8-17-6: EMERGENCY ACTION:
If the governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of
actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the state
of Illinois of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile
action, or from manmade or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the city
ESDA to cooperate fully with the state ESDA and with the governor in the
exercise of emergency powers as provided by law. (Ord. 527, 1-20-1976)
8-17-7: COMPENSATION:
Members of the ESDA who are paid employees or officers of the city, if called
for training by the state director of ESDA, shall receive for the time spent in
such training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position held; members
who are not such city employees or officers shall receive for such training
time such compensation as may be established by the mayor. (Ord. 527, 1-20-
1976)
8-17-8: REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE:
The state treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund, any
reimbursement by the state to the city for expenses incident to training
members of the ESDA as prescribed by the state director of ESDA, compensation
for services and expenses of members of a mobile support team while serving
outside the city in response to a call by the governor or state director of
ESDA, as provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by the state
incident to ESDA activities as provided by law. (Ord. 527, 1-20-1976)
8-17-9: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
The mayor may, on recommendation of the city coordinator of ESDA, authorize any
purchase of contracts necessary to place the city in a position to combat
effectively any disaster resulting from the explosion of any nuclear or other
bomb or missile, and to protect the public health and safety, protect property,
and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of such disaster, or
from manmade or natural disaster.
In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the city coordinator of ESDA is
authorized, on behalf of the city, to procure such services, supplies,
equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view of the
exigency without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities normally
prescribed by law pertaining to city contracts or obligations, as authorized by
the state ESDA act of 1975, provided that if the mayor meets at such time he
shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by that body.
(Ord. 527, 1-20-1976)
8-17-10: OATH:
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the city ESDA organization
shall, before entering upon his duties, subscribe to the following oath, which
shall be filed with coordinator:
I,                     , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and
defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United
States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory,
institutions, and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all
enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any
mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully
discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or
affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I, nor have I been a member of any
political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government
of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and that during
such time as I am affiliated with the City of Canton, Illinois ESDA
organization, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or
organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United
States or of this State by force or violence.
(Ord. 527, 1-20-1976)
8-17-11: OFFICE:
The mayor is authorized to designate space in a city building, or elsewhere, as
may be provided for by the mayor for the city ESDA as its office. (Ord. 527, 1-
20-1976)
8-17-12: APPROPRIATION; LEVY OF TAXES:
The mayor may make an appropriation for ESDA purposes only, a tax not to exceed
five cents ($0.05) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value of
all taxable property in addition to all other taxes, as provided by the state
ESDA act of 1975; however, that amount collectible under such levy shall in no
event exceed twenty five cents ($0.25) per capita. (Ord. 527, 1-20-1976)
CHAPTER 18
RESERVED
(Ord. 3059, 5-6-2014)
CHAPTER 19
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SEWERS
SECTION:
Article I. Use Of Public Sewers Required
8-19-1: Unlawful To Deposit Waste
8-19-2: Unlawful Discharge To Natural Outlets
8-19-3: Privies, Septic Tanks, And Cesspools Unlawful
8-19-4: Suitable Toilet Facilities Required
Article II. Private Sewage Disposal
8-19-5: Private Sewage Disposal System
8-19-6: Permit For Private Disposal System
8-19-7: Inspection Of Private Disposal System
8-19-8: Private Disposal System Type, Capacity And Location
8-19-9: Availability Of Public Sewer
8-19-10: Maintenance To Be In A Sanitary Manner
8-19-11: Provisions Not To Conflict With Additional Requirements
8-19-12: Connection To Public Sewer When Available
Article III. Building Sewers And Connections
8-19-13: Connection Permit Required
8-19-14: Disposal Compliance With Federal Standards
8-19-15: Classes Of Building Sewer Permits; Fee
8-19-16: Downstream Facilities Capacity
8-19-17: Costs Of Installation And Connection Borne By Owner
8-19-18: Separate Sewer To Be Provided
8-19-19: Use Of Old Building Sewers
8-19-20: Construction Standards
8-19-21: Basement Floor Elevation
8-19-22: Roof Downspouts And Other Connections Not Permitted
8-19-23: Conformance To Building And Plumbing Codes
8-19-24: Inspection And Connection Notification
8-19-25: Barricades And Lights During Excavation
8-19-26: Plumbing Fixture Connections To Public Sewer
8-19-27: Sewer Pipe Specifications
Article IV. Use Of The Public Sewers
8-19-28: Ground Water Drainage
8-19-29: Discharges To Sewers, Approval By Wastewater Treatment Superintendent
8-19-30: Unlawful Discharges To Public Sewer
8-19-31: Unlawful Discharge Of Harmful Wastes
8-19-32: Superintendent's Action Regarding Unlawful Discharges
8-19-33: Grease, Oil And Sand Interceptors
8-19-34: Preliminary Treatment Or Flow Equalizing Facilities
8-19-35: Control Manhole Required
8-19-36: Industrial Waste Tests And Analyses
8-19-37: Sampling Tests; Effect Of Constituents On Sewage Works
8-19-38: Special Agreement Between City And Industrial User
Article V. Protection Of Sewage Works From Damage
8-19-39: Disorderly Conduct; Destruction Of Sewage Works Property
Article VI. Powers And Authority Of Inspectors
8-19-40: Right Of Entry To Inspect Premises
8-19-41: City To Indemnify User Of Liability During Inspections
8-19-42: Entry Of Private Property; City Easements
Article VII. Penalties
8-19-43: Notice Of Violation
8-19-44: Penalty
8-19-45: Liability To City For Damages
Article VIII. Validity
8-19-46: Repealer
8-19-47: Severability
ARTICLE I. USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED
8-19-1: UNLAWFUL TO DEPOSIT WASTE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. (Ord. 1268, 12-5-1989)
8-19-2: UNLAWFUL DISCHARGE TO NATURAL OUTLETS:
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in
any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted
waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
subsequent provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1268, 12-5-1989)
8-19-3: PRIVIES, SEPTIC TANKS, AND CESSPOOLS UNLAWFUL:
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain
any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or
used for the disposal of sewage. (Ord. 1268, 12-5-1989)
8-19-4: SUITABLE TOILET FACILITIES REQUIRED:
The owner of all the houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the city and abutting
on any street, alley, or right of way in which there is now located or may in
the future be located any public sanitary (or combined) sewer of the city, is
hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein,
and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within ninety (90) days after
date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within ten
feet (10') of the property line. (Ord. 1268, 12-5-1989)
ARTICLE II. PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
8-19-5: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM:
Where a public sanitary (or combined) sewer is not available under the
provisions of article I, section 8-19-4 of this chapter, the building sewer
shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the
provisions of this article. (Ord. 1268, 12-5-1989)
8-19-6: PERMIT FOR PRIVATE DISPOSAL SYSTEM:
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system the
owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the building official. The
application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city,
which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other
information as deemed necessary by the building official. A permit and
inspection fee in conformity with the building code or plumbing code shall be
paid to the city at the time the application is filed. (Ord. 1268, 12-5-1989)
8-19-7: INSPECTION OF PRIVATE DISPOSAL SYSTEM:
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until
the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the building official. He
shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any
event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the building official when the
work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are
covered. The inspection shall be made within twenty four (24) hours of the
receipt of written notice by the building official. (Ord. 1268, 12-5-1989)
8-19-8: PRIVATE DISPOSAL SYSTEM TYPE, CAPACITY AND LOCATION:
The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system
shall comply with all recommendations of the state of Illinois private sewage
disposal licensing act and code and with the state of Illinois environmental
protection agency. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal
system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the
lot is less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet (1,859 square meters). No
septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
(Ord. 1268, 12-5-1989)
8-19-9: AVAILABILITY OF PUBLIC SEWER:
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a
private sewage disposal system, as provided in article I, section 8-19-4 of
this chapter, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in
compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar
private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable
material. (Ord. 1268, 12-5-1989)
8-19-10: MAINTENANCE TO BE IN A SANITARY MANNER:
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in
a sanitary manner at all times, and at no expense to the city. (Ord. 1268, 12-
5-1989)
8-19-11: PROVISIONS NOT TO CONFLICT WITH ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any
additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer, by the
Fulton County health department, or by their respective successors. (Ord. 1268,
12-5-1989)
8-19-12: CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER WHEN AVAILABLE:
When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be connected to
said sewer within sixty (60) days and the private sewage disposal system shall
be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank run gravel or dirt. (Ord. 1268,
12-5-1989)
ARTICLE III. BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
8-19-13: CONNECTION PERMIT REQUIRED:
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with, or opening
into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the building official. (Ord. 1268, 12-5-
1989)
8-19-14: DISPOSAL COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL STANDARDS:
All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except those
discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to the
federal act and more stringent state and local standards. (Ord. 1268, 12-5-
1989)
8-19-15: CLASSES OF BUILDING SEWER PERMITS; FEE:
There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: a) for residential
wastewater service, and b) for commercial, institutional/governmental or
industrial wastewater service. In either case, the owner or his agent shall
make application on a special form furnished by the city.
The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or
other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the building
official. A permit and inspection fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for a
residential or commercial building sewer permit shall be paid to the city at
the time the application is filed. The industry, as a condition of permit
authorization, must provide information fully and completely describing its
wastewater constituents, characteristics, and type of activity. (Ord. 1268, 12-
5-1989)
8-19-16: DOWNSTREAM FACILITIES CAPACITY:
A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection shall only
be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage facilities,
including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment facilities, have
sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently handle the additional
anticipated waste load. (Ord. 1268, 12-5-1989)
8-19-17: COSTS OF INSTALLATION AND CONNECTION BORNE BY OWNER:
All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city
from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation of the building sewer. (Ord. 1268, 12-5-1989)
8-19-18: SEPARATE SEWER TO BE PROVIDED:
   (A)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and
the whole considered as one building sewer, but the city does not or will not
assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from
any such connection.
   (B)   Any new connection, which is tributary only to a combined sewer, shall
be designed to minimize and/or delay inflow contribution to the combined sewer
system. The technique to minimize or delay inflow shall be approved by the
wastewater treatment superintendent.
   (C)   Any inflow source connected to a combined sewer system shall be
connected to a storm sewer within twelve (12) months after a storm sewer
becomes available. Procedures for disconnecting an inflow source from a
combined sewer and connecting to a storm sewer shall be approved by the
wastewater treatment superintendent.
   (D)   Any new construction, which is tributary only to a combined sewer,
shall be constructed with a separate domestic waste line and a separate
stormwater line to facilitate disconnection when a storm sewer becomes
available. (Ord. 2073, 2-7-2012)
8-19-19: USE OF OLD BUILDING SEWERS:
   (A)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the building official, to meet
all requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1268, 12-5-1989)
   (B)   An existing service sewer may be used for remediation water if upon
examination by the city, it meets all requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1454,
3-7-1995)
8-19-20: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and
the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing,
and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the
building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the
city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
American Society Of Testing Materials, "Water Pollution Control Federation
Manual Of Practice No. 9", and "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer
Main Construction In Illinois" shall apply. (Ord. 1268, 12-5-1989)
8-19-21: BASEMENT FLOOR ELEVATION:
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an
elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a means which is approved in
accordance with article II of this chapter and discharged to the building
sewer. (Ord. 1268, 12-5-1989)
8-19-22: ROOF DOWNSPOUTS AND OTHER CONNECTIONS NOT PERMITTED:
No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or ground water,
except remediation waters meeting all requirements as set forth in subsection
8-19-31(M) of this chapter, to a building sewer or building drain which in turn
is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer, or directly to
a public sanitary sewer. (Ord. 2073, 2-7-2012)
8-19-23: CONFORMANCE TO BUILDING AND PLUMBING CODES:
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing codes, or other applicable rules and
regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of American Society Of Testing Materials, "Water Pollution
Control Federation Manual Of Practice No. 9", and "Standard Specifications For
Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois". All such connections shall be
made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by the plumbing inspector before installation. (Ord.
1268, 12-5-1989)
8-19-24: INSPECTION AND CONNECTION NOTIFICATION:
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the building official
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the building
official or his representative. (Ord. 1268, 12-5-1989)
8-19-25: BARRICADES AND LIGHTS DURING EXCAVATION:
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. (Ord. 1268, 12-5-
1989)
8-19-26: PLUMBING FIXTURE CONNECTIONS TO PUBLIC SEWER:
   (A)   The discharge from plumbing fixtures, only, shall be connected to the
public sanitary sewers of the city, except for remediation waters. For the
purposes of this chapter, the term "plumbing fixtures" shall be construed in
accordance with the Illinois state plumbing code, and shall specifically
include basement floor drains.
   (B)   The connection of footing tile, area drains, surface water inlets,
downspouts, yard or field drains or any other drainage facility which receives
groundwater seepage, except for remediation waters, or collected surface water
to the public sanitary sewer system is hereby prohibited. (Ord. 1454, 3-7-1995)
8-19-27: SEWER PIPE SPECIFICATIONS:
All building sewers within a building or within five feet (5') of a water
service pipe shall be in accordance with the Illinois state plumbing code. New
sanitary sewers (private or public) beyond the limits described above for
connection with a city sewer shall be one of the following:
   (A)   Cast iron soil pipe, ASTM specification A-74, latest revision.
   (B)   Heavy wall PVC plastic pipe, ASTM D2729, D3033 or D3034 latest
revision.
   (C)   Heavy wall ABS plastic pipe, ASTM specification D2751, latest
revision.
Sewers eight inches (8") in diameter or longer shall be of materials as
specified in standard specifications or as approved by the city.
The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of
the building official, but in no event shall the size be less than four inches
(4") in diameter. The slope of such pipe shall not be less than one-fourth inch
(1/4") per foot for four inch (4") diameter pipe, or one-eighth inch (1/8") per
foot for six inch (6") diameter pipe. Any pipe laid longitudinally in public
streets, alleys or easements which could connect more than one building sewer
or could be extended to connect more than one building sewer, shall be not less
than eight inches (8") in diameter, and shall be constructed to a minimum depth
to permit further extension thereto. Sewers constructed longitudinally in a
public street, alley or easement shall be constructed in accordance with plans
and specifications prepared by a registered professional engineer and approved
by the Illinois environmental protection agency and the city. (Ord. 1268, 12-5-
1989)
ARTICLE IV. USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS
8-19-28: GROUNDWATER DRAINAGE:
No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater, surface
water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling
water, or unpolluted industrial process waters except groundwater remediation
water to any sanitary sewer. (Ord. 1268, 12-5-1989; amd. Ord. 1454, 3-7-1995)
8-19-29: DISCHARGES TO SEWERS, APPROVAL BY WASTEWATER TREATMENT SUPERINTENDENT:
   (A)   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers,
or to a natural outlet approved by the wastewater treatment superintendent.
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on
written approval of the wastewater treatment superintendent, to a storm sewer,
combined sewer, or natural outlet.
   (B)   Owners of all other wastewater collection systems, whether public or
private, with combined sewers tributary to Canton's wastewater collection
system shall have procedures in place prior to the discharge of any material to
Canton's system, which shall be approved by the wastewater treatment
superintendent to ensure that the following items are achieved consistent with
federal, state and local standards:
      1.   Inspect the collection system on a regularly scheduled basis.
      2.   Clean and maintain sewers, catch basins and regulators on a
regularly scheduled basis.
      3.   Inspect and perform preventative maintenance on all lift stations.
      4.   Repair collection system problems in a timely manner. Replace sewers
where necessary.
      5.   Detect and eliminate illegal connections.
      6.   Detect, prevent, and eliminate dry weather overflows.
      7.   Operate the collection system to maximize storage capacity. Operate
the combined sewer portions of the collection systems to delay the entry of
storm flow into the system.
      8.   Operate the treatment and collection systems to maximize treatment.
(Ord. 2073, 2-7-2012)
8-19-30: UNLAWFUL DISCHARGES TO PUBLIC SEWER:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
   (A)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas. Remediation waters from leaking underground
storage tanks or surface spills may be allowed provided that the same do not
exceed the limits of subsection 8-19-31(M) of this chapter.
   (B)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
   (C)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five and five- tenths
(5.5) or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
   (D)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole
or ground by garbage grinders. (Ord. 1268, 12-5-1989; amd. Ord. 1454, 3-7-1995)
8-19-31: UNLAWFUL DISCHARGE OF HARMFUL WASTES:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of
the wastewater treatment superintendent that such wastes can harm either the
sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment; have an adverse effect on the
receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or
constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these
wastes, the wastewater treatment superintendent will give consideration to such
factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities
in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage
treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of
treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and maximum limits
established by regulatory agencies. The substances prohibited are:
   (A)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (60°C).
   (B)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous material; or oils,
whether emulsified or not, in excess or one hundred milligrams per liter (100
mg/l) or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between thirty two degrees (32°) and one hundred fifty degrees
Fahrenheit (150°F) (0° and 65°C).
   (C)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and
operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4)
horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the wastewater treatment superintendent.
   (D)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or
concentrated plating solution, whether neutralized or not.
   (E)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, or
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the wastewater treatment superintendent for such materials.
   (F)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the wastewater treatment superintendent as necessary after
treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state,
federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the
receiving waters.
   (G)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the wastewater treatment superintendent in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
   (H)   Any wastes or waters having a pH in excess of nine and five-tenths
(9.5).
   (I)   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as Hg at
any time except as permitted by the wastewater treatment superintendent in
compliance with applicable state and federal regulations.
   (J)   Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 mg/l at any time except as permitted by
the wastewater treatment superintendent in compliance with applicable state and
federal regulations.
   (K)   Materials which exert or cause:
      1.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);
      2.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye waste and
vegetable tanning solutions);
      3.   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works;
      4.   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting
"slugs" as defined herein.
   (L)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters. (Ord. 1268, 12-5-1989)
   (M)   Any ground water or surface water which is collected in an effort to
remediate ground water which has been contaminated with petroleum hydrocarbons
which will exceed the following limitations:
1.   Benzene                     0.5 ppm
2.   Toluene                     0.5 ppm
3.   Ethyle Benzene              0.5 ppm
4.   Xylene                      0.5 ppm
5.   n-Hexane                    0.5 ppm
6.   1,2 Dichlorobenzene         0.5 ppm
7.   1,3 Dichlorobenzene         0.5 ppm
8.   1,4 Dichlorobenzene         0.5 ppm
9.   Lead                        5.81 ppm
10.  pH                          Between 5 and 11
11.  Total of items 1 through 8  4.0 ppm
In addition to the above limits, the discharge must not be hazardous as
defined by the hazardous waste characterization analysis for constituents
as listed under 35 IAC part 721, subpart C. The analysis results must be
submitted. The waste must not contain or exceed the following limits:
12.  Flashpoint                  <140° Fahrenheit
13.  pH                          Limited above
14.  No reactive chemicals capable of producing toxic gases.
15.  Must pass the toxic characteristics leaching procedure (TCLP).
 
Also, any discharge system shall include, at a minimum, an oil water separator.
This requirement may be waived by the wastewater treatment superintendent if
other devices such as skimmer pumps, settling basins, or surge tanks are in
use.
The applicant should note that an indemnification statement relieving the city
of all liability for the operation and discharges of the ground water
remediation system is required. The indemnification statement shall be included
with the permit application. (Ord. 1478, 8-1-1995)
8-19-32: SUPERINTENDENT'S ACTION REGARDING UNLAWFUL DISCHARGES:
If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the
public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in section 8-19-31 of this article, and/or which are
in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in 40 CFR 403, June 26,
1978, and any amendments thereto, and which in the judgment of the wastewater
treatment superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works,
processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard
to life or constitute a public nuisance, the wastewater treatment
superintendent may:
   (A)   Reject the wastes; or
   (B)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers; or
   (C)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
   (D)   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions of
section 8-19-11 of this chapter. If the wastewater treatment superintendent
permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and
installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and
approval of the wastewater treatment superintendent, and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. (Ord. 1268, 12-5-
1989)
8-19-33: GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS:
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the wastewater treatment superintendent, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any
flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
wastewater treatment superintendent and shall be located as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. (Ord. 1268, 12-5-1989)
8-19-34: PRELIMINARY TREATMENT OR FLOW EQUALIZING FACILITIES:
Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided, they
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the
owner at his expense. (Ord. 1268, 12-5-1989)
8-19-35: CONTROL MANHOLE REQUIRED:
Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and, when required
by the wastewater treatment superintendent, the owner of any property serviced
by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the
wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located,
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the wastewater
treatment superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his
expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all
times. (Ord. 1268, 12-5-1989)
8-19-36: INDUSTRIAL WASTE TESTS AND ANALYSES:
   (A)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests, and analyses of
waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and any special
conditions for discharge established by the city or regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction over the discharge.
   (B)   The number, type, and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed
by the owner shall be as required by the city, but no less than once per year
the industry must supply a full and complete analysis of the constituents of
the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the federal, state, and
local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of
measurements and laboratory analyses to the city at such times and in such a
manner as prescribed by the city. The owner shall bear the expense of all
measurements, analyses, and reporting required by the city. At such times as
deemed necessary the city reserves the right to take measurements and samples
for analysis by an outside laboratory service. (Ord. 1268, 12-5-1989)
   (C)   The city is not required to accept any remediation waters if samples
have not been tested or if the testing reflects levels not acceptable under
subsection 8-19-31(M) of this article. (Ord. 1454, 3-7-1995)
8-19-37: SAMPLING TESTS; EFFECT OF CONSTITUENTS ON SEWAGE WORKS:
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of IEPA division of laboratories manual of
laboratory methods, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or
upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no
special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to
be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily
accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works
and to determine the existence involved will determine whether a twenty four
(24) hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a
grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and
suspended solids analyses are obtained from twenty four (24) hour composites of
all outfalls, whereas pH's are determined from periodic grab samples. (Ord.
1268, 12-5-1989)
8-19-38: SPECIAL AGREEMENT BETWEEN CITY AND INDUSTRIAL USER:
No statement contained in this article IV shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern
whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by
the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, in accordance with article
I of this chapter, by the industrial concern, provided such payments are in
accordance with federal and state guidelines for user charge system. (Ord.
1268, 12-5-1989)
ARTICLE V. PROTECTION OF SEWAGE WORKS FROM DAMAGE
8-19-39: DISORDERLY CONDUCT; DESTRUCTION OF SEWAGE WORKS PROPERTY:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which
is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be
subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. (Ord. 1268, 12-
5-1989)
ARTICLE VI. POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS
8-19-40: RIGHT OF ENTRY TO INSPECT PREMISES:
The building official and other duly authorized employees of the city, the
Illinois environmental protection agency, and the U.S. environmental protection
agency, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to
enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The
building official or his representative shall have no authority to inquire into
any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper,
or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the sewers or waterway or facilities for waste
treatment. (Ord. 1268, 12-5-1989)
8-19-41: CITY TO INDEMNIFY USER OF LIABILITY DURING INSPECTIONS:
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in
section 8-19-40 of this article, the building official or duly authorized
employees of the city, the Illinois environmental protection agency, and the
United States environmental protection agency shall observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be
held harmless for injury or death to the city employees and the city shall
indemnify the company against liability claims and demands for personal injury
or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging
and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure
of the company to maintain conditions as required in article IV, section 8-19-
36 of this chapter. (Ord. 1268, 12-5-1989)
8-19-42: ENTRY OF PRIVATE PROPERTY; CITY EASEMENTS:
The building official and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the city has an easement for the purposes of, but not
limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and
maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All
entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full
accordance with the terms of the easement pertaining to the private property
involved. (Ord. 1268, 12-5-1989)
ARTICLE VII. PENALTIES
8-19-43: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter except article V
of this chapter shall be served by the city with written notice stating the
nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. The city may revoke
any permit for sewage disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of
this chapter. (Ord. 1268, 12-5-1989)
8-19-44: PENALTY:
Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for
in section 8-19-43 of this article, shall be guilty of a petty offense, and on
conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount of not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. Each
day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate
offense. (Ord. 1268, 12-5-1989)
8-19-45: LIABILITY TO CITY FOR DAMAGES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable
to the city for damages by reasons of such violation. (Ord. 1268, 12-5-1989)
ARTICLE VIII. VALIDITY
8-19-46: REPEALER:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
(Ord. 1268, 12-5-1989)
8-19-47: SEVERABILITY:
The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence, or provision of this chapter
shall not affect the validity of any other part of this chapter which can be
given effect without such invalid part or parts. (Ord. 1268, 12-5-1989)
CHAPTER 20
ANNEXATION; SEWER AND WATER SERVICE
SECTION:
8-20-1: Conditions Precedent To Receiving City Water/Sewer
8-20-2: Exceptions; Vote
8-20-3: Special Conditions
8-20-4: Intergovernmental Agreements
8-20-5: Deviations
8-20-1: CONDITIONS PRECEDENT TO RECEIVING CITY WATER/SEWER:
Any person desiring city water and/or sewer service to property lying outside
the city's corporate limits must:
   (A)   If the property is contiguous to the city's corporate limits, annex
the subject property into the city as a condition precedent to receiving such
water and/or sewer service.
   (B)   If the property is not contiguous to the city's corporate limits, as a
condition precedent to receiving either water and/or sewer service, enter into
a legally valid and binding preannexation agreement. Such agreement shall in
all instances be in form and substance satisfactory to the city attorney and
shall, as a minimum, contain the following provisions:
      1.   A complete and accurate legal description of the property which is
the subject of the agreement.
      2.   The common or street address of the subject property.
      3.   A declaration that water or sewer service, or both, are to be
provided.
      4.   A declaration that the owner(s) of record, at their sole expense,
will within sixty (60) days of becoming contiguous to the city petition the
city for voluntary annexation into the city and rezoning.
      5.   A declaration that such agreement is binding upon the present owners
and all future owners; that such agreement shall constitute a covenant in
perpetuity running with the land; and, that the city's original of said
agreement shall be filed by the city with the Fulton County recorder and that
such filing fee shall be paid by the city and added to the first sewer or water
bill as a one time special charge.
   (C)   The entirety of the subject property shall be annexed into the city,
or made the subject of the preannexation agreement, as applicable. Property
shall not be divided or subdivided with less than the whole being annexed or
made the subject of a preannexation agreement in order to receive city water or
sewer services. The sole exception shall be tracts in excess of twenty (20)
acres in size which are actually utilized as a grain farm and/or livestock
farm; as to such farm ground, the site of the dwelling house and dwelling house
outbuildings may be annexed into the city or made the subject of a
preannexation agreement. The permitted division of such property shall be drawn
in such a manner that the tract to be annexed or made the subject of a
preannexation agreement clearly conforms to all applicable requirements of
state law, and local ordinance. (Ord. 1269, 12-5-1989)
8-20-2: EXCEPTIONS; VOTE:
In extraordinary situations so declared by the city council, the council may by
a majority vote of the corporate authorities, deviate from the foregoing
subsection
8-20-1(C) of this chapter by requiring that all of a given tract of real
property be annexed into the city, or be made the subject of a requisite
preannexation agreement. (Ord. 1269, 12-5-1989)
8-20-3: SPECIAL CONDITIONS:
The city council may, in addition to any of the foregoing conditions, require
additional terms or conditions as may appear to be in the best interest of the
city as conditions precedent to the annexation or preannexation agreement.
(Ord. 1269, 12-5-1989)
8-20-4: INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as a restraint upon the power of
the city to enter into intergovernmental agreements relating to the sale of or
receipt of sewer or water services by the city. (Ord. 1269, 12-5-1989)
8-20-5: DEVIATIONS:
No city officer or official shall have any authority to deviate from the
requirements of this chapter, or to bind the city to any such deviation. (Ord.
1269, 12-5-1989)
CHAPTER 21
SPECIAL WATER AND SEWER PROJECTS; CONNECTIONS SUBSEQUENT TO CONSTRUCTION;
SPECIAL TAP-ON FEES
SECTION:
8-21-1: Special Water And Sewer Projects Authorized
8-21-2: Citizen Participation; Payment Of Costs
8-21-3: Connections Subsequent To Construction
8-21-4: Limitation On Payments; Disposition Of Payments
8-21-5: Method Of Determining Fee
8-21-1: SPECIAL WATER AND SEWER PROJECTS AUTHORIZED:
Special water and/or sewer projects which are paid in whole or in part by
private citizen participation are authorized by prior agreement between the
city and the residents or citizens of a geographic area in the municipality.
Such projects may be constructed by private contractor and paid for in whole by
the residents or citizens of the area or may be constructed by the city with
the residents or citizens of the area paying for all or part of the expense of
the project or improvement. In all events, written agreements between the city
and the residents or citizens of the area shall be in existence and in the
city's files before any construction start. (Ord. 1310, 4-16-1991)
8-21-2: CITIZEN PARTICIPATION; PAYMENT OF COSTS:
Among other matters, the foregoing written agreements shall provide for an
itemization and aggregate of special fees or expenses to be paid by the
citizen, resident or homeowner in the special project area. (Ord. 1310, 4-16-
1991)
8-21-3: CONNECTIONS SUBSEQUENT TO CONSTRUCTION:
Any person or entity desiring to connect to the sewer or water line(s)
subsequent to the construction of the line, who has not entered into a written
agreement, as aforesaid, with the city shall, as a condition precedent to
connecting to said sewer or water line(s), pay unto the city the same aggregate
of special costs or expenses as that initially borne by the residents or
property owners in the special project area. Such aggregate special payment
shall be in addition to all other standard or customary charges or expenses as
the same may from time to time be set forth by other ordinance. (Ord. 1310, 4-
16-1991)
8-21-4: LIMITATION ON PAYMENTS; DISPOSITION OF PAYMENTS:
The aggregate of special costs or payments provided by the foregoing subsection
shall be for all desired connections for a period of ten (10) years from the
date of issuance of the requisite Illinois environmental protection agency
operating permit for the particular project; or, if no such permit is required,
from the date the line(s) was first placed in operation. All payments as
provided herein shall be paid to the city treasurer for reimbursement to the
then owners of record of parcels or lots originally participating in the
original project. Such reimbursement shall not include interest or appreciation
in value. No reimbursement shall be made with respect to any parcel or lot
beyond the pro rata project cost actually borne and attributable to such parcel
or lot. Reimbursement as aforesaid shall be made in conformity with exhibit A
attached to the ordinance codified herein, and herein fully incorporated by
reference. (Ord. 1310, 4-16-1991)
8-21-5: METHOD OF DETERMINING FEE:
Fees to be charged shall be made in conformity with the schedules attached as
exhibit A to the ordinance codified herein. (Ord. 1310, 4-16-1991)
CHAPTER 22
CROSS CONNECTIONS
SECTION:
8-22-1: Definitions
8-22-2: Compliance With Existing Laws
8-22-3: Cross Connections Prohibited
8-22-4: Local Cross Connection Control Program
8-22-5: Corrections And Protective Devices
8-22-6: Piping Identification
8-22-7: Private Water Storage Tanks
8-22-8: Elimination Of Existing Cross Connections
8-22-9: Inspection
8-22-10: Discontinuance Of Water Service
8-22-11: Cross Connection Control Regulations
8-22-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply:
BACKFLOW: Water of questionable quality, wastes or other contaminants entering
a public water supply system due to a reversal flow.
CROSS CONNECTION: A connection or arrangement of piping or appurtenance where a
backflow could occur.
SAFE AIR GAP: The minimum distance of a water inlet or opening above the
maximum high water level or overflow rim in a fixture, device or container to
which public water is furnished which shall be at least two (2) times the
inside diameter of the water inlet pipe; but shall not be less than one inch
(1") and need not be more than twelve inches (12").
SECONDARY WATER SUPPLY: A water supply system maintained in addition to a
public water supply, including, but not limited to, water systems from ground
or surface sources not meeting the requirements of act no. 98 of the public
acts of 1913, as amended being sections 325.201 to 325.214 of the compiled laws
of 1948, or water from a public water supply which in any way has been treated,
processed or exposed to any possible contaminant or stored in other than an
approved storage facility.
SUBMERGED INLET: A water pipe or extension thereto from a public water supply
terminating in a tank, vessel, fixture or appliance which may contain water of
questionable quality, waste or other contaminant and which is unprotected
against backflow.
WATER UTILITY: The city of Canton water department. (Ord. 1503, 5-21-1996)
8-22-2: COMPLIANCE WITH EXISTING LAWS:
A connection with a public water supply system shall comply with the existing
laws and rules and the provisions of this code. (Ord. 1503, 5-21-1996)
8-22-3: CROSS CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED:
Cross connection of the public water supply system and any other water supply
system or source including, but not limited to, the following is prohibited:
   (A)   Between a public water supply system and a secondary water supply.
   (B)   By submerged inlet.
   (C)   Between a lawn sprinkling system and the public water supply system.
   (D)   Between a public water supply and piping which may contain sanitary
waste or a chemical contaminant.
   (E)   Between a public water supply system and piping immersed in a tank or
vessel which may contain a contaminant. (Ord. 1503, 5-21-1996)
8-22-4: LOCAL CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM:
The city shall develop a comprehensive control program for the elimination and
prevention of all future cross connections. (Ord. 1503, 5-21-1996)
8-22-5: CORRECTIONS AND PROTECTIVE DEVICES:
Any user of water from the city water system shall obtain written approval from
the water department for any proposed corrective action or protective device
before using or installing it. The total time allowed for completion of the
necessary corrections shall be contingent upon the degree of hazard involved
and include the time required to obtain and install equipment. If the cross
connection has not been removed within the time as hereinafter specified, the
city shall physically separate the city water supply from the on site piping
system in such manner that the two (2) systems cannot be connected by any
unauthorized person. (Ord. 1503, 5-21-1996)
8-22-6: PIPING IDENTIFICATION:
When a secondary water source is used in addition to the city water supply,
exposed city water and secondary water piping shall be identified by
distinguishing colors or tags and so maintained that each pipe may be traced
readily in its entirety. It will be necessary to protect the city water supply
at the service connection in a manner acceptable to the water department. (Ord.
1503, 5-21-1996)
8-22-7: PRIVATE WATER STORAGE TANKS:
A private water storage tank supplied from the city water system shall be
deemed a secondary water supply unless it is designed and approved for potable
water usage. (Ord. 1503, 5-21-1996)
8-22-8: ELIMINATION OF EXISTING CROSS CONNECTIONS:
Within one year from the effective date of this section all existing cross
connections to the city water supply system shall be eliminated. The expenses
of such elimination shall be that of the owner of the property on which such
cross connection exists. (Ord. 1503, 5-21-1996)
8-22-9: INSPECTION:
The water department of the city or any representative thereof shall have the
authority to inspect any premises to determine the presence of an existing
cross connection and to order the elimination of such cross connection. (Ord.
1503, 5-21-1996)
8-22-10: DISCONTINUANCE OF WATER SERVICE:
The water department is hereby authorized to discontinue water service after a
reasonable notice to any person owning any property where a cross connection in
violation of this code exists. The water department may take such other
precautionary measures as are necessary to eliminate any danger of the
contamination of the city water supply system. Water service to such property
shall not be restored until such cross connection has been eliminated. (Ord.
1503, 5-21-1996)
8-22-11: CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL REGULATIONS:
The following cross connection control regulations are hereby promulgated with
an effective date as of the effective date of this chapter:
   (A)   Cross Connection Control, General Policy:
      1.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is:
         (a)   To protect the public water supply system from contamination or
pollution by isolating within the customer's water system contaminants or
pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the public
water supply system.
         (b)   To promote the elimination or control of existing cross
connections, actual or potential, between the public or consumer's potable
water system and nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or
systems containing substances of unknown or questionable safety.
         (c)   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross
connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the
public and consumer's potable water systems.
      2.   Application: This section shall apply to all premises served by the
public potable water supply system of the city.
      3.   Policy: The owner or official custodian shall be responsible for
protection of the public water supply system from contamination due to backflow
or back siphonage of contaminants through the customer's water service
connection. If, in the judgment of the superintendent of water or his
authorized representative, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary
for the safety of the public water supply system, the superintendent of water
shall give notice to the consumer to install such approved backflow prevention
device at each service connection to the premises. The consumer shall
immediately install such approved device or devices at his own expense;
failure, refusal or inability on the part of the consumer to install such
device or devices immediately shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water
service to the premises until such device or devices have been installed. The
consumer shall retain records of installation, maintenance, testing and repair
as required in subsection (E)4(d) of this section for a period of at least five
(5) years.
   (B)   Definitions:
      1.   The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of this section:
AGENCY: Illinois environmental protection agency.
APPROVED: Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the Research
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern
California, American Water Works Association, American National Standards
Institute or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation.
AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM: Any water source or system on or available to the
premises other than the public water supply system and includes the water
supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include water from another
purveyor's public water supply system; or water from a source such as wells,
lakes, or streams, or process fluids; or used water. These waters may be
polluted or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water source or
system over which the water purveyor does not have control.
BACKFLOW: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the
distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other than the
intended source of the potable water supply.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: Any device, method or type of construction intended
to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All devices used for backflow
prevention in Illinois must meet the standards of the Illinois plumbing code
and the Illinois environmental protection agency.
CONSUMER OR CUSTOMER: The owner, official custodian or person in control of any
premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water system.
CONSUMER'S WATER SYSTEM: Any water system located on the customer's premises. A
building plumbing system is considered to be a customer's water system.
CONTAMINATION: An impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of any
substance to a degree which could create a health hazard.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement between two (2)
otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the
other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby there
may be a flow from one system into the other.
    Direct Cross Connection: A cross connection formed when a water system is
physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance.
    Indirect Cross Connection: A cross connection through which an unknown
substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into the safe
potable water system.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: An assembly composed of single, independently
acting check valves approved under ASSE standard 1015. A double check valve
assembly must include tight shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly
and suitable connections for testing the watertightness of each check valve.
FIXED PROPER AIR GAP: The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of the
receptacle.
HEALTH HAZARD: Any condition, device or practice in a water system or its
operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well
being of consumers. The word "severe" as used to qualify "health hazard" means
a hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in death or
significant reduction in the quality of life.
INSPECTION: A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all
materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and installations of
a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the Illinois plumbing
code, 77 Illinois administrative code 890.
NONPOTABLE WATER: Water not safe for drinking, personal, or culinary use as
determined by the requirements of 35 Illinois administrative code 604.
PLUMBING: The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or extension
of a plumbing system by any person. Plumbing includes all piping, fixtures,
appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes, including,
without limitation, lawn sprinkler systems, from the source of a private water
supply on the premises or from the main in the street, alley or at the curb to,
within and about any building or buildings where a person or persons live, work
or assemble. Plumbing includes all piping, from discharge of pumping units to
and including pressure tanks in water supply systems. Plumbing includes all
piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances for a building drain and a
sanitary drainage and related ventilation system of any building or buildings
where a person or persons live, work or assemble from the point of connection
of such building drain to the building sewer or private sewage disposal system
five feet (5') beyond the foundation walls.
POLLUTION: The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological, or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as
to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
POTABLE WATER: Water which meets the requirements of 35 Illinois administrative
code 604 for drinking, culinary, and domestic purposes.
POTENTIAL CROSS CONNECTION: A fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose
connection, tapered spout, or other connection which would facilitate extension
of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point.
PROCESS FLUID(S): Any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically
or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would
constitute a health, pollutional or system hazard if introduced into the public
or a consumer's potable water system. This includes, but is not limited to:
         (a)   Polluted or contaminated waters;
         (b)   Process waters;
         (c)   Used waters originating from the public water supply system
which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
         (d)   Cooling waters;
         (e)   Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells,
lakes, streams or irrigation systems;
         (f)   Chemicals in solution or suspension;
         (g)   Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids
used in industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes.
   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY: All mains, pipes and structures through which water is
obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well structures,
intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage
tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or intended
for use for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic
use and which serve at least fifteen (15) service connections or which
regularly serve at least twenty five (25) persons at least sixty (60) days per
year. A public water supply is either a "community water supply" or a
"noncommunity water supply".
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device containing a
minimum of two (2) independently acting check valves together with an
automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between the
two (2) check valves and approved under ASSE standard 1013. During normal flow
and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two (2) checks
shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check
valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall
operate to maintain the pressure between the check valves at less than the
supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves located
at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly
located test cocks.
SERVICE CONNECTION: The opening, including all fittings and appurtenances, at
the water main through which water is supplied to the user.
SURVEY: The collection of information pertaining to a customer's piping system
regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply system and
must include the location, type and most recent inspection and testing date of
all cross connection control devices and methods located within that customer's
piping system. The survey must be in written form, and should not be an actual
plumbing inspection.
SYSTEM HAZARD: A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or
degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water supply
system or a consumer's potable water system.
USED WATER: Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a consumer's
water system after it has passed through the service connection and is no
longer under the control of the water supply official custodian.
WATER PURVEYOR: The owner or official custodian of a public water system.
   (C)   Water System:
      1.   The water system shall be considered as made up of two (2) parts:
the public water supply system and the consumer's water system.
      2.   The public water supply system shall consist of the source
facilities and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities
of the potable water system under the control of the superintendent of water up
to the point where the consumer's water system begins.
      3.   The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized
in the production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to the public water
supply distribution system.
      4.   The public water supply distribution system shall include the
network of conduits used to deliver water from the source to the consumer's
water system.
      5.   The consumer's water system shall include all parts of the
facilities beyond the service connection used to convey water from the public
water supply distribution system to points of use.
   (D)   Cross Connection Prohibited:
      1.   Connections between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable
quality are prohibited except when and where approved cross connection control
devices or methods are installed, tested and maintained to ensure proper
operation on a continuing basis.
      2.   (a)   No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable
portion of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better
bacteriological and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis
by the agency.
         (b)   There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe
substance may enter a supply.
   (E)   Survey And Investigations:
      1.   The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the
approved cross connection control device inspector for the inspection of the
presence or absence of cross connections within the consumer's premises, and
testing, repair and maintenance of cross connection control devices within the
consumer's premises.
      2.   On request by the superintendent of water, or his authorized
representative, the consumer shall furnish information regarding the piping
system or systems or water use within the customer's premises. The consumer's
premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the superintendent of water
for the verification of information submitted by the consumer to the public
water supply custodian regarding cross connection inspection results.
      3.   It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to arrange
periodic surveys of water use practices on his premises to determine whether
there are actual or potential cross connections to his water system through
which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into his or the public potable
water system. All cross connection control or other plumbing inspections must
be conducted in accordance with 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 320/3.
      4.   It is the responsibility of the water consumer to prevent backflow
into the public water system by ensuring that:
         (a)   All cross connections are removed; or approved cross connection
control devices are installed for control of backflow and back siphonage.
         (b)   Cross connection control devices shall be installed in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
         (c)   Cross connection control devices shall be inspected at least
annually by a person approved by the agency as a cross connection control
device inspector (CCCDI). The inspection of mechanical devices shall include
physical testing in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
         (d)   Testing And Records:
            (1)   Each device shall be tested at least annually or more
frequently if recommended by the manufacturer.
            (2)   Records submitted to the community public water supply shall
be available for inspection by agency personnel in accordance with 415 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/4.
            (3)   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of
most recent test, name of CCCDI, and type and date of repairs.
            (4)   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
               A.   Date of each test;
               B.   Name and approval number of person performing the test;
               C.   Test results;
               D.   Repairs or servicing required;
               E.   Repairs and date completed; and
               F.   Servicing performed and date completed.
   (F)   Where Protection Is Required:
      1.   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving premises where, in the
judgment of the superintendent of water, actual or potential hazards to the
public water supply system exist.
      2.   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving premises where the following
conditions exist:
         (a)   Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary
supply is accepted as an additional source by the superintendent of water and
the source is approved by the agency.
         (b)   Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an
actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system. This shall
include premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters
originating from the public water supply system which are no longer under the
sanitary control of the superintendent of water.
         (c)   Premises having internal cross connections that, in the judgment
of the superintendent of water, are not correctable or intricate plumbing
arrangements which make it impractical to determine whether or not cross
connections exist.
         (d)   Premises where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross connection survey.
         (e)   Premises having a repeated history of cross connections being
established or reestablished.
      3.   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving, but not necessarily limited
to, the following types of facilities unless the superintendent of water
determines that no actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system
exists:
         (a)   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes.
         (b)   Laboratories.
         (c)   Piers, docks, waterfront facilities.
         (d)   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or storm water
pumping stations.
         (e)   Food or beverage processing plants.
         (f)   Chemical plants.
         (g)   Metal plating industries.
         (h)   Petroleum processing or storage plants.
         (i)   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors.
         (j)   Car washes.
   (G)   Type Of Protection Required:
      1.   The type of protection required under subsections (F)2(a), (F)2(b)
and (F)2(c) of this section shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists
as follows:
         (a)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed
where the public water supply system may be contaminated with substances that
could cause a severe health hazard.
         (b)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where
the public water supply system may be contaminated with a substance that could
cause a system or health hazard.
         (c)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where
the public water supply system may be polluted with substances that could cause
a pollution hazard not dangerous to health.
      2.   The type of protection required under subsection (F)2(d) of this
section shall be an approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device.
      3.   Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used for
a fire protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall
be installed on fire sprinkler systems connected to the public water supply
when:
         (a)   The sprinkler system contains antifreeze;
         (b)   Water is pumped into the system from another source; or
         (c)   There is a connection whereby another source can be connected to
the sprinkler system.
   (H)   Backflow Prevention Devices:
      1.   All backflow prevention devices or methods required by this section
shall be approved by the Research Foundation for Cross- Connection Control of
the University of Southern California, American Water Works Association,
American Society of Sanitary Engineering, or American National Standards
Institute or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation to be in
compliance with applicable industry specification.
      2.   Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance with 35
Illinois administrative code 653.802, and only as specified by the Research
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern
California or applicable industry specifications. Maintenance as recommended by
the manufacturer of the device shall be performed. Manufacturer's maintenance
manual shall be available on site.
   (I)   Inspection And Maintenance:
      1.   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which
backflow prevention devices required by this section are installed to have
inspection, tests, maintenance and repair made in accordance with the following
schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need or are specified in
manufacturer's instructions.
         (a)   Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected at the time
of installation and at least annually thereafter.
         (b)   Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested for
tightness at time of installation and at least annually thereafter, and
required service performed within fifteen (15) days.
         (c)   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices shall be
tested at least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer,
and required service performed within five (5) days.
      2.   Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by the
agency as competent to service the device. Proof of approval shall be in
writing.
      3.   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most
recent test or visual inspection, name of tester, and type and date of repairs.
      4.   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
         (a)   Date of each test or visual inspection;
         (b)   Name and approval number of person performing the test or visual
inspection;
         (c)   Test results;
         (d)   Repairs or servicing required;
         (e)   Repairs and date completed; and
         (f)   Servicing performed and date completed.
      5.   Whenever backflow prevention devices required by this section are
found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the
consumer without delay.
      6.   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the
superintendent of water.
   (J)   Booster Pumps:
      1.   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or
within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cutoff
device designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the service
line on the suction side of the pump drops to twenty (20) psi or less.
      2.   It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low
pressure cutoff device in proper working order and to certify to the
superintendent of water, at least once a year, that the device is operable.
   (K)   Violations:
      1.   The superintendent of water shall deny or discontinue, after
reasonable notice to the occupants thereof, the water service to any premises
wherein any backflow prevention device required by this section is not
installed, tested, maintained and repaired in a manner acceptable to the
superintendent of water, or if it is found that the backflow prevention device
has been removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected cross connection exists on
the premises, or if a low pressure cutoff required by this section is not
installed and maintained in working order.
      2.   Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the
consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance
with this section and to the satisfaction of the superintendent of water, and
the required reconnection fee is paid. (Ord. 1503, 5-21-1996)
TITLE 9
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Terms Defined
9-1-1: TERMS DEFINED:
Whenever in this title the following terms are used they shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
ALLEY: A public way within a block generally giving access to the rear of lots
or buildings, and not used for general traffic circulation.
BICYCLES: Every device propelled by human power, upon which any person may
ride, having two (2) tandem wheels, either of which is more than twenty inches
(20") in diameter.
BUSINESS DISTRICT: The territory of any city, village or incorporated town
contiguous to and including a highway when within any six hundred feet (600')
along such highway there are buildings in use for business or industrial
purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels, banks or office buildings,
railroad stations, and public buildings which occupy at least three hundred
feet (300') of frontage on one side or three hundred feet (300') collectively
on both sides of the highway.
CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY: Every street or highway in respect to which owners
or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right of access
to or from the same except at such points only as may be determined by the
public authority having jurisdiction over such street or highway.
CROSSWALK: That portion of the roadway included within the prolongation of the
sidewalk lines at street intersections.
DRIVERS: Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Police vehicles, vehicles of the fire department,
ambulances, vehicles carrying a state, county or municipal officer or employee
in response to an emergency call, and emergency vehicles of public service
corporation on an emergency call.
EXPLOSIVE: Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly used or
intended for the purpose of producing an explosion and which contains any
oxidizing and combustive units or other ingredients in such proportions,
quantities or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by
percussion, or by a detonator or any part of the compound or mixture may cause
such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous
pressures are capable of producing destructible effects on contiguous objects
or of destroying life or limb.
FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS: Any liquid which has a flashpoint of seventy degrees
Fahrenheit (70°F) or less, as determined by Tagliabue or equivalent closed cup
test device.
IMPROVED HIGHWAY: A roadway of concrete, brick, asphalt, macadam or gravel.
INTERSECTION:
   (A)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral
curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two
(2) highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or
the area within which vehicles traveling upon different roadways joining at any
other angle may come in conflict.
   (B)   Where a highway includes two (2) roadways forty feet (40') or more
apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an
intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
LANED ROADWAY: A street, the roadway of which is divided into two (2) or more
clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
LOADING ZONE: The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
MERGING TRAFFIC: A maneuver executed by the drivers of vehicles on converging
roadways to permit simultaneous or alternate entry into the junction thereof,
wherein the driver of each vehicle involved is required to adjust his vehicle
speed and lateral position so as to avoid a collision with any other vehicle.
METAL TIRES: Every tire the surface of which in contact with the roadway is
wholly or partially of metal or other hard, nonresilient material.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is
propelled by electric power obtained from overhead wires, but not operated upon
rails.
MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and
designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the
ground, but excluding a tractor.
PARK: To stand a vehicle, whether occupied or not, for a period of time greater
than is reasonably necessary for the actual loading or unloading of persons.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person afoot.
PNEUMATIC TIRE: Every tire in which compressed air is designed to support the
load.
PROPERTY LINE: The line marking the boundary between any street and the lots or
property abutting thereon.
PUBLIC BUILDING: A building used by the municipality, the county, any park
district, school district, the state of Illinois, or the United States
government.
RESIDENCE DISTRICT: The territory of any city, village, or incorporated town
contiguous to and including a highway not comprising a business district when
the property on such highway for a distance of three hundred feet (300') or
more is in the main improved with residences or residences and buildings in use
for business.
REVERSIBLE LANE: A lane of a two (2) or more laned roadway upon which traffic
may be directed to move in either direction by means of lane control signals or
other devices, in conjunction with official signs.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
ROAD TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles
and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon either independently or any
part of the weight of the vehicle or load so drawn.
SAFETY ZONE: The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a safety zone.
SCHOOL BUS: Every motor vehicle of the second division operated by or for a
public or governmental agency or by or for a private or religious organization
solely for the transportation of pupils in connection with school activities.
SEMITRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying persons
or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some
part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another
vehicle.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb line or roadway and the
adjacent property line designated for pedestrian use.
SOLID TIRE: Every tire of rubber or other resilient material which does not
depend upon compressed air for the support of the load.
SPEED CHANGE LANE: An auxiliary lane, including tapered areas, primarily for
the acceleration or deceleration of vehicles entering or leaving the through
traffic lanes.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between property lines of every way or
place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public, as a matter of right, for the purpose of vehicular traffic.
SUBURBAN DISTRICT: That portion of any city, village or incorporated town other
than the business and residence districts.
THROUGH HIGHWAY: Every highway or portion thereof at the entrance to which
vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to stop before
entering or crossing the same and when stop signs are erected as provided in
this title.
TRAFFIC: Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances
whether singly or together while using any highway for the purpose of travel.
TRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying passengers or
property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part
of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
TRUCK TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing
other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of
the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
URBAN DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including any street which is
built up with structures devoted to business, industry or dwelling houses
situated at intervals of less than one hundred feet (100') for a distance of
one-fourth (1/4) mile or more.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway except devises moved by human power or used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
YIELD RIGHT OF WAY: When required by an official sign means the act of granting
the privilege of the immediate use of the intersecting roadway to traffic
within the intersection and to vehicles approaching from the right or left,
provided that when the roadway is clear the vehicle may proceed into the
intersection. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
9-2-1: Obedience To Police
9-2-2: Scene Of Fire
9-2-3: Signs And Signals
9-2-4: Traffic Control Signal Legend
9-2-5: Flashing Signals
9-2-6: Lane Control Signals
9-2-7: Pedestrian Control Signals
9-2-8: Unauthorized Signs
9-2-9: Interference With Signs Or Signals
9-2-10: Advertising Signs
9-2-11: Ambulances, Operation Of
9-2-12: Animals Or Bicycles
9-2-13: Authorized Emergency Vehicles
9-2-1: OBEDIENCE TO POLICE:
Members of the police department and special police assigned to traffic duty
are hereby authorized to direct all traffic in accordance with the provisions
of this title, or in emergencies as public safety or convenience may require,
and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with any
lawful order, signal or direction of a policeman. Except in case of emergency,
it shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by law to direct or attempt
to direct traffic. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-2-2: SCENE OF FIRE:
The fire department officer in command or any fireman designated by him, may
exercise the powers and authority of a policeman in directing traffic at the
scene of any fire or where the fire department has responded to an emergency
call for so long as fire department equipment is on the scene in the absence of
or in assisting the police. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-2-3: SIGNS AND SIGNALS:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey the instructions
of any traffic sign or signal placed in view by authority of the corporate
authorities or in accordance with the laws of the state of Illinois, excepting
on direction of a police officer. All signs and signals established by
direction of the governing body shall conform to the Illinois state manual of
uniform traffic control devices for streets and highways. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-2-4: TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND:
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting the words
"Go", "Caution", or "Stop" or exhibiting different colored lights successively,
the following colors only shall be used and said terms and lights shall
indicate as follows:
   (A)   Circular green alone:
      1.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or
turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But
vehicular traffic shall yield the right of way to other vehicles and to
pedestrians lawfully within the intersection at the time such signal is
exhibited.
      2.   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within
any marked or unmarked crosswalk, unless directed otherwise by a pedestrian
signal.
   (B)   Steady yellow:
      1.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red
indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter or the related green
movement is being terminated, and shall stop before entering the nearest
crosswalk at the intersection, but if such stop cannot be made in safety, a
vehicle may be driven cautiously through the intersection.
      2.   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal pedestrians facing
such signal are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the
roadway, and any pedestrian then starting to cross shall yield the right of way
to all vehicles.
   (C)   Steady red alone:
      1.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at such other point as may be indicated
by a clearly visible line; if there is no such line, then vehicles shall stop
before entering such crosswalk and shall remain standing until the green
indication is shown, unless otherwise directed by sign or arrow.
      2.   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he
can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic or unless a
separate "walk" indication is shown.
   (D)   Green straight through arrow (alone):
      1.   Vehicle traffic facing such signal may proceed straight through, but
shall not turn right or left. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right of
way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection at
the time such signal is exhibited.
      2.   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within
the appropriately marked or unmarked crosswalk unless directed otherwise by a
pedestrian signal.
   (E)   Green turn arrow (alone or with circular green, with steady yellow,
with steady red, or with green straight through arrow):
      1.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall comply with the meaning of
the circular green, steady yellow or straight through arrow indication as if it
were shown alone, except that such vehicular traffic may cautiously enter the
intersection to make the movement indicated by the green turn arrow. Vehicular
traffic shall yield right of way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and
to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
   (F)   In the event that an official traffic control signal or flashing red
signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the
provisions of this section or of section
9-2-5 of this chapter shall be applicable except as to provisions which by
their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be at a sign or
marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the
absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.
   (G)   The motorman of any street car shall obey the above signals applicable
to vehicles.
   (H)   Green arrow alone: Vehicular traffic facing the signal may enter the
intersection only to make the movement or movements indicated by the arrow, but
shall not interfere with other traffic or endanger pedestrians lawfully within
a crosswalk.
   (I)   In the event an official traffic control signal or flashing red signal
is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provision
of this section shall be applicable except as to provisions which by their
nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be at a sign or marking
on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of
any such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal. (Ord. 117, 10-
6-1964)
9-2-5: FLASHING SIGNALS:
Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used, they shall require obedience
by vehicular traffic as follows:
   (A)   Flashing red (stop signal): When a red lens is illuminated by rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or if
none, then before entering the intersection and the right to proceed shall be
subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
   (B)   Flashing yellow (caution signal): When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past such signal only with caution. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-2-6: LANE CONTROL SIGNALS:
Whenever lane control signals are used in conjunction with official signs, they
shall have the following meaning:
   (A)   Opaque arrows on green, green arrow on opaque background, or green
alone: Drivers of vehicles facing such signals are permitted to use the lanes
over which the signal is displayed providing that no intersection traffic
control signal gives a stop indication affecting the lane or lanes involved.
   (B)   Opaque "X" on red, red "X" on opaque background or red alone: Drivers
of vehicles facing such signals are prohibited from using the lane over which
the signal is displayed. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-2-7: PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS:
Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words "Walk" or
"Don't Walk" are in place, such signals shall indicate as follows:
   (A)   Walk: Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in
the direction of the signal and shall be given the right of way by the driver
of all vehicles.
   (B)   Don't Walk: While the "don't walk" signal is illuminated, either
steady or flashing, no pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the
direction of the signal, but any pedestrian who has partly completed his
crossing during the "walk" indication shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety
island, if one is provided. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-2-8: UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS:
No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any street any
unauthorized sign, signal marking or device which purports to be or is an
imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or railroad sign
or signal or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, nor shall any
person place, maintain or display upon or in view of any street any other sign
which hides from view or interferes with the movement of traffic or
effectiveness of any traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal, and
no person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon
any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial
advertising. Any such unauthorized device is hereby declared to be a nuisance,
and may be removed by any policeman. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-2-9: INTERFERENCE WITH SIGNS OR SIGNALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, move or interfere with
any official traffic sign or signal. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-2-10: ADVERTISING SIGNS:
It shall be unlawful to maintain anywhere in the city any sign, signal, marking
or device, other than a traffic sign or signal authorized by the city council
or the Illinois state department of public works and buildings, which purports
to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or
railroad sign or signal, in view of any street or highway, and it shall be
unlawful to place or maintain any sign which hides from view any lawful traffic
control device.
It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate in view of any street or highway
any flashing or rotating beacon of light. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-2-11: AMBULANCES, OPERATION OF:
No person shall operate an ambulance which shall include any motor vehicle
primarily designed and used for conveyance of sick or injured persons in a
manner not conforming to a provision of the motor vehicle laws and regulations
of this state or ordinances of this city as such provisions apply to motor
vehicles in general, except in compliance with the following conditions:
   (A)   The person operating the ambulance shall be either responding to a
bona fide emergency call or specifically directed by a licensed physician to
disregard traffic laws operating the ambulance during and for the purpose of
the specific trip or journey that is involved:
   (B)   The ambulance shall be equipped with a siren producing an audible
signal of an intensity of one hundred (100) decibels at a distance of fifty
feet (50') from said siren, and with a lamp emitting an oscillating, rotating
or flashing red beam directed in part toward the front of the vehicle and
containing a power rating of at least one hundred (100) amps;
   (C)   The aforesaid siren and lamp shall be in full operation at all times
during such trip or journey; and
   (D)   Whenever the ambulance is operated at a speed in excess of forty (40)
miles per hour, the ambulance shall be operated in complete conformance with
every other motor vehicle law and regulation of this state and ordinances of
this city in which the ambulance is operated, relating to the operation of
motor vehicles, as such provision applies to motor vehicles in general, except
laws and regulations pertaining to compliance with official traffic control
devices or to vehicular operation upon the right of half of the roadway. (Ord.
117, 10-6-1964)
9-2-12: ANIMALS OR BICYCLES:
Any person riding a bicycle or an animal, or driving any animal drawing a
vehicle upon any street, shall be subject to the provisions of this title
applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except those provisions which can have
no application to one riding a bicycle or driving or riding an animal. Provided
that, except in business districts, bicycles may be ridden on sidewalks. (Ord.
117, 10-6-1964)
9-2-13: AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
The provisions of this title regulating the movement or parking of vehicles
shall not apply to the driver of any authorized emergency vehicle when
responding to an emergency call, but such driver when approaching shall slow
down as necessary for safety but may proceed cautiously past a red or stop sign
or signal. At other times, drivers of an authorized emergency vehicle shall
stop in obedience to a stop sign or signal.
No driver of any authorized emergency vehicle shall assume any special
privileges except when such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency
call or in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law.
The provisions of this title regulating the movement and parking of vehicles
shall not apply to persons, equipment or vehicles while actually engaged in
installing, repairing, or otherwise improving streets or street pavements.
(Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
CHAPTER 3
RULES OF THE ROAD 1
SECTION:
9-3-1: Required Position And Method Of Turning At Intersections
9-3-2: Turning On The Crest Of A Hill
9-3-3: Starting Parked Vehicle
9-3-4: Driver's Signal
9-3-5: Driving From Alleys, Driveways Or Garages
9-3-6: Vehicle Not To Be Driven On Sidewalks Or In Safety Zones
9-3-7: Right Of Way
9-3-8: Turning
9-3-9: Fire Department Vehicles; Fires
9-3-10: Driving On Right Side Of Roadway
9-3-11: Passing Vehicles
9-3-12: Overtaking Vehicles
9-3-13: One-Way Roadways And Rotary Traffic Islands
9-3-14: Driving On Roadways Laned For Traffic
9-3-15: Operation Of Vehicles On Approach Of Authorized Emergency Vehicles
9-3-16: Reckless, Negligent Or Careless Driving
9-3-17: Speed Restrictions
9-3-17-1: Special Speed Limit On North Park Drive
9-3-17-2: Special Speed Limit On East Birch Street
9-3-17-3: Special Speed Limit On North Fourth Avenue
9-3-17-4: Special Speed Limit On Streets Adjacent To Graham Hospital
9-3-18: Special Speed Limits While Passing Schools
9-3-19: Traffic Not To Be Obstructed
9-3-20: Bicycles And Motorcycles
9-3-21: Unattended Vehicles
9-3-22: Unattended Animals
9-3-23: Clinging To Vehicles
9-3-24: Toy Vehicles
9-3-24-1: Skateboards, Roller Skates
9-3-24-2: Impoundment
9-3-24-3: Parental Responsibility
9-3-24-4: Penalty
9-3-25: Riding On Running Boards
9-3-26: Train Signals
9-3-27: Funeral Or Other Processions
9-3-28: Backing
9-3-29: Restricted Access
9-3-30: Trucks Prohibited On City Streets
9-3-31: Limited Load Streets
9-3-32: School Buses
9-3-33: Following Too Closely
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 10, "Traffic Schedules", of this title.
9-3-1: REQUIRED POSITION AND METHOD OF TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS:
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as
follows:
   (A)   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as
close as practical to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway, or as
indicated by traffic markers or signs.
   (B)   At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both
directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left
turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the
centerline thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it
enters the intersection and after entering the intersection the left turn shall
be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the centerline of the
roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made in
that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection
or as indicated by traffic markers or signs.
   (C)   At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on
one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at
any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left hand
lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such
vehicle and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as
to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left lane lawfully
available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered,
or as indicated by traffic markers or signs.
The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from a private road
or driveway shall yield the right of way to all vehicles approaching on said
highway. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-3-2: TURNING ON THE CREST OF A HILL:
No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any
curve, or upon the approach to, or near the crest of a grade, where such
vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from
either direction within five hundred feet (500'). (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-3-3: STARTING PARKED VEHICLE:
No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or parked unless
and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. (Ord. 117, 10-6-
1964)
9-3-4: DRIVER'S SIGNAL:
No driver of a vehicle shall suddenly start, slow down, stop or attempt to turn
without first giving a suitable signal in such a manner as to apprise others
who might be affected by his action.
   (A)   No person shall turn a vehicle from a direction course upon a highway
unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety and then only
after giving a clearly audible signal by sounding the horn if any pedestrian
may be affected by such movement or after giving an appropriate signal in the
manner hereinafter provided in the event any other vehicle may be affected by
such movement.
   (B)   A signal or intention to turn right or left shall be given during not
less than the last one hundred feet (100') traveled by the vehicle before
turning.
The signal herein required shall be given either by means of the hand and arm
or by a signal lamp or signal device, but when a vehicle is so constructed or
loaded that a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to front and rear
of such vehicle then said signals must be given by such a lamp or device.
All signals herein required given by hand and arm shall be given from the left
side of the vehicle in the following manner and such signals shall indicate as
follows:
      1.   Left turn: Hand and arm extended horizontally.
      2.   Right turn: Hand and arm extended upward.
      3.   Stop or decrease of speed: Hand and arm extended downward. (Ord.
117, 10-6-1964)
9-3-5: DRIVING FROM ALLEYS, DRIVEWAYS OR GARAGES:
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or garage, shall stop
such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or across a sidewalk
line projected across such alley, and shall exercise extreme care in driving
upon said sidewalk or across such lines. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-3-6: VEHICLE NOT TO BE DRIVEN ON SIDEWALKS OR IN SAFETY ZONES:
No driver of a vehicle shall drive within any sidewalk area except at a
permanent or temporary driveway, nor at any time into or upon any portion of a
roadway marked as a safety zone. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-3-7: RIGHT OF WAY:
Excepting as otherwise herein provided, the driver of a vehicle approaching an
intersection shall yield the right of way to a vehicle which has entered the
intersection from a different highway; and when two (2) vehicles entering an
intersection from different highways at approximately the same time, the driver
of the vehicle on the left shall yield right of way to the vehicle on the
right. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-3-8: TURNING:
   (A)   Turning Left: The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending
to turn to the left shall yield the right of way to any vehicle approaching
from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close
thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard, but said driver, having so
yielded and having given a signal when and as required, may make such left turn
and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection from said
opposite direction shall yield the right of way to the vehicle making the left
turn.
   (B)   Limitations On Turning Around: It shall be unlawful for the operator
of any vehicle to turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction
unless such movement can be made in safety and without backing into traffic or
otherwise interfering with traffic.
   (C)   U-Turn: It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to make a
U-turn at any place where such turns are prohibited by ordinance. Such
prohibition shall be indicated by appropriate signs.
   (D)   No Left Turn: It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to
turn left at any place where such turns are prohibited by ordinance. Such
prohibition shall be indicated by appropriate signs. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-3-9: FIRE DEPARTMENT VEHICLES; FIRES:
Upon the approach of a fire department vehicle, drivers of vehicles shall
comply with the provisions of this title relating to the approach of authorized
emergency vehicle.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, other than one on official
business, to follow any fire apparatus in response to a fire alarm, closer than
one block or to park any vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has
stopped to answer a fire alarm.
It shall be further unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive over an
unprotected hose of the fire department without the consent of the fire chief
or the assistant in command. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-3-10: DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY:
Upon all roadways of sufficient width a vehicle shall be driven upon the right
half of the roadway except as follows:
   (A)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing such movement;
   (B)   When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair;
   (C)   Upon a roadway divided into three (3) marked lanes for traffic under
the rules applicable thereon; or
   (D)   Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic.
   (E)   Whenever there is a single track paved road on one side of the public
highway and two (2) vehicles meet thereon, the driver on whose right is the
wider shoulder shall give the right of way on such pavement to the other
vehicle. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-3-11: PASSING VEHICLES:
Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to
the right and upon roadways having width for not more than one line of traffic
in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least one-half (1/2)
of the main traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible. (Ord. 117,
10-6-1964)
9-3-12: OVERTAKING VEHICLES:
   (A)   Rules To Govern: The following rules shall govern the overtaking and
passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject to these
limitations, exceptions and special rules hereinafter stated:
      1.   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not
again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the
overtaken vehicle.
      2.   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his
vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
   (B)   Overtaking Vehicles On The Right:
      1.   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of
another vehicle which is making or about to make a left turn.
      2.   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and allowing sufficient
clearance, pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction either upon
the left or upon the right on a roadway with unobstructed pavement of
sufficient width for four (4) or more lines of moving traffic when such
movement can be made in safety. No person shall drive off the pavement or upon
the shoulder of the roadway in overtaking or passing on the right.
      3.   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon
the right on a one-way street or on any street on which traffic is restricted
to one direction of movement where the roadway is free from obstruction and of
sufficient width for two (2) or more lanes of moving vehicles.
   (C)   Limitations On Overtaking On The Left:
      1.   No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of center of the roadway
in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction
unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a
sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be
completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle
approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken.
In every event the overtaking vehicle must return to the right hand side of the
roadway before coming within one hundred feet (100') of any vehicle approaching
from the opposite direction.
      2.   No vehicle shall, in overtaking and passing another vehicle or at
any other time, be driven to the left side of the roadway under the following
conditions:
         (a)   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the
highway where the driver's view is obstructed within sufficient distance as to
create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite
direction.
         (b)   When approaching within one hundred feet (100') of or traversing
any intersection or railroad grade crossing.
         (c)   When official signs are in place directing that traffic keep to
the right, or a distinctive line also so directs traffic as declared in the
sign manual adopted by the Illinois state department of public works and
buildings.
         (d)   The limitations in subsections (C)2(a) and (C)2(b) of this
section shall not apply upon a one-way street, or upon a street with
unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for two (2) or more lanes of moving
traffic in each direction when such movement can be made with safety. (Ord.
117, 10-6-1964)
9-3-13: ONE-WAY ROADWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS:
   (A)   Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic a vehicle
shall be driven only in the direction designated.
   (B)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven on
the right of such island. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-3-14: DRIVING ON ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC:
Whenever any roadway has been divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes
for traffic, the following rules in addition to all others consistent herewith
shall apply:
   (A)   A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practical entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first
ascertained that such movement can be made with safety.
   (B)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three (3) lanes a vehicle shall
not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another
vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is clear of
traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn or where such
center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the
direction that the vehicle is proceeding and is signposted to give notice of
such allocation.
   (C)   Official signs may be erected directing specific traffic to use a
designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway and drivers of
vehicles shall obey the direction of such signs.
   (D)   Official traffic control devices may be installed prohibiting the
changing of lanes on sections of roadways and drivers of vehicles shall obey
such signs. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-3-15: OPERATION OF VEHICLES ON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle, when the driver
is giving audible sign by siren or bell, the driver of every other vehicle
shall yield the right of way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel
to, and as close as possible to the right hand edge or curb of the highway
clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the
authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a
police officer.
This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency
vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons
using the highway. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-3-16: RECKLESS, NEGLIGENT OR CARELESS DRIVING:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle in the city of Canton, Illinois, in
a careless, reckless, negligent or wanton manner, or carelessly so as to
endanger life or property. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-3-17: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle on any street in the city of
Canton, Illinois, not under the jurisdiction of the Illinois state department
of public works and buildings, or the county, in an urban district within the
city of Canton at a speed in excess of thirty (30) miles per hour, or in any
alley in said city at a speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour.
It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle on any highway outside the urban
district at a speed more than fifty five (55) miles per hour.
It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle of the first division towing another
vehicle, outside of any urban district, in the said city of Canton, at more
than fifty five (55) miles per hour, in an urban district at more than thirty
(30) miles per hour, or more than fifteen (15) miles an hour in an alley.
Provided, that if the mayor and city council by ordinance, set other limits as
provided by statute of the state of Illinois 1 , after an engineering of
traffic survey, then such limits shall govern the rate of speed on the streets
indicated in such ordinance. Appropriate signs shall be posted showing such
speed limits.
The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed the applicable maximum
speed limit does not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed when
approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching and going around a
curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding
roadway or when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other
traffic by reason of weather or highway conditions; and speed shall be
decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle on
or entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of
all persons to use due care.
It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle on any street or highway within the
city of Canton, Illinois, under the jurisdiction of the state department of
public works and buildings of the state of Illinois, or of the county of
Fulton, at a speed exceeding that lawfully set for such street.
Provided further, that the speed of all vehicles of the second division as
defined by the statute of the state of Illinois shall be as follows:
   (A)   If the vehicle is designed and used for pulling or carrying freight
and has a gross weight of eight thousand (8,000) pounds or less (including the
weight of the vehicle and maximum load), and is equipped with pneumatic tires,
the maximum is fifty five (55) miles per hour outside of an urban district,
thirty (30) miles per hour in an urban district, and fifteen (15) miles per
hour in an alley; but if such vehicle is equipped with two (2) or more solid
tires, the maximum speed is ten (10) miles per hour at all times and in all
locations.
   (B)   If the vehicle is designed and used for pulling or carrying freight
and has a gross weight of more than eight thousand (8,000) pounds (including
the weight of the vehicle and maximum load), and is equipped with pneumatic
tires, the maximum speed is fifty (50) miles per hour outside of an urban
district and thirty (30) miles per hour in an urban district, and fifteen (15)
miles per hour in an alley; but if such vehicle is equipped with two (2) or
more solid tires, the maximum speed is ten (10) miles per hour at all times and
in all locations. (Ord. 881, 4-21-1981)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/1-147.
9-3-17-1: SPECIAL SPEED LIMIT ON NORTH PARK DRIVE:
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven or operated on North Park
Drive in the city between the Canton park district property on the west and the
west right of way line of North Main Street on the east at a speed greater than
twenty (20) miles per hour. Penalties for violations of this section shall be
as established for speed violations in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes. (Ord.
974, 4-19-1983)
9-3-17-2: SPECIAL SPEED LIMIT ON EAST BIRCH STREET:
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven or operated on East Birch
Street in the city between the east right of way line of North Main Street to a
point five hundred feet (500') east of the east right of way line of North
Fifth Avenue at a speed greater than twenty five (25) miles per hour. Penalties
for violations of this section shall be as established for speed violations in
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes. (Ord. 1070, 6-18-1985)
9-3-17-3: SPECIAL SPEED LIMIT ON NORTH FOURTH AVENUE:
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven or operated on North Fourth
Avenue in the city between the north right of way line of East Birch Street to
a point five hundred feet (500') north of the north right of way line of Linden
Street at a speed greater than twenty five (25) miles per hour. Penalties for
violations of this section shall be as established for speed violations in 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes. (Ord. 1069, 6-4-1985)
9-3-17-4: SPECIAL SPEED LIMIT ON STREETS ADJACENT TO GRAHAM HOSPITAL:
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven at a speed greater than
twenty five (25) miles per hour on the following segments of streets in the
city of Canton:
Martin Avenue between Walnut Street and Maple Street.
South Avenue B between the south right of way line of Maple Street to a point
three hundred seventy five feet (375') south of the south right of way line of
Maple Street.
West Maple Street between the west right of way line of South Avenue B to a
point seven hundred sixty feet (760') west of said west right of way line of
South Avenue B.
West Walnut Street between the west right of way line of Martin Avenue to a
point eight hundred thirty feet (830') west of said west right of way line of
Martin Avenue.
Penalties for violation of this section shall be as established for speed
violations in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes. (Ord. 1844, 9-6-2005)
9-3-18: SPECIAL SPEED LIMITS WHILE PASSING SCHOOLS:
No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles
per hour while passing a school zone or while traveling upon any public
thoroughfare on or across which children pass going to and from school during
school days when schoolchildren are present. Appropriate signs shall be posted
to indicate this restriction. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-3-19: TRAFFIC NOT TO BE OBSTRUCTED:
No vehicle shall be operated or allowed to remain upon the street in such a
manner as to form an unreasonable obstruction to the traffic thereon. (Ord.
117, 10-6-1964)
9-3-20: BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES:
It shall be unlawful for more than one person to ride upon any bicycle
propelled by human power upon any street, or for any person to ride upon any
motorcycle other than upon a seat permanently attached to said vehicle to the
right or rear of the operator. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-3-21: UNATTENDED VEHICLES:
No vehicle shall be left unattended while the motor of such vehicle is running;
and no vehicle shall be left without a driver on any hill or incline unless the
vehicle is secured against moving.
Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any bridge or
causeway or in any tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction of
traffic, such officer is hereby authorized to provide for the removal of such
vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-3-22: UNATTENDED ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful to leave any horse or other draft animal unattended in any
street of the city without having such animal securely fastened. (Ord. 117, 10-
6-1964)
9-3-23: CLINGING TO VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person on any street riding a bicycle, motorcycle,
or any toy vehicle to cling to or attach himself or his vehicle to any moving
motor vehicle or wagon. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-3-24: TOY VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person upon a coaster, sled or other toy vehicle
to go upon any roadway other than at a crosswalk. (Ord. 1899, 3-6-2007)
9-3-24-1: SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES:
No person shall operate or ride on a skateboard or roller skates of any type on
any of the following areas:
   (A)   Any street or alley;
   (B)   Parking lots owned or leased by the city;
   (C)   On any public or private property where signs have been posted at the
entrance or displayed prominently on the property prohibiting the use of
skateboards or roller skates of any type;
   (D)   On any sidewalks running parallel to the following streets ("sidewalk"
meaning both sides of the street):
Anywhere in Jones park.
Chestnut Street from Avenue B to Third Avenue.
Elm Street from Avenue B to Third Avenue.
First Avenue from Locust Street to Walnut Street.
Locust Street from Avenue B to Third Avenue.
Main Street from Locust Street to Walnut Street.
Pine Street from Avenue B to Second Avenue.
Walnut Street from Martin Avenue to Second Avenue.
White Court from Elm Street to Walnut Street. (Ord. 1350, 5-5-1992)
9-3-24-2: IMPOUNDMENT:
The chief of police is hereby authorized and empowered to impound, for a period
not to exceed sixty (60) days, any toy vehicle as defined in this section
9-3-24 or any skateboard or roller skates used in violation of any of the
provisions of this section
9-3-24 or in violation of any of the ordinances of the city regulating traffic,
so far as they are applicable. When the owner/rider of any toy vehicle,
skateboard or roller skates is known, he or she shall be given or sent a letter
to his or her last known address notifying him or her that the toy vehicle,
skateboard or roller skates have been impounded and informing the owner/rider
how to claim the impounded toy vehicle, skateboard or roller skates. Where the
owner/rider of the toy vehicle, skateboard or roller skates is under age
seventeen (17), a copy of the letter shall be sent to his or her parent or
guardian, if known.
Any toy vehicle, skateboard or roller skates impounded under this section may
be redeemed after thirty (30) days or after the owner's first appearance in
city court, whichever occurs first. The redemption fee for any impounded
property shall be twenty dollars ($20.00). This fee is in addition to any fines
or penalties, which may be assessed for the violation of this code. After sixty
(60) days, all unclaimed toy vehicles, skateboards or roller skates shall be
deemed property of the city of Canton. (Ord. 1797, 5-4-2004)
9-3-24-3: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
The parent of any minor child, and the guardian of any ward, shall not
authorize or knowingly permit such child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this section
9-3-24. In the case of any violations of this section
9-3-24 by a minor child or ward under the age of thirteen (13), any parent or
guardian of such child or ward shall be presumed to be knowingly permitting the
child or ward to violate the provisions of this section
9-3-24 and shall be held financially responsible for any citations issued to
the child. (Ord. 1797, 5-4-2004)
9-3-24-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating this section
9-3-24 or section
9-3-24-1 of this chapter or any person deemed responsible for any person
violating said sections under section
9-3-24-3 of this chapter shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars
($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 1797, 5-4-2004)
9-3-25: RIDING ON RUNNING BOARDS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride upon the fenders, running board or
outside step of any vehicle. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-3-26: TRAIN SIGNALS:
The driver of a vehicle approaching a railroad grade crossing when a signal
device gives warning of the immediate approach of a train, shall stop within
fifty feet (50') but not less than ten feet (10') from the nearest track of
such railroad and shall not proceed until he can do so safely.
The driver of a vehicle shall stop at and not traverse such grade crossing when
a crossing gate is lowered or when a flagman, or automatic signal warns of the
approach of a train.
The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire, or any school bus
carrying any schoolchildren, or any vehicle carrying explosives or flammable
liquid as cargo shall stop such vehicle within fifty feet (50') but not less
than ten feet (10') from the nearest rail of the tracks and shall listen and
look in both directions along such track from which a train might come before
proceeding across such tracks at a grade crossing. Provided that no such stop
need be made at any such crossing where a police officer or a traffic control
signal directs traffic to proceed. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-3-27: FUNERAL OR OTHER PROCESSIONS:
   (A)   Driving Through Funeral Or Other Procession: No driver of a vehicle
shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized
procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously
designated as required in this title.
   (B)   Drivers In A Procession: Each driver in a funeral or other procession
shall drive as near to the right hand side of the roadway as close as practical
and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as practical and safe.
   (C)   Funeral Processions To Be Identified: A funeral composed of a
procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the
outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia and by
having the lights of each vehicle lighted. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-3-28: BACKING:
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be
made with reasonable safety and without interference with other traffic. (Ord.
117, 10-6-1964)
9-3-29: RESTRICTED ACCESS:
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled or limited
controlled access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are established
by public authority. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-3-30: TRUCKS PROHIBITED ON CITY STREETS:
All trucks traveling within the City shall confine their movement within the
City upon State routes, except as hereinabove provided.
This restriction shall not apply to trucks normally classified as one ton
maximum and having not more than two (2) axles.
Except as hereinafter provided, all other trucks larger than those specified
above shall be permitted off State routes within the City only for the purpose
of making local delivery and when such local delivery is made, said truck shall
leave said State route to provide the shortest route from the State route to
the point of local delivery, traveling, if possible, on hard surfaced streets,
and shall return after making said local delivery by the same route to the
State route.
Notwithstanding anything hereinabove provided, trucks may enter or leave the
City on West Hickory Street but shall be required when entering the City on
West Hickory Street to turn therefrom at its intersection with South Main
Street and thence proceed south on South Main Street to East Linn Street and
thence east on East Linn Street to its intersection with State routes at South
Fifth Avenue; further, notwithstanding anything hereinabove provided, trucks
may enter or leave the City on West Vine Street between the City limits on the
west and North Main Street on the east. (Ord. 968, 3-15-1983)
9-3-31: LIMITED LOAD STREETS:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any street in the City when the
gross weight on the surface of the road through any axle of such vehicle
exceeds sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds. Where lower limits are imposed by
ordinance and signs indicating such limitations are posted, it shall be
unlawful to operate a vehicle in excess of such weight on such street, except
for the purpose of making delivery or picking up a load, in which case such
vehicle may be driven on such street for not more than the minimum distance
necessary for the purpose.
   (A)   Exceptions:
      1.   No motor vehicle having a weight of eight thousand (8,000) pounds or
over, whether loaded or unloaded, shall be operated on Seventeenth Avenue in
the City, between East Walnut and East Chestnut Streets in said City; provided,
however, this provision shall not apply to emergency vehicles or vehicles
making pick ups or deliveries.
      2.   No single unit vehicle, as defined by the Illinois Vehicle Code,
weighing more than twenty three (23) tons may be driven or operated upon the
Cass Street Bridge. No combination vehicle, as defined by the Illinois Vehicle
Code, weighing more than thirty two (32) tons may be driven or operated upon
the Cass Street Bridge. That the City shall erect proper signage, as regulated
by the Illinois Vehicle Code and Illinois Department of Transportation, to
allow for proper display of these regulations. (Ord. 4117, 10-16-2018)
9-3-32: SCHOOL BUSES:
The driver of a vehicle on any street or highway upon meeting or overtaking
from either direction any school bus which has stopped on the highway for the
purpose of receiving or discharging any schoolchildren shall stop the vehicle
before reaching such school bus when there is in operation on the bus a visual
signal as required by statute for operation while the bus is transporting
pupils; provided that the driver of a vehicle upon a street or highway of which
the roadways for traffic moving in opposite directions are separated by a strip
of ground at least four feet (4') wide which is not surfaced or suitable for
vehicle traffic or on a controlled access highway where pedestrians are not
permitted to cross, need not stop his vehicle upon meeting or passing a school
bus which is on the opposite roadway. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-3-33: FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY:
   (A)   The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more
closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such
vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the street.
   (B)   The driver of any motor vehicle of the second division or motor
vehicle drawing another vehicle when traveling upon a street outside of a
business or residence district shall not follow within three hundred feet
(300') of another motor vehicle of the second division or motor vehicle drawing
another vehicle. The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed to
prevent overtaking and passing nor shall the same apply upon any lane
specifically designated for use by motor vehicles of the second division.
   (C)   Motor vehicles being driven upon any street outside of a business or
residence district in a caravan or motorcade whether or not towing other
vehicles shall be so operated as to allow sufficient space between each such
vehicle or combination of vehicles so as to enable any other vehicle to enter
and occupy such space without danger. This provision shall not apply to funeral
processions. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
CHAPTER 4
PEDESTRIANS
SECTION:
9-4-1: Right Of Way
9-4-2: Pedestrians Crossing Roadway
9-4-3: Signals
9-4-4: Standing On Sidewalk
9-4-5: Pedestrian Crossing
9-4-6: Pedestrians Walking Along Roadway
9-4-7: Blind Pedestrians Right Of Way
9-4-1: RIGHT OF WAY:
Where traffic control signals or pedestrian control signals provided for in
chapter 1 of this title are not in place or in operation, the driver of a
vehicle shall yield the right of way, slowing down or stopping, if need be, to
a pedestrian crossing the roadway or street within any marked crosswalk or
within any unmarked crosswalk.
Whenever stop signals or flashing red signals are in place at an intersection
or a marked crosswalk between intersections the pedestrian shall have the right
of way over drivers of vehicles; and at such marked places drivers of vehicles
shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk and any pedestrian within or
entering the crosswalk at either edge of the roadway shall have the right of
way over any vehicle so stopped.
The driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering any crosswalk when any
vehicle proceeding in the same direction is stopped at such crosswalk for the
purpose of permitting a pedestrian to cross. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-4-2: PEDESTRIANS CROSSING ROADWAY:
At no place shall the pedestrian cross any roadway other than by the most
direct route to the opposite curbing, and when crossing at any place other than
a crosswalk he shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
No person shall stand or loiter in any roadway other than in a safety zone, if
such act interferes with the lawful movement of traffic. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-4-3: SIGNALS:
At intersections where traffic is directed by a policeman or by a stop and go
signal, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cross the roadway other than
with released traffic, if such crossing interferes with the lawful movement of
traffic. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-4-4: STANDING ON SIDEWALK:
It shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to stand upon any sidewalk except as near
as reasonably possible to the building line or curb line, if such standing
interferes with the use of said sidewalk by other pedestrians. (Ord. 117, 10-6-
1964)
9-4-5: PEDESTRIAN CROSSING:
   (A)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than a crosswalk in any
business district. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-4-6: PEDESTRIANS WALKING ALONG ROADWAY:
   (A)   Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian
to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (B)   Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the
roadway or its shoulder facing traffic, and upon meeting a vehicle shall step
off to the left.
   (C)   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a
ride from the driver of any vehicle. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-4-7: BLIND PEDESTRIANS RIGHT OF WAY:
Any blind person who is carrying in a raised or extended position a cane or
walking stick which is white in color or white tipped with red, or who is being
guided by a dog, shall have the right of way in crossing any street or highway,
whether or not traffic on such street or highway is controlled by traffic
signals, anything in this title to the contrary notwithstanding. The driver of
every vehicle approaching the place where a blind person, so carrying such a
cane or walking stick or being so guided, is crossing a street or highway shall
bring his vehicle to a full stop and before proceeding, shall take such
precautions as may be necessary to avoid injury to the blind person. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to a blind person who is not
carrying such a cane or walking stick or is not guided by a dog, but the other
provisions of this chapter relating to pedestrians shall be applicable to such
person. However, the failure of a blind person to so use or so carry such a
cane or walking stick or to be guided by a guide dog when walking on streets,
highways or sidewalks, shall not be considered evidence of contributory
negligence. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
CHAPTER 5
PARKING RULES 1
SECTION:
9-5-1: No Parking Places
9-5-2: Snow Removal
9-5-3: Street Cleaning
9-5-4: Time Limit Parking And Overnight Parking
9-5-5: Towing Cars Away
9-5-6: Parking At Curb
9-5-7: Vehicles For Sale
9-5-8: Loading Zone
9-5-9: All Night Parking
9-5-10: Alleys
9-5-11: Cab Stands, Bus Stands
9-5-12: Parking Motor Vehicles On Private Property
9-5-13: Signs
9-5-14: Handicap Parking
9-5-15: Parking On Terraces
9-5-16: Parking Of Trailers, Motor Homes, And Nonmotorized Vehicles On Streets
9-5-17: Truck Parking And Refrigerated Truck Control
9-5-18: Eastview Elementary School Pick Up Lane
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 10 of this title for traffic schedules.
9-5-1: NO PARKING PLACES:
It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand at any time in any of the
following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or
in compliance with the directions of a policeman or traffic control device.
   (A)   In any intersection.
   (B)   In a crosswalk.
   (C)   Upon any bridge or viaduct, or in any subway or tunnel or the approach
thereto.
   (D)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet
(30') of a point of the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone.
   (E)   Within thirty feet (30') of a traffic signal, beacon or sign on the
approaching side.
   (F)   Within twenty feet (20') of any intersection or crosswalk.
   (G)   At any place where the standing of a vehicle will reduce the usable
width of the roadway for moving traffic to less than eighteen feet (18').
   (H)   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
   (I)   At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a driveway.
   (J)   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad grade
crossing.
   (K)   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any Fire
Department station and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any
such station within seventy five feet (75') of such entrance when properly
signposted.
   (L)   On any sidewalk or parkway.
   (M)   At any place where official signs prohibit parking. (Ord. 117, 10-6-
1964)
9-5-2: SNOW REMOVAL:
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any public street in the City at
any time within twelve (12) hours after a snowfall of three inches (3") or more
has occurred. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-5-3: STREET CLEANING:
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any public street or portion
thereof in the City at any time when such street is being cleaned. Signs
indicating that a street or portion thereof is being cleaned shall be posted
immediately before the cleaning of the street, and shall be removed after the
cleaning of the street is finished. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-5-4: TIME LIMIT PARKING AND OVERNIGHT PARKING:
   (A)   Except on Saturdays, Sundays or holidays, it shall be unlawful to park
any vehicle from the time period of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to five o'clock
(5:00) P.M., for more than two (2) hours in any designated restricted parking
area. Additionally, except on Saturdays, Sundays or holidays, it shall be
unlawful to park any vehicle from the time period of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
to five o'clock (5:00) P.M., for more than two (2) hours on West Pine Street
between Avenue A and Main Street on both sides of the road, in addition to
South Main Street between Pine Street and Walnut Street.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle overnight on any day of the
week or holidays at certain locations parallel and running adjacent to the City
Square. Overnight shall be defined for these purposes as parking from one
o'clock (1:00) A.M. until six o'clock (6:00) A.M. It shall be unlawful to park
overnight at the following locations:
Chestnut Street from Avenue A to 1st Avenue
East Side Square from Chestnut to Elm Street
Elm Street from Avenue A to 1st Avenue
Main Street from Locust Street to Pine Street
White Court from Elm Street to Pine Street (Ord. 4126, 1-15-2019)
9-5-5: TOWING CARS AWAY:
The Police Department and all members thereof assigned to traffic duty are
hereby authorized to remove and tow away or have removed and towed away by
commercial towing service, any car or other vehicle illegally parked in any
place where such parked vehicle creates or constitutes a traffic hazard, blocks
the use of a fire hydrant or obstructs or may obstruct the movement of any
emergency vehicle; or any vehicle which has been parked in any public street or
other public place for a period of twenty four (24) consecutive hours.
Cars so towed away shall be stored on any City property or in a public garage
or parking lot and shall be restored to the owner or operator thereof after
payment of the expense incurred by the City in removing and storing said
vehicles. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-5-6: PARKING AT CURB:
No vehicle shall be parked with the left side of such vehicle next to the curb,
except on one-way streets, and it shall be unlawful to stand or park any
vehicle in a street other than parallel with the curb and with the two (2)
right wheels of the vehicle within twelve inches (12") of the regular
established curb line, except that upon those streets that have been marked for
angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by
such marks. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-5-7: VEHICLES FOR SALE:
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for the purpose of
displaying it for sale, or to park any vehicle upon any business street from
which vehicle merchandise is peddled. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-5-8: LOADING ZONE:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stand a passenger vehicle
for a period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of
passengers, not to exceed thirty (30) minutes, in any place designated by the
City Council as a loading zone and marked as such, or in any of the following
designated places:
   (A)   At any place not to exceed seventy five feet (75') along the curb
before the entrance to any hospital or hotel at any time.
   (B)   At any place not to exceed seventy five feet (75') along the curb line
before the entrance to a public building between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) P.M., except on a Sunday.
   (C)   Directly in front of the entrance to any theater at any time that the
theater is open. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-5-9: ALL NIGHT PARKING:
   (A)   (Rep. by Ord. 1998, 4-6-2010)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle or to allow any previously
parked vehicle to remain in the parking spaces located immediately adjacent to
and facing Jones Park between the hours of one minute after twelve o'clock (12:
01) A.M. until six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. 1443, 8-16-1994)
9-5-10: ALLEYS:
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such
conditions as to leave available less than ten feet (10') of the width of the
roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop,
stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the
driveway entrance to any abutting property. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-5-11: CAB STANDS, BUS STANDS:
No vehicle other than a licensed taxicab shall be parked in any area designated
by ordinance as a cab stand; and no vehicle other than a bus shall be parked in
a place so designated as a bus loading zone. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-5-12: PARKING MOTOR VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any private property without
the consent of the owner of the property. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-5-13: SIGNS:
Appropriate signs shall be posted in all areas where parking is limited or
prohibited, indicating such limitations or prohibitions. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-5-14: HANDICAP PARKING:
   (A)   Handicap parking spaces shall be provided in all city owned, leased or
operated parking lots in a ratio of not less than four percent (4%) of the
total of all parking spaces in each such lot but with not less than two (2)
such handicapped parking spaces per lot.
   (B)   That no motor vehicle shall be parked in a handicapped parking space
on either public or private property in violation of this section, of section
3-616 or of section 11-1301.3 of the Illinois vehicle code 1 .
   (C)   That the use of such handicap parking spaces shall be reserved to the
exclusive use of handicap persons subject, however, to all other restrictions
placed upon the parking of motor vehicles in such lots. Identification of
handicap persons using such spaces shall be made in one of the following ways:
      1.   By reference to the display on a parked motor vehicle of a handicap
vehicle license plate, decal, or device issued by one of the several states or
subdivisions thereof and displayed on a currently registered motor vehicle.
   (D)   The construction and layout of handicap parking spaces shall be in
conformity with the requirements set forth in state of Illinois capital
development board publication, "Accessibility Standards (Illustrated)" (June
1978), as the same may be amended. Each such handicap parking space shall be
clearly marked and identified as such.
   (E)   Handicap persons selling or transferring motor vehicles shall remove
the decal or device from such vehicle prior to the sale or transfer. No
replacement decal or device shall be issued unless the remains or scrapings
from the prior decal or device are presented to the police department at the
time the request for replacement is made. (Ord. 1985, 8-4-2009)
   (F)   Use of a handicap parking space by a motor vehicle not being then used
for the transportation of handicap persons shall subject the operator of such
motor vehicle to the penalties set forth in title 1, chapter 27, "General
Penalty", of this code and the fee schedule that is adopted by city council
from time to time according to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301(c) for
each such occurrence, exclusive of court costs. The parking of a motor vehicle
not displaying a valid handicap marker as set forth in subsection (C)1 of this
section, in a handicap parking space shall be prima facie evidence of a
violation of this section. (Ord. 4034, 7-19-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS.
9-5-15: PARKING ON TERRACES:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any terrace which is zoned
on either an agricultural, conservation, or residential zoning configuration.
Parking on terraces is permitted in commercial, business, or industrial zoning
configurations but only if the terrace is paved with a concrete or asphalt
surface.
   (B)   As used in this section, the term "terrace" means that area between
the property line closest to the street and the street curb line closest to the
said property line; or, if a sidewalk is in place, that area between the
closest side of the sidewalk and the street curb line closest to the sidewalk.
   (C)   No vehicle shall be parked on any terrace within thirty feet (30') of
the right of way line of any intersecting street, alley, or other public way.
   (D)   Violation of this section shall be punished, upon conviction, by a
fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each such offense. (Ord. 1023, 1984)
9-5-16: PARKING OF TRAILERS, MOTOR HOMES, AND NONMOTORIZED VEHICLES ON STREETS:
   (A)   Terms: As used in this section the following terms shall have the
following definitions:
    MOTOR HOME: Any motorized vehicle which is designed or constructed to
physically incorporate thereon one or more of the following:
      1.   Sleeping accommodations for one or more persons;
      2.   Cooking facilities;
      3.   Sanitary facilities;
      4.   And, which is greater than six feet eight inches (6'8") in width,
outside bumper to outside bumper.
   NONMOTORIZED VEHICLE: Any "vehicle", as defined in this title, which is not
powered or propelled by a motor or other energy source incorporated into the
design or construction of the vehicle.
   (B)   Parking Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or
permit to be parked, any trailer, motor home, or nonmotorized vehicle which is
owned, operated, controlled by, or registered to such person, on any street,
alley, or other public way within the corporate limits of the City.
   (C)   Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each such offense. (Ord. 1110, 6-17-1986)
9-5-17: TRUCK PARKING AND REFRIGERATED TRUCK CONTROL:
   (A)   Definitions: The following terms shall have the meanings given them:
BUS: A motor vehicle, other than a commuter van, designed for carrying more
than ten (10) persons.
LARGER TRUCK: Any motor truck with a D license or larger.
REFRIGERATED TRUCK: A truck or trailer or other movable container which is
refrigerated by means of an internal combustion engine as its source of
power.   
TRUCK-TRACTOR: Any motor truck designed to pull a semitrailer.
   (B)   Truck Parking: No person shall park, leave or store any larger truck,
truck-tractor, bus or refrigerated truck on the streets of the City except
under the following circumstances:
      1.   When a bona fide delivery is being made for the reasonable time
required.
      2.   Where the vehicle is mechanically disabled for the reasonable time
required to remove same for repair.
   (C)   Refrigerated Truck Control: No person may park, leave or store any
refrigerated truck while its refrigeration engine is operating or any truck or
truck-tractor with its engine running except when parked in an area zoned for
such purpose and more than five hundred feet (500') from any zoned residential
area.
   (D)   Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this section
shall be fined not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or be incarcerated in a penal institution for a
period of time not to exceed thirty (30) days, or both. Each day or portion
thereof that a violation is allowed to exist shall constitute a separate
offense. (Ord. 1455, 3-21-1995)
9-5-18: EASTVIEW ELEMENTARY SCHOOL PICK UP LANE:
   (A)   On Monday through Friday while school is in session, there shall be a
student pick-up lane created and designated with striping from 13th Avenue
heading east continuing to the west entrance to the Eastview Elementary School.
   (B)   From two o'clock (2:00) P.M. until four o'clock (4:00) P.M. on each
respective school day, there shall be no parking in the designated pick-up lane
to allow for pick-up of students from the school. (Ord. 4118, 10-16-2018)
CHAPTER 6
PARKING METERS
(Rep. by Ord. 614, 11-15-1977)
CHAPTER 7
THROUGH, ONE-WAY, YIELD RIGHT OF WAY STREETS, AND STOP INTERSECTIONS 1
SECTION:
9-7-1: Through Streets
9-7-2: One-Way Streets Or Alleys
9-7-3: Stop Streets
9-7-4: Yield Right Of Way Streets
9-7-5: Posted Signs
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 10 of this title for traffic schedules.
9-7-1: THROUGH STREETS:
The streets and parts of streets of the city designated by ordinance as through
streets are hereby declared to be through streets. The driver of a vehicle
shall stop at the entrance to a through street and shall yield the right of way
to other vehicles which have entered the intersection or which are approaching
so close on a through street as to constitute an immediate hazard unless
directed otherwise by the traffic officer or a traffic control signal. (Ord.
117, 10-6-1964)
9-7-2: ONE-WAY STREETS OR ALLEYS:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any street or alley designated
as a one-way street or alley by ordinance, in any direction other than that so
designated. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-7-3: STOP STREETS:
The driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to a stop sign at an
intersection where a stop sign is erected, pursuant to ordinance, at one or
more entrances thereto, and shall proceed cautiously, yielding to the vehicles
not so obliged to stop which are within the intersection or approaching so
close as to constitute an immediate hazard, unless traffic at such intersection
is controlled by a police officer on duty, in which event the directions of the
police officer shall be complied with. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-7-4: YIELD RIGHT OF WAY STREETS:
Any street designated by ordinance as a yield right of way street and so posted
is hereby declared to be a yield right of way street.
The driver of a vehicle in obedience to a yield right of way sign shall reduce
the speed of his vehicle to not more than twenty (20) miles per hour and shall
yield the right of way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection
street either from the right or left or which are approaching so closely on
such intersection as to constitute a hazard; but said driver having so yielded
may proceed at such time as a safe interval occurs.
If a driver is involved in a collision at an intersection or interferes with
the movement of other vehicles after driving past a yield right of way sign,
such collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of the driver's failure to
yield right of way. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-7-5: POSTED SIGNS:
Appropriate signs shall be posted to show all through, stop and yield right of
way streets; all one-way streets and alleys; and all stop intersections. (Ord.
117, 10-6-1964)
CHAPTER 8
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT 1
SECTION:
9-8-1: Clear Vision
9-8-2: Gas And Smoke
9-8-3: Unnecessary Noise
9-8-4: Driving Unsafe Vehicles Prohibited
9-8-5: Spilling Loads
9-8-6: Brakes
9-8-7: Horn
9-8-8: Lamps On Vehicles Owned By Firemen
9-8-9: Lights
9-8-10: Muffler
9-8-11: Nonskid Devices
9-8-12: Width, Length And Height; Projecting Loads
9-8-13: Signal Lamps And Signal Devices
9-8-14: Tires
9-8-15: Weight
9-8-16: Bicycles; Lamps Required
9-8-17: Motorcycles, Trailers; Lights Required
9-8-18: Squealing Or Screeching Of Tires Prohibited
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 10 of this title for traffic schedules.
9-8-1: CLEAR VISION:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which is so loaded or in such a
condition that the operator does not have a clear vision of all parts of the
roadway essential to the safe operation of the vehicle.
Any vehicle with the view of the roadway to the rear so obstructed shall be
equipped with a mirror so attached as to give him a view of the roadway behind
him. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-8-2: GAS AND SMOKE:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which emits smoke or such an amount
of smoke or fumes as to be dangerous to the health of the persons or as to
endanger the drivers of other vehicles. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-8-3: UNNECESSARY NOISE:
It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle which makes unusually loud or
unnecessary noise. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-8-4: DRIVING UNSAFE VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to drive or move or for the owner to cause or
knowingly permit to be driven or moved on any highway any vehicle or
combination of vehicles which is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any
person or property, or which does not contain those parts or is not at all
times equipped with such lamps and other equipment in proper condition and
adjustment as required by statute, or which is equipped in any manner in
violation of the statutes. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-8-5: SPILLING LOADS:
No vehicle shall be so loaded that any part of its load spills or drops on any
street or alley in the municipality. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-8-6: BRAKES:
It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle upon a street unless such
vehicle is equipped with good and sufficient brakes in good working condition,
as required by the state traffic law, or to operate any vehicle which is so
loaded that the operator does not have ready access to the mechanics operating
the brakes of such vehicles. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-8-7: HORN:
Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a good and sufficient audible
signaling device in efficient working condition. Such signaling device shall be
sounded when necessary to give timely warning of the approach of a vehicle, but
such horn or other signaling device shall not be sounded for any purpose other
than as a warning of impending danger.
No motor vehicle other than an emergency vehicle shall be equipped with a siren
or gong signaling device. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-8-8: LAMPS ON VEHICLES OWNED BY FIREMEN:
Any motor vehicle owned or fully operated by a fireman may be equipped with not
to exceed two (2) lamps which shall emit a blue light as provided by statute.
(Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-8-9: LIGHTS:
It shall be unlawful to operate or park on any street any vehicle not equipped
with adequate lights conforming to the requirements of the state law, provided
that vehicles may be parked at nighttime without lights on any street or
portion thereof, designated by ordinance as a place where vehicles may be so
parked at nighttime. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-8-10: MUFFLER:
No motor vehicle shall be operated on any street unless such vehicle is
provided with a muffler in efficient actual working condition; and the use of a
cutout is prohibited. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-8-11: NONSKID DEVICES:
It shall be unlawful to operate upon any street any motor vehicle equipped with
any nonskid device so constructed that any rigid or nonflexible portion thereof
comes in contact with the pavement or roadway. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-8-12: WIDTH, LENGTH AND HEIGHT; PROJECTING LOADS:
The maximum width, length and height of any vehicle and its load shall not
exceed the limits expressed in the Illinois state traffic law.
No passenger type vehicle shall be operated on the streets with a load
extending beyond the line of the fenders on the left side of the vehicle nor
extending more than six inches (6") beyond the line of the fenders on the right
side thereof.
No combination of vehicles coupled together shall consist of more than two (2)
units, but such limitation shall not apply to vehicles operated in daytime when
transporting pipes, poles, machinery and other objects which cannot be readily
dismembered, nor to such vehicles operated at nighttime by a public utility
when engaged in emergency repair work; but such loads carried at night shall be
clearly marked with sufficient lights to show the full dimensions of the load.
No part of the load of a vehicle shall extend more than three feet (3') in
front of the extreme front portion of the vehicle. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-8-13: SIGNAL LAMPS AND SIGNAL DEVICES:
Every motor vehicle and trailer having a gross weight of three thousand (3,000)
pounds and less, including the weight of the trailer and the maximum load,
shall be equipped with a signal lamp or signal device which is so constructed
and located on the vehicle as to give a signal of the intention to stop which
shall be red or yellow in color, and signals of intention to turn to the right
or left, all of which signals shall be plainly visible and understandable in
normal sunlight and at night from a distance of one hundred feet (100') to the
rear but shall not project a dazzling or glaring light; except that a stop
signal need be visible only from the rear.
Any trailer having a gross weight of three thousand (3,000) pounds or less,
including the weight of the trailer and maximum load, need not be equipped with
such turn signal device unless the distance from the steering wheel of the
towing vehicle to the left outside limits of such trailer body exceeds twenty
four inches (24").
All mechanical signal devices shall be self-illuminated during the period from
sunset to sunrise or when visibility is limited as to require the use of lights
for safety. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-8-14: TIRES:
It shall be unlawful to operate on any street any motor vehicle which is not
equipped with tires conforming to the requirements of the Illinois state
traffic law. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-8-15: WEIGHT:
It shall be unlawful to drive on any street any motor vehicle with the weight,
including load, in excess of that permitted by the state traffic law for
driving on improved highways, or with weight distributed in a manner not
conforming to such law, or in violation of special weight limits provided for
by ordinance and signposted. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-8-16: BICYCLES; LAMPS REQUIRED:
Every bicycle when upon a street, during the period from sunset to sunrise,
shall be equipped with at least one lighted lamp exhibiting a white light, or
light of a yellow or amber tint, visible from a distance of five hundred feet
(500') to the front of the bicycle and with at least one lighted lamp
exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to
the rear. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-8-17: MOTORCYCLES, TRAILERS; LIGHTS REQUIRED:
During the period from sunset to sunrise, or at any other time when visibility
is so limited as to require the use of lights for safety, every motorcycle
operated on any street or other public place in the city of Canton shall carry
and exhibit one lighted lamp commonly known as a driving light and every motor
vehicle two (2) such lighted lamps showing white lights, or lights of a yellow
or amber tint, visible at least five hundred feet (500') in the direction
toward which each motorcycle or motor vehicle is proceeding, and each motor
vehicle, trailer or semitrailer shall also exhibit at least one lighted lamp
which shall be so situated as to throw a red light visible for at least five
hundred feet (500') in the reverse direction; provided that every trailer
having a gross weight of three thousand (3,000) pounds or less including the
weight of the trailer and maximum load shall be equipped with two (2) lighted
lamps, one on each side of the rear of such trailer which shall be so situated
as to throw a red light visible for at least five hundred feet (500') in the
reverse direction. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
9-8-18: SQUEALING OR SCREECHING OF TIRES PROHIBITED:
No person shall operate a motor vehicle in such a manner as to cause or allow
to be emitted squealing, screeching or other such noise from the tires, except
where such noise is caused by an emergency operation to avoid imminent danger.
Any person who violates this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to a
fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00), nor more than two hundred
dollars ($200.00) for each offense. (Ord. 698, 2-20-1979)
CHAPTER 9
DRIVERS
SECTION:
9-9-1: Liquor Or Drugs
9-9-2: Accidents
9-9-1: LIQUOR OR DRUGS:
It shall be unlawful for the habitual user of narcotic drugs to operate any
motor vehicle on any street; and it shall be unlawful for any intoxicated
person, or any person under the influence of alcohol or of a narcotic drug, to
operate or attempt to operate any motor vehicle on any street. (Ord. 117, 10-6-
1964)
9-9-2: ACCIDENTS:
The driver of a vehicle which has collided with or been in an accident with any
vehicle, person or property in such a manner as to cause injury or damage,
shall stop immediately, and render such assistance as may be possible, and give
his true name and residence to the injured person or any other person
requesting the same on behalf of the injured person, or the owner of the
property damaged, and to a policeman, if one is present. The driver of each
vehicle concerned in any such accident shall report to the nearest police
authority promptly after such accident. (Ord. 117, 10-6-1964)
CHAPTER 10
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
SECTION:
9-10-1: Stop Signs
9-10-2: Parking
9-10-3: One-Way Streets And Alleys
9-10-4: Yield Right-Of-Way Streets
9-10-5: U-Turns
9-10-6: Miscellaneous Provisions
9-10-7: Two-Way Streets
9-10-8: Code Violations Penalty
9-10-1: STOP SIGNS:
A stop sign shall be placed at the following intersections and every driver of
a motor vehicle approaching said intersection shall bring the vehicle to a
complete stop before entering said intersection and shall then proceed only
when a safe interval occurs in the traffic:
Anderson Place at South Seventh Avenue  Northeast and southwest corners.
Ash Street at Eleventh Avenue           Northeast, northwest, southeast and
                                        southwest corners.
Ash Street at First Avenue              All four (4) corners.
Aspen Drive at East Sycamore Street     Northwest corner at the westernmost
(1400 block)                            intersection.
Avenue A at Railroad                    Southwest and northeast corners.
Avenue B at East Maple Street           Northwest and southeast corners.
Avenue B at Pine Street                 Northwest corner.
Avenue B at Railroad                    Northeast corner.
Avenue B at West Myrtle Street          Southwest corner.
Avenue C at Cass Place                  Northwest, southeast and southwest
                                        corners.
Avenue C at Olive Street                Northeast corner.
Avenue C at Pine Street                 Northwest corner.
Avenues F, G and H at West Walnut       Northwest and southeast corners.
Street
Baxter Court at Myrtle Street           Southeast corner.
Cass Place at Johnson Court             Southwest and northeast corners.
Cherry Street at South Second Avenue    Southwest and northeast corners.
Chestnut Street at Eleventh Avenue      All four( 4) corners.
County Highway 21 at Lakeland Park      Northwest corner.
Drive
Dean Court at Myrtle Street             Southeast corner.
East Ash Street at North Twentieth      Southwest corner.
Avenue
East Chestnut Street at North           Southeast corner.
Thirteenth Avenue
East Elm Street at North Main Street    Northeast corner.
East Elm Street at North Thirteenth     Northwest corner.
Avenue
East Locust Street at North Eleventh    Northeast and southwest corners.
Avenue
East Maple Street at South Ninth Avenue Southeast and northwest corners.
East Myrtle Street at North Eleventh    Southeast and northwest corners.
Avenue
East Myrtle Street at North Ninth       Southwest and northeast corners.
Avenue
East Myrtle Street at North Seventh     Southwest and northeast corners.
Avenue
East Myrtle Street at North Sixteenth   Southeast, northwest and southwest
Avenue                                  corners.
East Pine Street at South Seventh       Southeast and northeast corners.
Avenue
East Sycamore Street at North Seventh   Northeast and southwest corners.
Avenue
East Sycamore Street at North Sixth     Northeast and southwest corners.
Avenue
East Sycamore Street at Taylor Court    Southeast and northwest corners.
East Vine Street at Royal Court         Southwest corner.
East Walnut Street at South Seventh     Northeast and southwest corners.
Avenue
East Walnut Street at South Eleventh    Northeast and southwest corners.
Avenue
Eighth Avenue at Pine Street            All four( 4) corners.
Elm Street at Eleventh Avenue           Northeast and southwest corners.
Enterprise Drive at Illinois Route 9    Southeast corner.
Fifteenth Avenue at East Ash Street     All four( 4) corners.
Fifteenth Avenue at East Chestnut       Northeast and northwest corners.
Street
Fifteenth Avenue at East Myrtle Street  All four( 4) corners.
Fifteenth Avenue at Sycamore Street     Southeast corner.
Fourteenth Avenue at Ash Street         Southeast corner.
Fourteenth Avenue at East Chestnut      Northwest corner.
Street
Fourth Avenue at East Elm Street        Southeast and northwest corners.
Fourth Avenue at Maple Street           Northwest and southeast corners.
French Court at Cass Place              Northwest corner.
French Court at County Highway 21       Southeast corner.
French Court at West Myrtle Street      Southwest corner.
French Court at West Olive Street       Southwest corner.
French Court at West Vine Street        Southwest corner.
Fulton Place at Avenue B                Southwest corner.
Gettysburg Drive at North Fourth Avenue Southwest corner.
Grant Place at South Sixth Avenue       Southeast corner.
Hanlon Street at South Sixth Avenue     North and south sides.
Harvester Lane at North Fourth Avenue   Southwest corner.
Hipple Court at Cass Place              Southeast corner.
Ingersoll Boulevard at North Fourth     Southwest corner.
Avenue
Iris Court at East Ash Street           Southeast corner.
Keeling Court at West Vine Street       Northwest corner.
Lewis Street at Sixth Avenue            Northeast and southwest corners.
Liberty Place (alley) at North Sixth    Northeast corner.
Avenue
Liberty Street at North Sixth Avenue    Southeast corner.
Lincoln Road at North Fourth Avenue     Southwest corner.
Linden Street at Lawrence Drive         Northwest corner.
Linden Street at North First Avenue     Northwest corner.
Linden Street at North Fourth Avenue    Southwest corner.
Locust Street at Eleventh Avenue        Northwest and southwest corners.
Main Street at Locust                   Southwest corner, east exit of City
                                        parking lot.
Main Street at Railroad                 Southwest corner.
Maple Street at Second Avenue           Northwest and southeast corners.
Maple Street at Third Avenue            Northwest corner.
Mulberry Place at Avenue D              North side.
New Salem Street at North Fourth Avenue Southwest corner.
Ninth Avenue at Oak Street              Northwest comer.
North Avenue B at West Myrtle Street    Southeast corner.
North Avenue C at West Vine Street      Southeast corner.
North Avenue E at Cass Place            Northwest corner.
North Avenue E at County Highway 21     Southeast corner.
North Avenue E at West Myrtle Street    Northeast and southwest corners.
North Avenue E at West Olive Street     Northeast and southwest corners.
                                        Northeast corner, stopping westbound
North Avenue E at West Vine Street      traffic; southwest corner, stopping
                                        eastbound traffic.
North Avenue F at Cass Place            Northeast corner, stopping westbound
                                        traffic.
North Avenue F at County Highway 21     Southeast corner, stopping northbound
                                        traffic.
North Avenue F at West Myrtle Street    Northeast corner, stopping westbound
                                        traffic.
North Avenue F at West Olive Street     Northeast corner, stopping westbound
                                        traffic.
North Avenue F at West Vine Street      Northeast corner, stopping westbound
                                        traffic.
North Eighth Avenue at East Olive       Northeast and southwest corners.
Street
North Eighth Avenue at East Sycamore    Southeast corner( stopping northbound
Street                                  traffic) and Northwest corner( stopping
                                        southbound traffic)
North Fifth Avenue at Custer Place      Northeast corner.
North First Avenue at East Chestnut     Northwest and southeast corners.
Street
North Fourteenth at East Locust Street  Northeast corner.
North Ninth Avenue at East Olive Street Northeast and southwest corners.
North Ninth Avenue at East Sycamore     Southeast corner( stopping northbound
Street                                  traffic)
North Second Avenue at East Birch       Southeast and northwest corners.
Street
North Seventh Avenue at East Chestnut   Southeast and northwest corners.
Street
North Sixteenth Avenue at East Ash      Northwest corner.
Street
North Sixth Avenue at East Ash Street   Northwest corner.
North Sixth Avenue at East Myrtle       Northwest and southeast corners.
Street
North Tenth Avenue at East Birch Street Southeast and northwest corners.
North Tenth Avenue at East Olive Street Northwest and southeast corners.
North Third Avenue at East Olive Street Southwest and northeast corners.
North Twelfth Avenue at East Chestnut   East side.
Street
North Twelfth Avenue at East Elm Street West side.
North Twelfth Avenue at East Vine       Northwest and southeast corners.
Street
Olive Street at Twelfth Avenue          Northeast and southwest corners.
Orchid Court at East Ash Street         Southeast corner.
Palm Street at North Fourth Avenue      Southwest corner.
Park Court at Maple Street              Northwest corner.
Park Court at West Walnut               Street Southeast corner.
Pecan Street at North Fourth Avenue     Southwest corner.
Pine Street at Avenue C                 Northeast and southwest corners.
Pine Street at South Eleventh Avenue    Southwest corner.
Poplar Street at North Fourth Avenue    Southwest corner.
Robinson Court at Walnut Street         Northwest corner.
Second Avenue at Spruce Street          Northeast and southwest corners.
Second Avenue at Vine Street            Northeast and southwest corners.
Seventeenth Avenue at East Chestnut     Southeast corner.
Street
Seventh Avenue at Grant Place           Northwest corner.
Seventh Avenue at West Elm Street       Southwest and northeast corners.
Sixteenth Avenue at Ash Street          Southeast corner.
Sixteenth Avenue at Sycamore            Street Southeast corner.
South Avenue A at Beech Street          Southeast and northwest corners.
South Avenue B at Cedar Street          Southeast and northwest corners.
South Eighth Avenue at Anderson Place   Northwest corner.
South Eleventh Avenue at Walnut Street  Northwest corner.
                                        East side, at a point on a line
                                        established by the projection of the
                                        south right-of-way line; and west side,
                                        at a point northerly of the north
South Main Street at Tamarack Street    right- of-way line, as projected and at
                                        the place of the beginning of the curve
                                        to the right on South Main Street( said
                                        curve as described having reference to
                                        southbound traffic).
South Main Street at Tamarack Street    Southwest corner.
South Second Avenue at East Oak Street  Northwest and southeast corners.
South Second Avenue at Holly Street     Southwest and northeast corners.
South Sixth Avenue at Anderson Place    Northwest corner.
South Sixth Avenue at East Hickory      All four( 4) corners.
Street
South Sixth Avenue at East Oak Street   All four( 4) corners.
South Sixth Avenue at East Pine Street  Southeast and northwest corners.
South Sixth Avenue at Sam Scott Street  Northwest corner.
Spruce Street at North Avenue O         Northwest and southeast corners.
Sunview Terrace at North Eleventh       Northwest corner.
Avenue
East Sycamore Street at North           First Avenue Northwest and southwest
                                        corners.
Tamarack at Avenue B                    Northeast, northwest and southeast
                                        corners.
Third Avenue at Holly Street            Northeast and southwest corners.
Third Avenue at Olive Street            Northeast and southwest corners.
Third Avenue at Vine Street             Northeast and southwest corners.
Thirteenth Avenue at East Ash Street    Northwest corner.
Thirteenth Avenue at East Myrtle Street Southeast corner.
Thompson Court at East Locust Street    West side.
Twelfth Avenue at Ash Street            Northwest corner.
Van Buren Court at Walnut Street        Northwest corner.
Van Buren Court (alley) at East Maple   Northwest corner.
Street
Van Winkle Drive at South Avenue F      Southwest corner.
Vine Street at First Avenue             All four( 4) corners.
Walling Court at West Maple Street      Southeast corner.
Walnut Street at Maple Street           North end of the alley.
West Chestnut Street and Avenue F       Northeast corner, westbound.
West Chestnut Street and Avenue F       Southwest corner, eastbound.
West Elm Street at Avenue D             North side.
West Pine Street at Avenue D            North and south sides.
West Pine Street at Martin Avenue       Northeast and southeast corners.
West Vine Street at North Avenue B      Northeast and southwest corners.
West Walnut Street at South Avenue D    Southwest corner.
White Court at East Pine                Street Southeast corner.
White Court at Walnut Street            Northwest corner.
 
Any person who violates this section shall, upon conviction or plea, be subject
to a fine of not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each such offense. (Ord. 4277, 2-15-2022; amd.
Ord. 4303, 9-6-2022)
9-10-2: PARKING:
   (A)   No Parking: No person shall park a vehicle on the following streets of
the City:
                                    North or west side, between the south
                                    curb lines of South Fifth Avenue and the
Anderson Place                      north curb lines of South Seventh Avenue
                                    at any time for any continuous period in
                                    excess of two (2) hours' duration.
Ash Street                          South side, from North Main Street east
                                    to Fifteenth Avenue.
                                    On the east side or the west side of
                                    Avenue A in the City of Canton, Illinois,
Avenue A                            between the north curb line of West Pine
                                    Street and the south curb line of West
                                    Locust Street.
                                    No parking of any motor vehicle shall be
                                    permitted on the west side of Avenue D
Avenue D                            between the north right-of-way line of
                                    West Chestnut Street, and the south
                                    right-of-way line of West Locust Street.
                                    East side, from the north curb line of
Baxter Court                        East Ash Street to the south curb line of
                                    East Myrtle Street.
                                    No parking of any motor vehicle shall be
                                    permitted on the north side of Birch
                                    Street in the City between the east curb
                                    line of Fourth Avenue and a point one
                                    hundred thirty five feet (135') east of
                                    the east curb line of Fourth Avenue.
Birch Street                        No parking of any motor vehicle shall be
                                    permitted on the south side of Birch
                                    Street in the City between the east curb
                                    line of Fourth Avenue and the west curb
                                    line of Fifth Avenue.
                                    North side, between the east curb line of
                                    North Main Street and the west curb line
                                    of First Avenue.
                                    No parking of any motor vehicle shall be
                                    permitted on the north side or the south
                                    side of Buckey Street in the City. Any
Buckey Street                       person who violates this provision shall,
                                    upon conviction, be subject to a fine of
                                    not less than five dollars ($5.00), nor
                                    more than two hundred dollars ($200.00)
                                    for each offense.
                                    South side, from the west curb line of
                                    South Fifth Avenue to the westerly
Cherry Street                       terminus of said Cherry Street for more
                                    than two (2) consecutive hours at any one
                                    time between the hours of six o'clock (6:
                                    00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
                                    The north side of Chestnut Street between
                                    First Avenue and Eighth Avenue; and, on
Chestnut Street                     the south side of Chestnut Street between
                                    Third Avenue and Eighth Avenue in the
                                    City.
                                    No parking of any motor vehicle shall be
                                    permitted on the north side of Custer
                                    Place between the east curb line of North
                                    Fifth Avenue and the west curb line of
Custer Place                        North Sixth Avenue.
                                    No parking of any motor vehicle shall be
                                    permitted on the south side of Custer
                                    Place in the City between the east curb
                                    line of Fifth Avenue and the west curb
                                    line of Ninth Avenue.
                                    Parking on Dean Court a distance of forty
                                    four feet (44') from the crosswalk at the
                                    corner of East Ash Street is prohibited
Dean Court                          on the east side of the street.
                                    West side, from the south curb line of
                                    East Myrtle Street to the north curb line
                                    of East Ash Street.
                                    On the north side or the south side of
                                    East Ash Street in the City between the
                                    east curb line of North Main Street and
                                    the west curb line of North Eleventh
                                    Avenue.
                                    On the south side of the 1500 block of
                                    East Ash Street there shall be no parking
East Ash Street                     from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to nine
                                    o'clock (9:00) A.M. and two o'clock (2:
                                    00) P.M. until four o'clock (4:00) P.M.
                                    on days when school is in session. Any
                                    person who violates this provision shall,
                                    upon conviction or plea, be subject to a
                                    fine of not less than twenty dollars
                                    ($20.00) nor more than thirty five
                                    dollars ($35.00) for each such offense.
                                    No parking of any motor vehicle shall be
                                    permitted on both sides of East Beech
East Beech Street                   Street between the east curb line of
                                    South Main Street and the east City
                                    limits.
                                    Parking is hereby eliminated and
East Birch Street                   prohibited by nonresidents on East Birch
                                    Street between North Main Street and
                                    North First Avenue.
                                    On the north side of East Chestnut Street
                                    in the City of Canton, Illinois, between
                                    the east curb line of North Eighth Avenue
                                    and the west curb line of North Eleventh
                                    Avenue.
                                    On the north side of East Chestnut Street
                                    in the City of Canton, Illinois, between
                                    the east curb line of North Fifth Avenue
                                    and the west curb line of North Eighth
                                    Avenue.
                                    On the north side or the south side of
                                    East Chestnut Street in the City of
                                    Canton, Illinois, between the east curb
                                    line of North Eleventh Avenue and the
                                    west curb line of North Twentieth Avenue
                                    (Bradley Corners).
                                    On the south side of East Chestnut Street
                                    in the City of Canton, Illinois, between
                                    the east curb line of North Eighth Avenue
East Chestnut Street                and the west curb line of North Eleventh
                                    Avenue.
                                    South side, from the east curb line of
                                    Fifth Avenue to the west curb line of
                                    Seventh Avenue.
                                    South side of East Chestnut Street in
                                    said City between the east curb line of
                                    Second Avenue in said City and a point on
                                    said East Chestnut Street one hundred
                                    feet (100') east thereof at any time for
                                    more than two (2) continuous hours.
                                     
                                    In the area contemplated in the preceding
                                    paragraph except parallel with said East
                                    Chestnut Street and on the south side
                                    thereof.
                                     
                                    Any person who violates this provision
                                    shall be subject to a fine of not less
                                    than five dollars ($5.00) and not more
                                    than two hundred dollars ($200.00).
                                    South side, from the east curb line of
                                    South Fifth Avenue to the west curb line
                                    of South Seventh Avenue.
                                    Two (2) hour parking on the north side of
                                    East Elm Street between North Second
                                    Avenue and North Third Avenue:
                                     
                                    1. Parking of any motor vehicle shall be
                                    permitted for a two (2) hour limit on the
                                    north side of East Elm Street from the
                                    west right-of-way line of North Third
                                    Avenue to the east right-of-way line of
East Elm Street                     North Second Avenue in the City.
                                     
                                    2. Parking on the north side of East Elm
                                    Street from the west right-of-way line of
                                    North Third Avenue to the east right-of-
                                    way line of North Second Avenue shall be
                                    parallel parking only.
                                     
                                    Any person who violates this provision
                                    shall, upon conviction, be subject to a
                                    fine of not less than five dollars
                                    ($5.00) nor more than five hundred
                                    dollars ($500.00) for each such
                                    violation.
                                    On the north side or the south side of
                                    East Liberty Place in the City of Canton,
East Liberty Place                  Illinois, between the east curb line of
                                    North Fifth Avenue and the west curb line
                                    of North Sixth Avenue.
                                    On the north side of East Linn Street in
                                    the City of Canton, Illinois, between the
                                    east curb line of South Main Street and
East Linn Street                    the west curb line of South Fifth Avenue.
                                    On the south side of East Linn Street in
                                    said City between the east curb line of
                                    South Fifth Avenue to the west curb line
                                    of South Sixth Avenue.
                                    Either side, from Main Street to North
                                    Fifth Avenue or on either side of Fifth
                                    Avenue from East Locust Street to East
                                    Linn Street, except for an interval of no
                                    longer than ten (10) minutes for the
                                    purpose of loading or unloading
                                    passengers or goods; provided, however,
                                    that the foregoing exception shall not
East Locust Street                  apply to that portion of East Locust
                                    Street from North Third Avenue to North
                                    Fifth Avenue where, because of narrowness
                                    of that portion of said street, there
                                    shall be no parking on either side except
                                    for the actual loading and unloading of
                                    passengers.
                                    South side, from the east curb line of
                                    North Fifth Avenue to the west curb line
                                    of North Eleventh Avenue.
                                    On the north side or the south side of
                                    East Maple Street in the City between the
                                    east curb line of South Fourth Avenue and
                                    the west curb line of South Fifth Avenue.
                                    South side, between the west curb line of
East Maple Street                   South Second Avenue to the east curb line
                                    of South First Avenue.
                                    South side, between the west curb line of
                                    South Seventh Avenue and the east curb
                                    line of South Fifth Avenue for more than
                                    two (2) consecutive hours in any one day.
                                    On the north side or the south side of
                                    East Myrtle Street in the City between
                                    the east curb line of North Eleventh
                                    Avenue and the west curb line of North
                                    Fifteenth Avenue.
East Myrtle Street                  South side, from North Eighth Avenue to
                                    the east corporation limits, except for
                                    the unloading of goods or the discharging
                                    of passengers.
                                    South side, from the west curb line of
                                    North First Avenue to a point two hundred
                                    feet (200') west of said curb line.
East Oak Street                     On the south side of the 400 block of
                                    East Oak Street.
                                    South side, from North Seventh Avenue to
                                    North Eleventh Avenue, except for the
                                    unloading of goods or the discharging of
East Olive Street                   passengers.
                                    South side, from the east curb line of
                                    North Main Street to a point twenty feet
                                    (20') east of the west curb line of Royal
                                    Court as projected or extended south.
                                    North side, between the east curb line of
                                    South Second Avenue and the west curb
East Pine Street                    line of Van Buren Court.
                                    South side, from the east curb line of
                                    South Fifth Avenue to the west curb line
                                    of South Eleventh Avenue.
                                    Motor vehicle parking is hereby
                                    eliminated and prohibited from six
                                    o'clock (6:00) P.M. until six o'clock (6:
                                    00) A.M. Central Time on East Sycamore
                                    Street between North Main Street and
East Sycamore Street                North First Avenue.
                                    South side, from the east right-of-way
                                    line of the Chicago, Burlington and
                                    Quincy Railroad to North Eleventh Avenue,
                                    except for the unloading of goods or the
                                    discharging of passengers.
                                    South side, from the east curb line of
East Vine Street                    North Main Street to the west curb line
                                    of Royal Court.
                                    South side, from the east curb line of
East Walnut Street                  South Fifth Avenue to the west curb line
                                    of South Eleventh Avenue.
                                    Both sides of Eleventh Avenue between
                                    East Myrtle Street north to the City
                                    limits.
                                    No parking of any motor vehicle shall be
Eleventh Avenue                     permitted on the east side of Eleventh
                                    Avenue in the City between the south curb
                                    line of Ash Street and the north curb
                                    line of Locust Street.
                                    The west side of Eleventh Avenue between
                                    East Ash Street and East Myrtle Street.
Enterprise Drive                    On the east and west side of Enterprise
                                    Drive.
                                    Either side, between the north curb line
Fifteenth Avenue                    of Ash Street and the south curb line of
                                    Myrtle Street.
                                    No parking of any motor vehicle shall be
                                    permitted on either the east or the west
Fifth Avenue                        side of Fifth Avenue in the City between
                                    the north curb line of Locust Street and
                                    the south curb line of Ash Street.
                                    Along the public right-of-way on Hickory
                                    Street from the intersection of Main
                                    Street westerly to the structure over Big
                                    Creek, a distance of two thousand eight
                                    hundred fifty feet (2,850'). Said street
                                    being designated FAU Route 0013 and also
                                    being the extension of County Highway 5
                                    and FAS Route 456, known locally as the
Hickory Street                      Canton to Cuba Road.
                                     
                                    Nothing herein shall apply to emergency
                                    vehicles, nor to the official performance
                                    of traffic control, nor to vehicles
                                    temporarily disabled which are to be
                                    removed within a proper time.
                                    The south side of Hickory Street between
                                    South 6th Avenue and South 5th Avenue.
                                    Parking within the limits of the
                                    improvement on Illinois Route 9/Illinois
                                    Route 78 (Fifth Avenue). Any person,
                                    firm, or corporation violating this
                                    provision shall be fined not less than
                                    five dollars ($5.00) for each offense,
                                    and a separate offense shall be deemed
Illinois Route 9/Illinois Route 78  committed for each and every day which a
(Fifth Avenue)                      violation continues or exists. In
                                    addition to the fines set out in this
                                    section, any member of the City Council
                                    is hereby authorized to have an offending
                                    vehicle removed from this area designated
                                    as a no parking area and said expense for
                                    the removal shall be paid by the person
                                    found guilty of the offense in addition
                                    to the fines set forth above.
                                    On the west side of Johnson Court in the
Johnson Court                       City of Canton, Illinois, between the
                                    north curb line of West Spruce Street and
                                    the south curb line of West Cass Place.
                                    South side, between the east curb line of
Liberty Place                       North Second Avenue and the west curb
                                    line of North Fourth Avenue.
                                    No parking of any motor vehicle shall be
                                    permitted on Linden Street in the City:
                                     
                                    1. On the north side of Linden Street
                                    between the west right-of-way line of
                                    North Fourth Avenue and the east right-
                                    of-way line of Lawrence Drive.
                                     
                                    2. Between the hours of seven o'clock (7:
                                    00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M.
                                    weekdays, from the west right-of-way line
                                    of Lawrence Drive and the east right-of-
                                    way line of North Main Street.
                                     
Linden Street                       3. On the south side of Linden Street
                                    from the east right-of-way line of North
                                    Main Street to the west right-of-way line
                                    of North First Avenue.
                                    No parking of any motor vehicle shall be
                                    permitted on the north side of Linden
                                    Street between the west right-of-way line
                                    of North Fourth Avenue and the east
                                    right-of-way line of North First Avenue.
                                    North side, between the hours of eight
                                    o'clock (8:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:
                                    00) P.M.
                                    On the north side or the south side of
                                    Linden Street in the City of Canton,
                                    Illinois.
Linn Street                         Either side, between Sixth and Seventh
                                    Avenues.
                                    North side, between the east curb line of
                                    Fifth Avenue and the west side of the
                                    alley (as extended) thereto easterly next
Maple Street                        adjacent for more than two (2) hours
                                    between the hours of six o'clock (6:00)
                                    A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on any
                                    day.
                                    Either the east or west side between West
                                    Maple and West Walnut Streets.
                                    West side, from the south curb line of
                                    West Pine Street to the north curb line
Martin Avenue                       of West Walnut Street for more than two
                                    (2) consecutive hours between the hours
                                    of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and five
                                    o'clock (5:00) P.M. (local time) on any
                                    day excepting of Sundays and legal
                                    holidays.
Myrtle Street                       South side, from North Main Street to the
                                    new Junior High School.
                                    No parking of any motor vehicle shall be
                                    permitted on the east side of North
                                    Avenue A from north of the north line of
                                    West Olive Street to a point one hundred
                                    twenty two feet (122') north of the north
                                    line of West Olive Street, except for
                                    loading/unloading of passengers at said
                                    area.
                                    No parking of any motor vehicle shall be
                                    permitted on the west side of North
                                    Avenue A between the north curb line of
                                    West Locust and the south curb line of
                                    West Vine Street in the City.
                                    Parking of a motor vehicle on the east
                                    side of North Avenue A between the north
                                    curb line of West Locust Street and the
                                    south curb line of West Vine Street in
                                    the City is allowed in accordance with
                                    this Code.
                                     
                                    Any person who violates this provision
                                    shall, upon conviction, be subject to a
                                    fine of not less than twenty five dollars
                                    ($25.00) nor more than five hundred
                                    dollars ($500.00) for each such
                                    violation.
                                    The east side of North Avenue A from the
                                    north curb line of West Olive Street to a
North Avenue A                      point one hundred forty two feet (142')
                                    north of the north curb line of West
                                    Olive Street is hereby designated a no
                                    parking loading zone from seven o'clock
                                    (7:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M.,
                                    local time, Monday through Friday of each
                                    calendar week, inclusive.
                                     
                                    No person shall park a vehicle or a motor
                                    vehicle along the aforesaid curb line
                                    during the aforesaid hours unless
                                    actually engaged in the loading or
                                    unloading of passengers and/or cargo.
                                     
                                    Parking in the aforesaid loading zone is
                                    permissible on Saturday and Sunday of
                                    each week and from five o'clock (5:00)
                                    P.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on
                                    Monday through Friday of each week.
                                     
                                    Any person who violates any portion of
                                    this provision shall be subject to a fine
                                    of not less than twenty five dollars
                                    ($25.00) nor more than two hundred
                                    dollars ($200.00) for each occurrence.
                                    West side, from West Locust Street to
                                    West Vine Street except for the unloading
                                    of goods or the discharging of
                                    passengers.
                                    On the east side of the street in the 600
                                    block of North Avenue B between Vine
                                    Street to Myrtle Street.
North Avenue B                      Parking is hereby eliminated and
                                    prohibited on the west side of North
                                    Avenue B between West Elm Street and West
                                    Pine Street in the City.
                                    On the east side of the street in the 200
                                    block of North Avenue C.
                                    Parking on the west side of North Avenue
North Avenue C                      C from the south right-of-way line of
                                    West Birch Street to the north right-of-
                                    way line of West Myrtle Street is hereby
                                    prohibited.
                                    East side, from East Ash Street to the
North Eighth Avenue                 north corporation limits, except for the
                                    unloading of goods or discharging of
                                    passengers.
                                    On the east side of the street in the
                                    200-300 blocks of North Eleventh Avenue
                                    between Ash Street to Locust Street
                                    stating that from six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
North Eleventh Avenue               to six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on days when
                                    school is in session there shall be no
                                    parking, and that every driver of a motor
                                    vehicle will refrain from parking any
                                    vehicle under his or her control in said
                                    area.
North Fifth Avenue                  East side, from East Locust Street to
                                    East Ash Street.
                                    On the west side of North First Avenue in
                                    the City of Canton, Illinois, between the
                                    north curb line of East Locust Street and
North First Avenue                  the south curb line of East Sycamore
                                    Street.
                                    West side, between the south curb line of
                                    East Spruce Street to the north curb line
                                    of East Locust Street.
                                    No parking of any motor vehicle shall be
                                    permitted on the east and west side of
North Fourth Avenue                 North Fourth Avenue between the north
                                    right-of-way line of East Birch Street
                                    and the north right-of-way line of Linden
                                    Street.
                                    Either side, from Birch Street south to
                                    Locust Street, on Locust Street from Main
                                    Street East to Fifth Avenue, and on Fifth
                                    Avenue from East Locust Street to Linn
                                    Street except for the unloading of goods
                                    or the discharging of passengers.
                                    Either side, from Locust Street to Birch
                                    Street, except for an interval of no
North Main Street                   longer than ten (10) minutes for the
                                    purpose of unloading passengers or goods.
                                    On the east side or the west side of
                                    North Main Street in the City between the
                                    north curb line of Locust Street and the
                                    south curb line of Alder Street.
                                    West side, south of Locust Street for a
                                    distance of one hundred seventy feet
                                    (170') south from the center of the
                                    intersection of Main and Locust Street.
                                    No parking of any motor vehicles shall be
                                    permitted for more than two (2)
                                    consecutive hours on the east side of
                                    North Second Avenue in the City, between
                                    the north curb line of East Elm Street
                                    and the south curb line of East Chestnut
                                    Street.
                                    Parking on the east side of North Second
                                    Avenue from the south right-of-way line
                                    of East Locust Street to the north right-
                                    of-way line of East Chestnut Street shall
                                    be allowed between the hours of six
                                    o'clock (6:00) P.M. until six o'clock (6:
North Second Avenue                 00) A.M. (applicable local time) on any
                                    day.
                                    Parking on the west side of North Second
                                    Avenue from the south right-of-way line
                                    of East Locust Street to the north right-
                                    of-way line of East Elm Street shall be
                                    allowed.
                                    There shall be no parking on the east
                                    side of North Second Avenue from the
                                    south right-of-way line of East Locust
                                    Street to the north right-of-way line of
                                    East Elm Street from six o'clock (6:00)
                                    A.M. until six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
                                    (applicable local time) of any day.
                                    There shall be no parking on the east and
                                    west sides of North Sixteenth Avenue from
North Sixteenth Avenue              the north right-of-way line of East
                                    Chestnut Street to the south right-of-way
                                    line of East Ash Street.
                                    East side, from East Chestnut Street to
North Sixth Avenue                  East Spruce Street, except for the
                                    unloading of goods or discharging of
                                    passengers.
                                    East side, from East Myrtle Street to the
North Tenth Avenue                  north corporation limits, except for the
                                    unloading of goods or discharging of
                                    passengers.
North Third Avenue                  East side, from East Elm Street to East
                                    Ash Street.
                                    East side, from East Ash Street to East
North Twelfth Avenue                Myrtle Street, except for the unloading
                                    of goods or discharging of passengers.
                                    Either side, west of the west curb line
Olive Street                        of Avenue C in the City of Canton,
                                    Illinois.
                                    East side, between the south curb line of
                                    West Walnut Street and the north curb
Park Court                          line of West Maple Street.
                                    West side, from the south curb line of
                                    West Walnut Street to the north curb line
                                    of West Maple Street.
                                    No parking of any motor vehicle shall be
                                    permitted on both the north and south
Sam Scott Street                    sides of Sam Scott Street in the City
                                    between the east right-of-way line of
                                    South Fourth Avenue and the west right-
                                    of-way line of South Fifth Avenue.
                                    East side, between the south curb line of
                                    Chestnut Street and a point on said
                                    Second Avenue one hundred six feet (106')
                                    south thereof at any time for more than
                                    thirty (30) continuous minutes and then
                                    only for the purpose of the conduction of
Second Avenue                       business in the City building of said
                                    City thereto adjacent.
                                    West side of Second Avenue in said City
                                    between a point thereon located one
                                    hundred sixty eight feet (168') north of
                                    the north curb line of Locust Street to
                                    the south curb line of Myrtle Street in
                                    said City.
                                    West side, from the south curb line of
                                    East Birch Street to the north curb line
                                    of East Ash Street and from the south
Seventh Avenue                      curb line of East Locust Street to the
                                    north curb line of Grant Place, excepting
                                    therefrom, however, that portion of said
                                    Seventh Avenue between East Walnut Street
                                    and East Pine Street.
                                    Parking in the 400 block of South Avenue
                                    A between the south right-of-way line of
South Avenue A                      the Santa Fe Railroad right-of-way and
                                    the north right-of-way line of West Oak
                                    Street is prohibited on the west side of
                                    South Avenue A.
                                    No parking of any motor vehicle shall be
                                    permitted for more than two (2)
                                    consecutive hours at any one time between
South Avenue A and South Avenue B   the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and
                                    six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on the south side
                                    of West Maple Street in the City between
                                    the west curb line of South Avenue A and
                                    the east curb line of South Avenue B.
                                    Between the hours of six o'clock (6:00)
                                    A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M., on the
                                    west side of South Avenue B in the City
                                    of Canton, Illinois, between the south
                                    curb line of West Maple Street and the
                                    north curb line of West Hickory Street.
                                    East side, from the south curb line of
                                    West Maple Street to the north curb line
                                    of West Hickory Street.
                                    Either side, between the south curb line
                                    of West Walnut Street and the north curb
                                    line (as extended) of Mulberry Place.
                                    No parking of any motor vehicle shall be
                                    permitted on either the east or the west
                                    sides of South Avenue B between the south
                                    curb line of West Maple Street and the
                                    north curb line of West Hickory Street in
South Avenue B                      the City except parking shall be
                                    permitted on the west side only of South
                                    Avenue B for a point fifty feet (50')
                                    south of the south right- of-way line of
                                    the Santa Fe main line as it presently
                                    intersects South Avenue B and the north
                                    right-of-way line of West Oak Street, and
                                    then shall only be permitted between the
                                    hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and six
                                    o'clock (6:00) A.M., local time.
                                    There shall be no parking on the east
                                    side of South Avenue B from the south
                                    right-of- way line of East Pine Street to
                                    a point sixty feet (60') south of the
                                    south right-of-way line of East Pine
                                    Street.
                                    West side, from Elm Street to Pine Street
                                    except for the unloading of goods or the
                                    discharging of passengers.
                                    Parking is hereby eliminated and
South Fifth Avenue                  prohibited on South Fifth Avenue from
                                    East Linn Street to the corporate limits
                                    of the City.
                                    On the west side of the South First
South First Avenue                  Avenue, one hundred feet (100') north of
                                    Hickory Street.
South First Street                  On the west side of the street in the 700
                                    block of South First Street.
                                    East side, from the intersection of South
                                    Fourth Avenue and East Maple Street to a
                                    point one hundred seventy five feet
                                    (175') south of said intersection.
                                    East side, from the south curb line of
South Fourth Avenue                 East Elm Street to the north curb line of
                                    East Oak Street.
                                    On the east side or the west side of
                                    South Fourth Avenue in the City between
                                    the south curb line of East Elm Street
                                    and the north curb line of East Oak
                                    Street.
                                    On the west side of South Main Street in
                                    the City of Canton, Illinois, between the
                                    south curb line of West Walnut Street and
                                    the north curb line of West Cherry
South Main Street                   Street.
                                    On the west side of the street in the 800
                                    block of South Main Street.
                                    West side, from the south curb line of
                                    East Cherry Street (as extended) to the
                                    north curb line of West Tamarack Street.
                                    Between the south side of East Maple
                                    Street and Railroad Street except
South Second Avenue                 parallel parking of vehicle shall be
                                    permitted on East Maple Street to the
                                    south side of the Canton Manufacturing
                                    Corporation building.
                                    No parking is allowed on the west side of
South Sixth Avenue                  South Sixth Avenue from Hickory to Cherry
                                    Street and said area is hereby declared
                                    to be a no parking zone.
                                    East side, between the north curb line of
                                    Locust Street and the south curb line of
Third Avenue                        Howard Place between the hours of six
                                    o'clock (6:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:
                                    00) P.M. on any day.
                                    No parking of any motor vehicle shall be
                                    permitted on the east side of Van Buren
                                    Court in the City between the south curb
                                    line of Pine Street and a point sixty
Van Buren Court                     five feet (65') southerly therefrom on
                                    the east curb line of Van Buren Court.
                                    On the west side of Van Buren Court in
                                    the City of Canton, Illinois, between the
                                    north curb line of East Pine Street and
                                    the south curb line of East Elm Street.
                                    No parking of any motor vehicle shall be
                                    permitted on the north side of Van Winkle
                                    Drive in the City between the west curb
Van Winkel Drive                    line of Avenue F and the east curb line
                                    of Avenue H.
                                    The south side of the 700 block of Van
                                    Winkel Drive from the west right-of-way
                                    line of South Avenue G.
                                    North side, from North Avenue A to North
                                    Main Street, or on the south side of East
                                    Ash Street from North Main Street to the
                                    corporation line (except that portion of
West Ash Street                     East Ash Street from North Fourth Avenue
                                    to Dean Court, where no person shall park
                                    a vehicle on either side of said street)
                                    for a longer interval than the actual
                                    loading or unloading of passengers or
                                    goods.
                                    On the south side of West Birch Street in
West Birch Street                   the City between the west curb line of
                                    North Main Street and east curb line of
                                    North Avenue A.
West Elm Street                     South side, from Avenue B east to Avenue
                                    A.
                                    North side, from the west curb line of
West Hickory Street                 South Main Street to the east curb line
                                    of South Avenue B.
                                    Along West Locust Street as presently
                                    located within the City limits between a
                                    point one hundred twenty seven feet
                                    (127') east of Avenue B to nine hundred
                                    four feet (904') west of Avenue D.
                                    Either side, from North Main Street to
                                    North Avenue B.
West Locust Street                  Parking is hereby eliminated and
                                    prohibited from nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.
                                    to one o'clock (1:00) P.M. on the north
                                    side of West Locust Street, commonly
                                    known as "Old West Locust Street", from
                                    the 700 block through the 800 block, and
                                    through the 900 block of West Locust
                                    Street.
                                    From the west curb line of North Avenue B
                                    to the east curb line of Prospect Court.
                                    North side, from the west curb line of
                                    Martin Avenue to a point twenty feet
                                    (20') west of said west curb line of said
                                    Martin Avenue.
                                    North side, from the west curb of Martin
                                    Avenue to a point one hundred eighty feet
                                    (180') west of the west curb of the
West Maple Street                   Graham Hospital drive or entrance.
                                    On the north side of West Maple Street
                                    from the west line of South Main Street
                                    to the east line of Martin Avenue.
                                    South side, from the east curb line of
                                    Walling Court to the east curb line of
                                    South Avenue B.
                                    South side, from the west curb line of
                                    South Avenue B to the east curb line of
                                    South Avenue D.
                                    South side, from the west curb line of
West Myrtle Street                  North Main Street to a point one hundred
                                    fifty feet (150') west of said west curb
                                    line of said North Main Street.
                                    Between the hours of six o'clock (6:00)
                                    A.M. until six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
                                    (applicable local time) on the north side
                                    of West Pine Street from the west curb of
                                    South Avenue B to the east curb of South
                                    Avenue D.
                                    No parking of any motor vehicle shall be
                                    permitted on the south side of West Pine
                                    Street, at the general address of 44 West
                                    Pine Street, from a point one hundred
West Pine Street                    forty nine feet (149') east of the east
                                    curb line of South Martin Avenue to a
                                    point two hundred eleven feet (211') east
                                    of the east curb line of South Martin
                                    Avenue.
                                    North side, from Martin Avenue to South
                                    Avenue B except for the unloading of
                                    foods or the discharging of passengers.
                                    On the north side of West Pine Street in
                                    the City of Canton, Illinois, between the
                                    east curb line of South Martin Avenue and
                                    the west curb line of South Avenue A.
                                    No parking of any motor vehicle shall be
                                    permitted on the north side of West
                                    Spruce Street from the east curb line of
                                    North Avenue A to a point one hundred
West Spruce Street                  twenty two feet (122') east of said east
                                    curb line of North Avenue A.
                                    South side, from the east curb line of
                                    North Avenue D to the west curb line of
                                    North Main Street.
                                    There shall be no parking on the north
                                    side of West Vine Street from a point
West Vine Street                    sixty feet (60') west of the northwest
                                    curb line of Keeling Court, proceeding
                                    one hundred feet (100') west on West Vine
                                    Street.
                                    North side, between the west curb line of
                                    South Avenue D to the bridge over Big
                                    Creek.
                                    Parking is hereby eliminated and
                                    prohibited by nonresidents on the north
                                    side of West Walnut Street for the first
                                    five hundred feet (500') west from Martin
                                    Avenue.
                                    Parking is hereby eliminated and
                                    prohibited by nonresidents on the north
                                    side of West Walnut Street west from
                                    Martin Avenue to the east side of
                                    Robinson Court.
                                    Parking is hereby eliminated and
West Walnut Street                  prohibited by nonresidents (residents of
                                    the area involved shall be able to park
                                    in said area provided their vehicles
                                    display the designated decal) on the
                                    north side of West Walnut Street for
                                    three hundred fifty feet (350') east of
                                    Martin Avenue. Any person who violates
                                    this provision shall, upon conviction or
                                    plea, be subject to a fine of not less
                                    than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than
                                    twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each
                                    such offense.
                                    South side, from Martin Avenue to South
                                    Avenue D except for the unloading of
                                    goods or the discharging of passengers.
 
No parking of any vehicle by nonresidents of the area involved shall be
permitted on the north side and south side of Linden Street between Main Street
and First Avenue, on the east side and west side of Lawrence Drive between
Linden Street and Magrabl Drive and on the north side and south side of Magrabl
Drive between Main Street and Lawrence Drive, all in the City of Canton,
Illinois, on Mondays through Fridays which are school days excluding holidays
between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M. and
that every driver of a motor vehicle other than residents of the area involved
shall refrain from parking any vehicle under his or her control on such streets
during such times.
Residents of the area involved, that is, those persons residing on the north
side and south side of Linden Street between Main Street and First Avenue, on
the east side and west side of Lawrence Drive between Linden Street and Magrabl
Drive and on the north side and south side of Magrabl Drive between Main Street
and Lawrence Drive, shall be permitted to park their vehicles in said area
during such times provided their vehicles display the necessary residential
decal or permit which decal or permit shall be issued by the Canton Police
Department to the residents of the area involved.
Upon request, the Canton Police Department shall issue a maximum of three (3)
residential decals or permits per household to those residents abutting the
areas designated in this provision.
The residents of the areas designated in this provision shall display the
residential decal or permit in each of their vehicles in order to park in the
areas designated in this provision.
There shall be additional decals or permit parking in an area seventy seven
feet (77') north of Cherry Street on the west side of South 6th Avenue. Upon
request, the Canton Police Department shall issue an amount of decals or
permits for this specific area they deem appropriate and may revoke same upon
their sole discretion.
The Street Superintendent of the City of Canton, Illinois, shall post
appropriate signs informing the public of this provision.
Any person who violates this provision shall, upon conviction or plea, be
subject to a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) and no more than twenty
five dollars ($25.00) for each such offense.
   (B)   Diagonal Parking: All vehicles shall be parked diagonally with one
front wheel against the curb on the following designated streets:
 
East Elm Street      On the south side of East Elm Street from Second Avenue to
                     Fourth Avenue.
                     South side of East Maple Street from the east sidewalk
East Maple Street    line of South Second Avenue east to a point one hundred
                     ninety eight feet (198').
Public Square        On the Public Square.
                     Between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and five
                     o'clock (5:00) P.M. of each weekday (Monday through Friday
                     of each week) on the east side of Second Avenue in said
                     City between the south curb line of Chestnut Street in
                     said City and a point on said Second Avenue one hundred
Second Avenue        feet (100') south thereof at any time for more than thirty
                     (30) continuous minutes and then only for the purpose of
                     the conduct of business in the City building of said City
                     thereto adjacent.
                     In the area contemplated in the preceding paragraph except
                     diagonal with said Second Avenue and on the east side
                     thereof and in stalls there designated.
West Chestnut Street On the north side of West Chestnut Street from Main Street
                     to Avenue A.
 
   (C)   Reserved.
   (D)   Parking Motor Vehicles In The Business District And In City Parking
Lots:
      1.   The term "Business District", as herein used, shall mean and refer
to that area within the City of Canton, Illinois, bounded as follows: by the
south side of Locust Street; by the north side of Walnut Street; by the east
side of Avenue A; and by the west side of Second Avenue.
      2.   Parking spaces or stalls shall be marked and designated as
hereinafter set forth within the Business District, for the parking of motor
vehicles, and except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for any person
to park any motor vehicle within any such parking spaces or stalls for more
than two (2) consecutive hours between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.
and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. of any weekday (excepting only of such national
holidays as may be determined and promulgated by the Congress or President of
the United States). It shall be lawful, however, for any person to park any
motor vehicle within any such parking spaces or stalls for more than two (2)
consecutive hours between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and five
o'clock (5:00) P.M. of any weekday on Chestnut Street between First Avenue and
East Side Square. However, all day parking shall be permitted in parking lots
owned by the City for the use and convenience of the public for parking motor
vehicles therein, but it shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor
vehicle in any parking lot owned by the City between the hours of eleven
o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on any day except for
physicians on emergency calls.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle during
the times prohibited by the preceding subsection in such manner that such
vehicle occupies portions of two (2) parking spaces or stalls so that another
motor vehicle cannot be parked in one or the other of them.
      4.   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to affect or regulate
the parking of motor vehicles within the Business District other than within
the parking spaces or stalls, herein contemplated and provided, and any
ordinance therefor providing and not inconsistent herewith shall remain in full
force and effect.
      5.   The Superintendent of Streets and Police Chief of this City together
designate and appropriately mark the parking spaces or stalls herein
contemplated and post appropriate signs informing persons of these regulations.
      6.   The parking spaces or stalls herein contemplated shall be marked and
designated, in manner indicated, on and along the following streets and places
and within the areas set forth in this City as follows:
                     On the east side of Avenue A from the north curb line of
                     Elm Street to a point one hundred ninety feet (190')
                     north, for parallel parking heading in a northerly
Avenue A             direction.
                     On the east side of Avenue A from the north curb line of
                     Pine Street to a point one hundred seventy five feet
                     (175') north, for parallel parking heading in a northerly
                     direction.
                     On both sides of Chestnut Street between First Avenue and
                     Second Avenue, for parallel parking heading in an
                     easterly direction.
                     On both sides of Chestnut Street between the east curb
                     line of Main Street and the east side of square, for
                     diagonal parking heading, respectively, in a
Chestnut Street      southwesterly and northwesterly direction.
                     On both sides of Chestnut Street between the west curb
                     line of Main Street and Avenue A, for parallel parking
                     heading in a westerly direction on the south side of
                     Chestnut Street; and for diagonal parking heading in a
                     northwesterly direction on the north side of Chestnut
                     Street.
                     On both sides of East Chestnut Street from the east side
East Chestnut Street of square (White Court) to First Avenue for diagonal
                     head-in parking for a maximum of eight (8) hours.
                     On both sides of the street on East Side Square, between
East Side Square     Elm and Chestnut Streets, diagonal parking heading,
                     respectively, in a northeasterly and a northwesterly
                     direction.
                     On both sides of Elm Street between Second and First
                     Avenues, for parallel parking heading in a westerly
                     direction.
                     On both sides of Elm Street between the east curb line of
                     Main Street and the west curb line of White Court (as
                     extended), for diagonal parking heading, respectively, in
                     a southeasterly and northeasterly direction.
                     On both sides of Elm Street between the east curb line of
                     White Court (as extended) and First Avenue, for parallel
                     parking heading in an easterly direction on the south
Elm Street           side of Elm Street; and, for parallel parking heading in
                     a westerly direction on the north side of Elm Street.
                     On both sides of Elm Street between the west curb line of
                     Main Street and Avenue A, for parallel parking heading in
                     an easterly direction on the south side of Elm Street;
                     and, for parallel parking heading in a westerly direction
                     on the north side of Elm Street.
                     On the south side of Elm Street between the east curb
                     line of Main Street and the west curb line of White Court
                     (as extended) for diagonal parking heading in a
                     southeasterly direction and for parallel parking (2
                     spaces) heading in a westerly direction.
                     On the east and west sides of Jones Park, north of the
                     island area north of Elm Street, for diagonal head-in
                     parking toward the park for a maximum of three (3) hours.
                     On the north end of Jones Park, on both sides of the
                     island area south of Chestnut Street, for head-in parking
Jones Park           heading, respectively, in a northerly and southerly
                     direction.
                     On the south end of Jones Park, on both sides of the
                     island area north of Elm Street, for head-in parking
                     heading, respectively, in a northerly and southerly
                     direction.
                     On both sides of Main Street, between Elm Street and Pine
                     Street, for parallel parking heading, respectively, in a
                     northerly and southerly direction.
                     On both sides of Main Street, between Locust and Chestnut
                     Streets for parallel parking heading in a southerly
Main Street          direction on the east side of Main Street; and, for
                     diagonal parking heading in a southwesterly direction on
                     the west side of Main Street.
                     On both sides of Main Street, between Pine Street and
                     Walnut Street, for parallel parking heading,
                     respectively, in a northerly and southerly direction.
                     On both sides of Pine Street, between First Avenue and
                     Main Street for parallel parking heading, respectively,
                     in a westerly and easterly direction.
                     On the north side of Pine Street, between Main Street and
                     Avenue A, for parallel parking heading in a westerly
                     direction.
Pine Street          On the south side of Pine Street, between Van Buren Court
                     and First Avenue, for parallel parking heading in an
                     easterly direction.
                     On the south side of Pine Street to a point one hundred
                     fifty feet (150') westerly of the west curb line of Main
                     Street, for parallel parking heading in an easterly
                     direction.
                     On the west side of Second Avenue from the south curb
Second Avenue        line of Chestnut Street to a point one hundred fifteen
                     feet (115') south thereof, for head-in perpendicular
                     parking.
                     On street parking shall be permitted on the north side of
                     West Chestnut Street between the west curb line of North
                     Main Street and the east curb line of North Avenue A in
                     the City. Such parking shall be parallel to the north
                     curb line of West Chestnut Street with motor vehicles to
West Chestnut Street park facing in a westerly direction.
                     On street parking shall be permitted on the south side of
                     West Chestnut Street between the west curb line of North
                     Main Street and the east curb line of North Avenue A in
                     the City. Such parking shall be parallel to the south
                     curb line of West Chestnut Street with motor vehicles to
                     park facing in an easterly direction.
                     On the north side of West Walnut Street from a point two
                     hundred six feet (206') west from the west right-of-way
                     line of Martin Avenue to a point six hundred twenty six
West Walnut Street   feet (626') west of the west right- of-way line of Martin
                     Avenue is hereby allowed. The two (2) hour parking zone
                     shall remain on West Walnut Street except as provided in
                     this subsection.
                     On both sides of White Court, between the south curb line
White Court          of Elm Street and the north curb line of Pine Street, for
                     parallel parking heading in a southerly direction.
 
In any legal proceeding which may be in the enforcement of this chapter, it
shall be considered prima facie proof of evidence that any person in whose name
a motor vehicle is or was registered at the applicable time was then in control
and in operation of such vehicle.
      7.   The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Police
Department of this City on a regular, continual basis during the hours and
periods of its applicability.
   (E)   Reserved.
   (F)   Parking By Handicapped Drivers: Every driver of a motor vehicle will
refrain from parking any vehicle under his or her control in said areas listed
below unless it displays the proper registration plates or decals issued to a
person with disabilities, as defined by section 1-159.1, pursuant to sections
3-616, 11-1301.1 or 11-1301.2 or to a disabled veteran pursuant to section 3-
609 of the Illinois Vehicle Code 1 .
 
                   No parking of any motor vehicle, other than by a handicapped
                   driver, shall be permitted on the south side of East Elm
                   Street, commencing at the intersection of the centerline of
                   Third Avenue with the south curb line of Elm Street in the
                   City; thence west sixty feet (60'), thence north twenty feet
                   (20'), thence east to the centerline of Third Avenue
Elm Street         extended, thence south to the point of beginning.
                   The south side of Elm Street, commencing at the intersection
                   of the centerline of Third Avenue with the south curb line
                   of Elm Street in the City, thence west sixty feet (60'),
                   thence north twenty feet (20'), thence east to the
                   centerline of Third Avenue extended, thence south to the
                   point of beginning be, and the same is hereby designated as
                   parking to be used by handicapped drivers.
                   One handicap parking sign shall be placed in the spot
                   nearest Main Street in the alley running east-west from Main
Main Street        Street to White Court, south of 2 East Elm Street (Legacy
                   Christian Bookstore) and north of 23 South Main Street
                   (Country Financial).
South First Avenue Two (2) handicapped parking spaces shall be placed on the
                   west side of South First Avenue, south of Hickory Street.
 
The appropriate officials of the City shall post appropriate signs and make
appropriate markings designating this area for parking by handicapped drivers
and informing people of these regulations.
Any person who violates this subsection (F) shall, upon conviction or plea, be
subject to a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more
than three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) for each offense pursuant to 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.3(c).
   (G)   Community Bank And Trust Company Parking Restrictions:
      1.   The following words or phrases shall be construed and have the
meanings or definitions set forth:
   PARK OR PARKING: The standing of a motor vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than when temporarily and actually engaged in loading or unloading
merchandise or passengers.
   PARKING AREA: That area provided for the use of motor vehicles in connection
with the banking facility of said Community Bank and Trust Company, generally
located at the address of 245 North Main Street in the City and on the
following described realty:
Lots 74, 83 and 86 in Swans First Addition, also known as Old Town Addition, to
the city of Canton, county of Fulton and state of Illinois;
and which said realty is generally located on the east side of Main Street and
between Locust and Spruce Streets in the city.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person, not specifically authorized by
said Community Bank and Trust Company, or not actively utilizing the facilities
of said Community Bank and Trust Company for established banking services, to
park a motor vehicle at any place in or on the parking area, herein
contemplated, during the following times:
         (a)   Between the hours of five o'clock (5:00) P.M. and eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. of each day commencing on each Monday through each day thereafter
to each succeeding Friday at eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. thereof; and
         (b)   Between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. on every Friday
until eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. of each Monday thereafter succeeding; and
         (c)   At any time during generally recognized holidays.
      3.   It shall be prima facie evidence that any person who parks a motor
vehicle in or on said parking area during the periods herein prohibited is not
authorized to do so and is not actively utilizing the facilities of said
Community Bank and Trust Company for established banking services.
      4.   The Police Chief of this City shall cause appropriate signs to be
posted informing persons of these regulations.
      5.   Any person who violates any of the provisions hereof shall be
punished by fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) for each such violation.
   (H)   Town And Country Insurance Agency, Ltd., Parking Area Restrictions:
      1.   The following words or phrases shall be construed and have the
meaning or definition set forth:
   PARK OR PARKING: The standing of a motor vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than when temporarily and actually engaged in loading and unloading
merchandise or passengers.
   PARKING AREA: That area provided for the use of motor vehicles in connection
with the Town & Country Insurance Agency, Ltd., business and the business of
Mid America Credit, Inc., said facilities being generally located at the
address of 301 North Main Street in the City of Canton, Illinois on the
following described realty:
Lot number 71 in the original town of Canton, Illinois, except nineteen and
three-tenths (19.3) feet off the north side of said lot, and the east sixty
feet (60') of said lot.
and which said realty is generally located on the east side of Main Street and
between Spruce and Ash Streets in the city of Canton, Illinois.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person, not specifically authorized by
said Town & Country Insurance Agency, Ltd., or not actively utilizing the
facilities of Town & Country Insurance Agency, Ltd., or Mid America Credit,
Inc., to park a motor vehicle at any place in or on the parking area, herein
contemplated, during the following times:
         (a)   Between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. of each day commencing on each Monday through each day thereafter
to each succeeding Sunday at eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.;
         (b)   Between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on Sunday until
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. of each Monday thereafter succeeding; and
         (c)   At any time during generally recognized holidays.
      3.   It shall be prima facie evidence that any person who parks a motor
vehicle in or on said parking area during the periods herein prohibited is not
authorized to do so and is not actively utilizing the facilities of Town &
Country Insurance Agency, Ltd., or Mid America Credit, Inc.
      4.   The Police Chief of this City shall cause appropriate signs to be
posted informing persons of these regulations.
      5.   Any person who violates any of the provisions hereof shall be
punished by fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) for each such violation.
   (I)   Ludlum Shopping Center Parking Restrictions:
      1.   The following words or phrases shall be construed and have the
meanings or definitions set forth:
   PARK OR PARKING: The standing of a motor vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than when temporarily and actually engaged in loading or unloading
merchandise or passengers.
   PARKING AREA: That area provided for the use of motor vehicles in connection
with Ludlum Shopping Center owned by Lumco, Inc., a Delaware corporation and
generally located at the address of 370 North Main Street in the City of
Canton, Illinois, and on the following described realty:
Lot 58 in the original town, sometimes referred to as Swan's Addition of the
city of Canton; part of Lot 57 in the original town of Canton more particularly
described as follows:
Beginning at the Southeast corner of Lot 57; thence west 421/2'; thence North
to the South line of west Ash Street; thence East 421/2', thence South to the
Point of Beginning; and the North 90' of Lot 63 of the original town, sometimes
referred to as Swan's Addition of the city of Canton; and the East 50' of the
North half of Lot 64 of the original town, sometimes referred to as Swan's
Addition of the city of Canton, all located in the city of Canton, county of
Fulton and state of Illinois.
and which said realty is generally located on the west side of Main Street and
between Ash and Spruce Streets in the city of Canton, Illinois.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person, not specifically authorized by
Lumco, Inc., or not actively utilizing the facilities of the retail and service
shops located in Ludlum Center to park a motor vehicle at any place in or on
said parking area during the following times:
         (a)   Between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. of each day commencing on each Monday through each day thereafter
to each succeeding Saturday at eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. thereof; and
         (b)   Between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. on each and every
Saturday until eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. of each Monday thereafter; and
         (c)   At any time during generally recognized holidays.
      3.   Notwithstanding the foregoing paragraph, parking shall be allowed
for customers of the Norge Laundry during the following times and upon the
following conditions:
         (a)   Monday through Sunday from five o'clock (5:00) A.M. until ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M.;
         (b)   Provided that the parking occurs within a designated parking
area for Norge Laundry said designated parking area to be described with paint
or other appropriate markings by Lumco; and
         (c)   Further provided that the parking in this area shall only be
during the period when the owner or user of said automobile is patronizing the
Norge Laundry facility.
      4.   It shall be prima facie evidence that any person who parks a motor
vehicle in or on said parking area during the periods herein prohibited is not
authorized to do so and is not actively patronizing or utilizing the retail or
service establishments of said Ludlum Center owned by Lumco, Inc.
      5.   The Police Chief of this City shall cause appropriate signs to be
posted informing persons of these regulations.
      6.   Any person who violates any of the provisions hereof shall be
punished by fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) for each such violation.
   (J)   Goodyear Store Parking Area Restrictions:
      1.   The following words or phrases shall be construed and have the
meanings or definitions set forth:
PARK OR PARKING: The standing of a motor vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than when temporarily and actually engaged in loading or unloading
merchandise or passengers.
PARKING AREA: That area provided for the use of motor vehicles in connection
with the retail business establishments known as the Goodyear Store and
Bowman's Shoe Store, said premises being generally located at the address of
230 North Main Street in the City of Canton, Illinois, on the following
described realty:
A part of Lot number 82 in the original town of Canton, Fulton County,
Illinois, described as follows:
Commencing at the Southeast corner of said lot, running thence North to the
Northeast corner of said lot, thence West 143 feet, thence South to the South
line of said lot and thence East 143 feet to the place of beginning,
also
A part of Lot 82 in the original town of Canton, described as follows:
381/2 feet off of the West end of Lot 82
also
A part of Lot 87 in the original town of Canton, described as follows:
Commencing at the Northeast corner of Lot 87, thence running South 25 feet to a
point, thence West 93.5 feet to a point, thence South 13/4 feet, thence West 88
feet, thence North 263/4 feet, thence East 181/2 feet to the place of
beginning. All of the property subject to the restrictions, covenants,
conditions of records situated in the city of Canton, county of Fulton, state
of Illinois.
and which said realty is generally located on the west side of Main Street
between Locust and Spruce Streets in the city of Canton, Illinois.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person, not specifically authorized by
the owner of said parking area, or not actively utilizing or patronizing the
retail facilities of the Goodyear Store or Bowman's Shoe Store, to park a motor
vehicle at any place in or on the parking area herein contemplated during the
following times:
         (a)   Between the hours of five thirty o'clock (5:30) P.M. and eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. of each day commencing on each Monday through each day
thereafter to each succeeding Saturday at eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.; and
         (b)   Between the hours of five thirty o'clock (5:30) P.M. on Saturday
until eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. of each succeeding Monday thereafter; and
         (c)   At any time during generally recognized holidays.
      3.   It shall be prima facie evidence that any person who parks a motor
vehicle in or on said parking area during the periods herein prohibited is not
authorized to do so and is not actively utilizing the retail store facilities
of the Goodyear Store or Bowman's Shoe Store.
      4.   The Police Chief of this City shall cause appropriate signs to be
posted informing persons of these regulations.
      5.   Any person who violates any of the provisions hereof shall be
punished by fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) for each such violation.
   (K)   Mutual Savings And Loan Association Parking Area Restrictions:
      1.   The following words or phrases shall be construed and have the
meanings or definitions set forth:
PARK OR PARKING: The standing of a motor vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than when temporarily and actually engaged in loading or unloading
merchandise or passengers.
PARKING AREA: That area provided for the use of motor vehicles in connection
with Mutual Savings and Loan Association business operations generally located
at the address of 801 North Main Street in the City of Canton, Illinois, and on
the following described realty:
A part of the Northeast Quarter of section 27, in Township 7 North of the Base
Line, Range Four East of the Fourth Principal Meridian situated in the county
of Fulton and state of Illinois, more particularly described as follows:
Commencing at an iron pin at the Northeast corner of the intersection of Birch
Street and North Main Street, in the city of Canton, county of Fulton, and
state of Illinois, said pin being located approximately 91/2 feet North of the
curb line of Birch Street and 37.7 feet East of the curb line of Route 78;
Thence North 208.71 feet; thence East 208.71 feet; thence South 208.71 feet;
thence West 208.71 feet to the point of beginning, containing approximately 1
acre, more or less, all being located in the city of Canton, county of Fulton
and state of Illinois;
and which said realty is generally located on the east side of Main Street and
between Birch and Sycamore Streets in the city of Canton, Illinois.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person, not specifically authorized by
Mutual Savings and Loan Association, or not actively utilizing the business
facilities of Mutual Savings and Loan Association to park a motor vehicle at
any place in or on said parking area during the following times:
         (a)   Between the hours of five o'clock (5:00) P.M. and eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. of each day commencing on each Monday through each day thereafter
to each succeeding Saturday at eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. thereof; and
         (b)   Between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on each and
every Saturday until eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. of each Monday thereafter; and
         (c)   At any time during generally recognized holidays.
      3.   It shall be prima facie evidence that any person who parks a motor
vehicle in or on said parking area during the period herein prohibited is not
authorized to do so and is not actively patronizing or utilizing the business
establishment owned by Mutual Savings and Loan Association.
      4.   The Police Chief of this City shall cause appropriate signs to be
posted informing persons of these regulations.
      5.   Any person who violates any of the provisions hereof shall be
punished by fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) for each such violation.
   (L)   Fulton County Association For The Handicapped Inc., Parking Area
Restrictions:
      1.   The following words or phrases shall be construed and have the
meanings or definitions set forth:
PARK OR PARKING: The standing of a motor vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than when temporarily and actually engaged in loading and unloading
merchandise or passengers.
PARKING AREA: That area provided for the use of motor vehicles in connection
with the businesses of Fulton County Association for the Handicapped Inc., the
Fulton County Health Department and the Chicken and the Sea Restaurant, said
facilities being generally located at the address of 500 N. Main Street in the
City of Canton, Illinois, on the following described realty:
Tract I
Lots 1 and 2 in Block 1 in Smith & Johnson's Addition to the city of Canton,
Fulton county, Illinois a.k.a. 500 - 502 N. Main Street and 1 - 65 W. Olive
Street in the city of Canton, Illinois.
Tract II
A part of the Northeast Quarter of section 27, Township 7 North, Range 4 East
of the Fourth Principal Meridian, Canton, Fulton county, Illinois described as
follows:
Commencing at the Northwest corner of Lot No. 2, Block No. 1 in Smith &
Johnson's Addition to the city of Canton, in said quarter, running thence North
63 feet, thence East 146 feet, thence South 63 feet, and thence West to the
place of beginning, 146 feet; also known as Lot No. 3, Block No. 4 in JOSEPH
ZWISLER'S ADDITION to Canton, Illinois.
Tract III
56 feet off the West end of Lots 4 and 5 in Block 4 in JOSEPH ZWISLER'S
ADDITION to the city of Canton, Fulton County, Illinois, commencing at the
Northwest corner of Lot 4, thence South 1731/2 feet, thence East 56 feet,
thence North 1731/2 feet, thence West to the point of beginning.
and which said realty is generally located on the west side of Main Street and
between Olive and Vine Streets in the city of Canton, Illinois.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person, not specifically authorized by
agents of or representatives of the said Fulton County Association for the
Handicapped Inc., the Fulton County Health Department or the Chicken and the
Sea Restaurant, or not actively utilizing the facilities of said parties, to
park a motor vehicle at any place in or on the parking area, herein
contemplated, during the following times:
         (a)   Between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. of each day commencing on each Monday through each day thereafter
to each succeeding Sunday at eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.;
         (b)   Between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on Sunday until
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. of each Monday thereafter succeeding; and
         (c)   At any time during generally recognized holidays.
      3.   It shall be prima facie evidence that any person who parks a motor
vehicle in or on said parking area during the periods herein prohibited is not
authorized to do so and is not actively utilizing the facilities of Fulton
County Association for the Handicapped Inc., Fulton County Health Department
and Chicken and the Sea Restaurant.
      4.   The Police Chief of this City shall cause appropriate signs to be
posted informing persons of these regulations.
      5.   Any person who violates any of the provisions hereof shall be
punished by fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) for each such violation.
   (M)   Finn's Interiors Parking Area Restrictions:
      1.   The following words or phrases shall be construed and have the
meanings or definitions set forth:
PARK OR PARKING: The standing of a motor vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than when temporarily and actually engaged in loading and unloading
merchandise or passengers.
PARKING AREA: That area provided for the use of motor vehicles in connection
with the business Finn's Interiors, said facilities being generally located at
the address of 488 N. Main Street in the City of Canton, Illinois, on the
following described realty:
A tract of land described as being a part of Lot 4, Block 1 in Smith and
Johnson Addition to the city of Canton, and a part of the Northeast Quarter of
section 27 in Township 7 North, Range 4 East of the Fourth Principal Meridian,
described as follows: Commencing at the Northeast corner of said Lot 4 in Block
1 in Smith and Johnson's Addition to the city of Canton, at the Southwest
corner of North Main and West Olive Streets, thence South 107 feet, thence West
95 feet, thence North 107 feet, thence East 95 feet to the place of beginning,
all situated in the city of Canton, in the county of Fulton and state of
Illinois.
and which said realty is generally located on the west side of Main Street and
the south side of Olive Street in the city of Canton, Illinois.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person, not specifically authorized by
agents of or representatives of the said Finn's Interiors, or not actively
utilizing the facilities of said parties to park a motor vehicle at any place
in or on the parking area, herein contemplated, during the following times:
         (a)   Between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. of each day commencing on each Monday through each day thereafter
to each succeeding Sunday at eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.;
         (b)   Between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on Sunday until
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. of each Monday thereafter succeeding; and
         (c)   At any time during generally recognized holidays.
      3.   It shall be prima facie evidence that any person who parks a motor
vehicle in or on said parking area during the periods herein prohibited is not
authorized to do so and is not actively utilizing the facilities of Finn's
Interiors.
      4.   The Police Chief of this City shall cause appropriate signs to be
posted informing persons of these regulations.
      5.   Any person who violates any of the provisions hereof shall be
punished by fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) for each such violation.
   (N)   William H. Malmgren Law Office Parking Regulation:
      1.   The following words or phrases shall be construed and have the
meanings or definitions set forth:
   PARK OR PARKING: The standing of a motor vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than when temporarily and actually engaged in loading or unloading
merchandise or passengers.
   PARKING AREA: That area provided for the use of motor vehicles in connection
with the business establishment known as the William H. Malmgren Law Offices,
said premises being generally located at the address of 369 North Main Street
in the City of Canton, Illinois, on the following described realty:
The west sixty three feet (63') of Lot 59, less sixteen and one-half feet (161/
2') off the north side conveyed to the Town of Canton, Illinois, all in the
Original Town of Canton, situated in the county of Fulton, in the state of
Illinois.
and which said realty is generally located on the east side of Main Street at
the southeast corner of Main and Ash Streets in the city of Canton, Illinois.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person, not specifically authorized by
the said William H. Malmgren Law Office, or not actively utilizing or
patronizing the business facilities of the William H. Malmgren Law Office, to
park a motor vehicle at any place in or on the parking area herein contemplated
during the following times:
         (a)   Between the hours of five thirty o'clock (5:30) P.M. and eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. of each day commencing on each Monday through each day
thereafter to each succeeding Saturday at eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.; and
         (b)   Between the hours of five thirty o'clock (5:30) P.M. on Saturday
until eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. of each succeeding Monday thereafter; and
         (c)   At any time during generally recognized holidays.
      3.   It shall be prima facie evidence that any person who parks a motor
vehicle in or on said parking area during the periods herein prohibited is not
authorized to do so and is not actively utilizing the business facilities of
the William H. Malmgren Law Offices.
      4.   The Police Chief of this City shall cause appropriate signs to be
posted informing persons of these regulations.
      5.   Any person who violates any of the provisions hereof shall be
punished by fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) for each such violation.
   (O)   Linn Farms, Inc., Parking Areas; 845 Through 885 N. Main Street:
      1.   The following words or phrases shall be construed and have the
meaning or definition set forth:
   PARK OR PARKING: The standing of a motor vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than when temporarily and actually engaged in the loading or
unloading of merchandise or passengers.
   PARKING AREA: That area provided for the use of motor vehicles in connection
with the business establishments now or hereafter located in the "shopping
center" and "parking area" hereinafter set forth, all being generally located
at address of 845 through 885 N. Main Street, in the City of Canton, Illinois,
on the following described real property:
A part of the NE1/4 of Section 27, Township 7 North, Range 4 East of the Fourth
Principal Meridian, bounded and described as follows:
Commencing 5 chains and 50 links west of the northeast corner of said NE1/4 of
said Section 27, running thence south 5 chains, thence south 88° west 13 chains
and 50 links, thence south 2 chains and 18 links, thence south 82° west 8
chains and 50 links to the center of the Canton and Farmington Road, thence
north 19° west along the center of the Canton and Farmington Road 8 chains and
69 links, more or less, to the north section line of said section 27, and
thence east on said section line 23 chains and 95 links, more or less, to the
place of beginning; EXCEPTING therefrom the following described tract: Part of
the NE1/4 of Section 27, Township 7 North, Range 4 East of the Fourth Principal
Meridian, more particularly described as follows: Commencing on the north line
of section 27, 365.23 feet west of the northeast corner of section 27 and 0.35
feet north of the center of a 3-inch iron fence post set in concrete, the same
being the northwest corner of certain Park property, thence, south 0°52'41"
west 331.43 feet to an iron fence post as above described, thence south
88°55'49" west 889.42 feet to an iron fence post as above described, thence
south 1°37'21" west 143.26 feet to an iron fence post as above described,
thence south 82°44'13" west 108.55 feet to a concrete marker, thence north
0°21'21" east 495.77 feet along the west line of First Avenue extended
northerly to a concrete marker on the north line of section 27, Township 7
North, Range 4 East of the Fourth Principal Meridian, thence north 89°28'23"
east along the north line of section 27, 1003.4 feet to the point of beginning,
containing 8.102 acres, more or less, all being situated in the city of Canton,
county of Fulton and state of Illinois, containing 6.538 acres, more or less.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle at any
place in or on the parking area herein contemplated during the time period from
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M., local time, Sunday
through Saturday.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any person, not actively utilizing or
patronizing the business facilities located on said premises, to park a motor
vehicle at any time at any place in or on the parking area herein contemplated
during the time period from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to eleven o'clock (11:00)
P.M., local time, Sunday through Saturday.
      4.   Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, it shall be lawful for the
aforesaid owner, said owner's lessees and each of their respective agents or
officers to park upon said parking area at any time, or to authorize some other
person to park thereon at any time.
      5.   It shall be prima facie evidence that any person who parks a motor
vehicle in or on said parking area during the periods herein prohibited is not
authorized to do so and is not actively utilizing said business establishments.
      6.   Any person who violates any of the provisions hereof shall be
punished by a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) for each such violation.
   (P)   Perpendicular Parking:
 
                   On the south side of East Cherry Street be allowed from
East Cherry Street South Fifth Avenue to the westerly lot line of East Cherry
                   Street at a point east of South Fourth Avenue for a period
                   of time not to exceed two (2) consecutive hours.
 
   (Q)   Parallel Parking: Parallel parking is hereby permitted on the south
side of Chestnut Street between Second Avenue and Third Avenue in the City.
   (R)   The Placement Of Handicap Parking Spaces:
      1.   Handicap parking spaces shall be designated by resolution and placed
at appropriate places throughout the City.
      2.   The handicap parking spaces placed throughout the City shall conform
with 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301 and 5/11-1301.1 of the Illinois
Motor Vehicle Code.
      3.   The handicap parking spaces appropriately marked shall be for the
use of a person with a motor vehicle bearing registration plates or a special
decal pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.1 and 5/11-1301.2 of
the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code.
      4.   Any person who violates this subsection (R) shall, upon conviction
or plea, be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) nor more than three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) for each offense
pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.3(c).
   (S)   Canton Newsstand:
      1.   The first parking space at the southeast corner of East Elm Street
and White Court will be a fifteen (15) minute parking space.
      2.   The space is designed to accommodate the customers of the Canton
Newsstand.
      3.   Any person accused of a violation of an ordinance restricting the
length of time a vehicle may be parked there shall be penalized by a fine of
five dollars ($5.00) for each offense. (Ord. 4141, 5-7-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/11 et seq.
9-10-3: ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS:
The several streets and alleys designated as one-way streets or alleys on which
traffic or vehicles shall move in one direction only, are as follows: (Ord.
122, 12-15-1964, eff. 12-25-1964; amd. Ord. 1539, 3-18-1997)
   (A)   Streets:
Chestnut Street     From Main Street to Avenue A, east to west.
                    From Main Street to Fifth Avenue, west to east.
                    From Fifth Avenue to the east side of the square, east to
Elm Street          west.
                    From Main Street to the east side of the square, west to
                    east.
Market Court        North from West Elm Street to West Chestnut Street.
North Avenue A      From the north curb line of West Locust Street to the
                    south curb line of West Vine Street.
North Main Street   From Locust Street to Elm Street, north to south.
                    Between Pine and Walnut Streets, shall be utilized only by
Robinson Court      vehicles proceeding south thereon and vehicular traffic
                    thereon shall proceed south and in no other direction.
South Second Avenue From East Elm Street to East Maple Street upon which
                    traffic shall move from north to south only.
Square              East side of the square, south to north.
Van Buren Court     From East Pine Street to East Elm Street upon which
                    vehicles shall move in a north direction only.
White Court         From Elm Street to Pine Street, north to south.
 
(Ord. 122, 12-15-1964, eff. 12-25-1964; amd. Ord. 162, 12-7-1965, eff. 12-17-
1965; Ord. 275, 8-5-1969, eff. 8-15-1969; Ord. 444, 10-16-1973, eff. 10-26-
1973; Ord. 1223, 12-6-1988)
   (B)   Alleys:
East-west alley between Lots 17 and 18 and Lots 19 and 20 in Nathan Jones First
Addition, west from the square to North Avenue A.
The alley west of the railroad tracks parallel with Fourth Avenue will be one-
way going south from Locust Street to Liberty Place.
West alley between Lots 9 to 16 in Anderson's First Addition from south to
north from Linn Street to Cherry Street. (Ord. 1539, 3-18-1997; amd. Ord. 1994,
12-15-2009; Ord. 2064, 1-3-2012)
   (C)   Penalty: Any person who violates this section shall, upon conviction
or plea, be subject to a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each such offense. (Ord. 1994, 12-
15-2009)
9-10-4: YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY STREETS:
Official yield right-of-way signs shall be posted at the following street
intersections in the City:
                    North side, where said street intersects with North
                    Seventh Avenue.
East Olive Street   North side, where said street intersects with North Eighth
                    Avenue.
                    South side, where said street intersects with North Eighth
                    Avenue.
Ingersoll Boulevard Ingersoll Boulevard and Harvester Road.
North Second Avenue Southwest and northeast corners of the intersection of
                    North Second Avenue and East Olive Street.
                    East side, where said street intersects with East Locust
                    Street.
                    East side, where said street intersects with East Spruce
                    Street.
North Sixth Avenue  West side, where said street intersects with East Chestnut
                    Street.
                    West side, where said street intersects with East Locust
                    Street.
                    West side, where said street intersects with East Spruce
                    Street.
South Second Avenue Southwest and northeast corners of the intersection of
                    South Second Avenue and East Cherry Street.
                    Southeast and northwest corners of the intersection of
                    South Sixth Avenue and East Maple Street.
South Sixth Avenue   
                    Southeast and northwest corners of the intersection of
                    South Sixth Avenue and East Oak Street.
South Third Avenue  Southeast and northwest corners of the intersection of
                    South Third Avenue and East Cherry Street.
 
(Ord. 125, 2-2-1965, eff. 2-12-1965; amd. Ord. 131, 3-16-1965, eff. 3-26-1965;
Ord. 158, 10-19-1965, eff. 10-29-1965; Ord. 1919, 12-18-2007)
9-10-5: U-TURNS:
U-turns shall be prohibited on the following streets in the city:
 
Fifth Avenue  Between Pine and Locust Streets.
Locust Street Between Fifth Avenue and Avenue B.
Main Street   Between Locust and Ash Streets.
 
(Ord. 506, 9-2-1975, eff. 9-12-1975)
9-10-6: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Flashing Signals Placement: Flashing signals as provided for in
section
9-2-5 of this title shall be placed at the following locations:
 
                      At the top of the hill on Avenue B prior to the
                      intersection of Avenue B and East Maple Street that will
                      caution northbound drivers of the approaching four-way
Avenue B              stop.
                      Any person who violates this provision shall, upon
                      conviction or plea, be subject to a fine of not less than
                      seventy five dollars ($75.00) nor more than five hundred
                      dollars ($500.00) for each such offense.
                      On the west side, north of the firetruck bays of the
First Avenue          public safety building facing southbound traffic and on
                      the east side of First Avenue, south of the firetruck
                      bays facing northbound traffic.
                      On the southeast corner and northwest corner of North
                      Eleventh Avenue at the intersection of East Myrtle Street
North Eleventh Avenue and North Eleventh Avenue.
                      Any person who violates this provision shall, upon
                      conviction, be subject to a fine in accordance with
                      statutory law.
 
(Ord. 1541, 4-2-1997; amd. Ord. 1879, 8-1-2006)
   (B)   Naming Of Streets: A public road which runs in a northerly- southerly
direction through the center of section 25 in Canton Township, Fulton County,
Illinois, and makes its crossing or intersection with East Chestnut Street in
the city, be and the same hereby is officially named and designated as
"Twentieth Avenue". (Ord. 480, 2-18-1975)
   (C)   Right Turn: No driver of a vehicle shall make a right turn at the
intersection of Main and Ash Streets in the city during the time when the
signal light there and then intended to control the operation of his vehicle is
on "red", any law to the contrary notwithstanding.
The proper officials of this city shall post appropriate signs informing
persons of this provision. (Ord. 535, 3-2-1976)
9-10-7: TWO-WAY STREETS:
 
                     From the east curb line of North First Avenue to the west
                     curb line of North Fifth Avenue is hereby designated as a
East Chestnut Street two-way street upon which traffic shall move from east to
                     west over the north half of said street and from west to
                     east over the south half of said street.
                     From the east curb line of North First Avenue to the west
                     curb line of North Fifth Avenue is hereby designated as a
East Elm Street      two-way street upon which traffic shall move from east to
                     west over the north half of said street and from west to
                     east over the south half of said street.
                     From the west curb line of North Main Street to the east
                     curb line of North Avenue "A" is hereby designated as a
West Chestnut Street two-way street upon which traffic shall move from east to
                     west over the north half of said street and from west to
                     east over the south half of said street.
 
(Ord. 1014, 4-3-1984; amd. Ord. 1024, 6-19-1984; Ord. 1025, 6-19-1984)
9-10-8: CODE VIOLATIONS PENALTY:
Those portions of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes punishable by fine only are
hereby incorporated by reference.
Punishments for violations of this chapter shall be as, from time to time, set
forth in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes.
In charging a violation of said codification, it shall be sufficient to make
reference to the applicable section and title of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
with a designation of local ordinance, e.g.: "L.O. 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-501, driving while under the influence of alcohol". (Ord. 1284,
6-19-1990)
CHAPTER 11
VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES
SECTION:
9-11-1: Penalty
9-11-2: Arrests
9-11-3: Prima Facie Proof
9-11-1: PENALTY:
Violation of any section of this title shall be governed by title 1, chapter
27, "General Penalty", of this code and the fee schedule that is adopted by
city council from time to time. (Ord. 4034, 7-19-2016)
9-11-2: ARRESTS:
Any person arrested for a violation of any provision of this title shall be
released upon proper bail being furnished as required by law. (Ord. 117, 10-6-
1964)
9-11-3: PRIMA FACIE PROOF:
The fact that an automobile which is illegally operated or parked is registered
in the name of a person shall be considered prima facie proof that such person
was in control of the automobile at the time of such violation. (Ord. 117, 10-
6-1964)
CHAPTER 12
GOLF CARTS AND UTILITY TERRAIN VEHICLES
SECTION:
9-12-1: Definitions
9-12-2: Vehicle Requirements
9-12-3: Restrictions
9-12-4: Operation Of Golf Carts/Recreational Off Highway Vehicle/UTV
9-12-5: Annual Registration Of Golf Carts/Recreational Off Highway Vehicle/UTV
9-12-6: Inspection Of Vehicles
9-12-7: Mandatory Insurance
9-12-8: Operation Limited To Licensed Drivers
9-12-9: Other Laws, Regulations, And Ordinances
9-12-10: Use Under The Influence
9-12-11: Revocation Or Denial Of Registration
9-12-12: Penalty
9-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words, terms and titles shall have the
following meanings:
GOLF CART: A vehicle specifically designed and intended for the purposes of
transporting one or more persons and their golf clubs or maintenance equipment
while engaged in the playing of golf, supervising the play of golf, or
maintaining the condition of the grounds on a public or private golf course as
defined by 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-123.9 and 11-1426.1(a)(2) of the
Illinois vehicle code.
RECREATIONAL OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLE/UTILITY TERRAIN VEHICLE (UTV): Any motorized
off highway device designed to travel primarily off highway, sixty four inches
(64") or less in width, having a manufacturer's dry weight of two thousand
(2,000) pounds or less, traveling on four (4) or more nonhighway tires,
designed with a nonstraddle seat and a steering wheel for steering control,
except equipment such as lawn mowers defined by 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/1-168.8 and 5/11-1426.1(a)(4) of the Illinois vehicle code and go-carts.
(Ord. 4029, 5-3-2016)
9-12-2: VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:
All vehicles allowed to operate on city streets pursuant to this chapter, shall
be equipped with all of the safety systems and equipment as required by the
Illinois vehicle code 1  including: seat belts for every passenger, horn,
brakes, a steering apparatus, tires, a rearview mirror, red reflectorized
warning devices in the front and rear, a slow moving emblem on the rear of the
vehicle as required in section 12-709 of the Illinois vehicle code, 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-709, a headlight that emits a white light
visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the front, a taillamp
that emits a red light visible from at least one hundred feet (100') from the
rear, brake lights, turn signals, a windshield, and any and all other safety
equipment required to be installed and operational on such vehicles as set
forth in said statute. (Ord. 4046, 10-18-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/11-1426.1.
9-12-3: RESTRICTIONS:
All-terrain vehicles (ATV) as defined in the Illinois vehicle code, go-carts,
and all other vehicles that do not meet the requirements set forth in this
chapter are not authorized on the roadways of the city of Canton. (Ord. 4029,
5-3-2016)
9-12-4: OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS/RECREATIONAL OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLE/UTV:
Subject to the requirements of section 11-1426.1 of the Illinois vehicle code,
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1426.1, which are hereby adopted by
reference by the city council of the city of Canton, and of the provisions of
this chapter, drivers properly licensed to operate motor vehicles on the
roadways of the city of Canton and who are sixteen (16) years of age, are
allowed to operate golf carts and/or UTVs under this chapter on the roadways of
the city of Canton, having a posted speed limit of thirty five (35) miles per
hour or less. However, golf carts and/or UTVs are not allowed on the city
sidewalks, Illinois State Route 9 or 78 (a.k.a. 5th Avenue, Locust Street, and
Main Street) in the city of Canton, with the exception of a golf cart/UTV may
cross Illinois State Route 9 or 78 at a ninety degree (90°) angle. (Ord. 4029,
5-3-2016)
9-12-5: ANNUAL REGISTRATION OF GOLF CARTS/RECREATIONAL OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLE/UTV:
No vehicle authorized under this title and chapter, shall be operated on any
street or alley in the city of Canton unless the owner(s) thereof shall have
first registered such vehicle with the city of Canton in accordance with the
following requirements:
   (A)   Registration of such vehicles shall be administered by the chief of
police of the city of Canton, or his designee. An application for registration
may be made on a form prescribed by the city of Canton. Said form shall include
a statement under oath or penalties of perjury that the vehicle proposed to be
registered meets the definition of the vehicles defined by the state statute or
in section
9-12-1 of this chapter and shall be accompanied by an annual registration fee
of fifty dollars ($50.00) and proof of liability insurance for said vehicle
having at least the same limits of coverage as required from time to time for
motor vehicles under the mandatory insurance law of the state of Illinois.
   (B)   Vehicles registered under this chapter and section shall be issued a
sticker from the city of Canton which shall be affixed to the rear of the
vehicle and shall be viewable to a police officer from outside of said vehicle.
   (C)   The registration of said vehicle shall be effective for a period of
one calendar year and shall be renewed annually on January 1 of each year in
the same manner as the original registration.
   (D)   The registration of said vehicles shall not be transferrable in the
event of a change of ownership. A new registration fee will be required of the
new owner(s). No refund of the original registration fee is allowed in the
event of the change of ownership.
   (E)   The registration of said vehicles shall be subject to revocation by
the chief of police of the city of Canton in the event of a violation of the
requirements of section 11-1426.1 of the Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-1426.1, or any of the provisions of this chapter. A
revocation of such registration shall be made in writing and shall set forth
the provision(s) of the state statute or this chapter that has been violated.
No refund of the registration fee is allowed in the event of the revocation of
said permit.
   (F)   In the event that the registration of a vehicle is revoked due to a
failure to maintain the required liability insurance or the failure of the
condition of the vehicle in compliance with the state statute or this chapter,
including, but not limited to, maintaining the required safety systems. The
chief of police of the city, or his/her designee, in his/her discretion, may
reinstate the registration upon documentation of reinstatement of the required
insurance coverage or of the repair or modification of the vehicle to cure any
deficiencies, as applicable, if the chief of police of the city of Canton
determines that the violation was not intentional and is not likely to recur.
(Ord. 4029, 5-3-2016)
9-12-6: INSPECTION OF VEHICLES:
Vehicles registered, or proposed to be registered, pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter, shall be subject to inspection before being issued said
registration sticker. The inspection is only required for the first year of
registration or if a sticker lapses. Vehicle owners may obtain an inspection
form from the city of Canton police department and provide that form to the
business conducting the inspection. Businesses must inspect and certify on the
city of Canton police department form that the vehicle meets the required
inspection. The inspector must certify that the vehicle meets the definition as
set forth in the state statute or this chapter, particularly in connection with
the provisions for maintenance in operating condition of required safety
systems and equipment. The certifying business must be a business whose primary
function is the selling of golf carts and/or UTVs or whose primary function is
the repair of mechanical vehicles. (Ord. 4029, 5-3-2016)
9-12-7: MANDATORY INSURANCE:
The owner of any vehicle registered under this chapter shall continuously
maintain liability insurance for said vehicle having at least the same limits
of coverage as required from time to time for motor vehicles under the
mandatory insurance law of the state of Illinois. (Ord. 4029, 5-3-2016)
9-12-8: OPERATION LIMITED TO LICENSED DRIVERS:
All persons who operate a vehicle under this chapter within the city of Canton
must have a valid driver's license. (Ord. 4029, 5-3-2016)
9-12-9: OTHER LAWS, REGULATIONS, AND ORDINANCES:
Vehicles registered under this chapter shall be operated at all times in
accordance with the provisions of the Illinois vehicle code, the rules of the
road contained therein, and any other laws, regulations, or ordinances
governing the operation of motor vehicles in the city of Canton as well as the
laws, regulations or ordinances specifically pertaining to vehicles operated
under this chapter and the operation thereof. (Ord. 4029, 5-3-2016)
9-12-10: USE UNDER THE INFLUENCE:
A person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle authorized
under this chapter on a roadway in the city of Canton while under the influence
of alcohol or drugs, is subject to the provisions of sections 11-500 through
11-502 of the Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-500
through 11-502. Further, a violation of the provisions of this section shall be
cause for the city of Canton to revoke the permit of the authorized vehicle.
(Ord. 4029, 5-3-2016)
9-12-11: REVOCATION OR DENIAL OF REGISTRATION:
   (A)   The chief of police may revoke any registration authorized under this
chapter if the chief of police determines that permitting said vehicle to be
operated by the owner, or his or her authorized user, on any street or alley of
the city would jeopardize public safety.
   (B)   The chief of police may deny registration authorized under this
chapter if the chief of police determines, in his or her sole judgement, that
permitting said vehicle to be operated by the owner, or his or her authorized
user, on any street or alley of the city would jeopardize public safety.
   (C)   The chief of police shall issue his or her revocation or denial, in
writing, which shall be personally delivered to the owner, mailed via U.S. Mail
to the address included on the owner’s application for registration, or sent
via e-mail to the e-mail address included on the owner’s application for
registration.
   (D)   If the chief of police revokes or denies any registration under this
chapter, then the owner may appeal the chief of police’s decision within ten
(10) days of receipt of the chief of police’s written decision. The request for
appeal must be in writing, must include the reasons for the appeal, and must be
personally delivered to the mayor’s office during business hours or postmarked
within said ten (10) days. The city council will then consider whether to
affirm, amend, and/or reverse the chief of police’s decision within thirty (30)
days, unless a further extension agreed upon with the owner, of receipt of the
request for appeal. The owner may appear at the city council meeting to be
heard regarding his or her appeal. The owner may be represented by an attorney
at the meeting, if he or she desires. The city council’s decision to affirm,
amend, and/or reverse the chief of police’s decision shall be final.
   (E)   In the event a registration is denied under this section, then the
application fee shall be refunded to the owner. If a registration is revoked,
then the owner shall not be entitled to a refund of his or her registration fee
without approval of the chief of police or, in the case of an appeal, the city
council. (Ord. 4029, 5-3-2016; amd. Ord. 4217, 3-16-2021)
9-12-12: PENALTY:
Violations of this chapter shall be governed by Title 1, Chapter 27, “General
Penalty,” of this code and the fee schedule that is adopted by city council
from time to time. (Ord. 4029, 5-3-2016; amd. Ord. 4217, 3-16-2021)
CHAPTER 13
LOW-SPEED ELECTRIC BICYCLES AND
LOW-SPEED GAS BICYCLES
SECTION:
9-13-1:    Definitions
9-13-2:    Registration; Fees
9-13-3:    Additional Requirements
9-13-4:    Penalty; Impoundment
9-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
LOW-SPEED ELECTRIC BICYCLE Means a bicycle equipped with fully operable pedals
and an electric motor of less than seven hundred fifty (750) watts that meets
the requirements of one of the following classes:
   (a)    "Class 1 low-speed electric bicycle" means a low-speed electric
bicycle equipped with a motor that provides assistance only when the rider is
pedaling and that ceases to provide assistance when the bicycle reaches a speed
of twenty (20) miles per hour.
   (b)    "Class 2 low-speed electric bicycle" means a low-speed electric
bicycle equipped with a motor that may be used exclusively to propel the
bicycle and that is not capable of providing assistance when the bicycle
reaches a speed of twenty (20) miles per hour.
   (c)    "Class 3 low-speed electric bicycle" means a low-speed electric
bicycle equipped with a motor that provides assistance only when the rider is
pedaling and that ceases to provide assistance when the bicycle reaches a speed
of twenty-eight (28) miles per hour.
      A "low-speed electric bicycle" is not a moped or a motor driven cycle.
LOW-SPEED GAS BICYCLE Means a 2-wheeled or 3-wheeled device with fully operable
pedals and a gasoline motor of less than one horsepower or fifteen (15) cubic
centimeter displacement that is operated at speeds of less than twenty (20)
miles per hour.
The definitions of"low-speed electric bicycle" and "low-speed gas bicycle," as
set forth in this section, are intended to be consistent with the definitions
for same set forth in the Illinois Vehicle Code, and to the extent the
definitions in the Canton Municipal Code and Illinois Vehicle Code for "low-
speed electric bicycle" and "low-speed gas bicycle" conflict, then the
definitions set forth in the Illinois Vehicle Code shall apply and control.
ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE OR CODE Means the Illinois Vehicle Code (615 ILCS 5/1-100
et seq.), as may be amended from time-to-time.
CITY STREET For purposes of this Chapter means any highway, street, roadway,
road, alley, or right-of-way located within the City's jurisdiction. (Ord.
4468, 5-20-2025)
9-13-2: REGISTRATION; FEES:
   (A)   No person shall operate a low-speed electric bicycle or a low-speed
gas bicycle upon a City Street unless the low-speed electric bicycle or a low-
speed gas bicycle is registered and permitted with the City's Police Department
(the "Police Department"). The owner shall furnish the Police Department with
his or her name and address, the make and serial number of the low-speed
electric or low-speed gas bicycle, waiver of liability, and any other
information as the Police Department may require, including a certification
that the low-speed electric or low-speed gas bicycle meets the equipment
requirements of this Chapter. All low-speed electric or low-speed gas bicycles
are subject to inspection by the Police Department to ensure the vehicle is
equipped as required by this Chapter prior to registration. If an owner is
under the age of eighteen, then his or her parent or legal guardian shall
register the low-speed electric bicycle or a low-speed gas bicycle as the
registered "owner" and shall be strictly liable for any violations of this
Chapter.
   (B)   Upon registration of a low-speed electric or low-speed gas bicycle and
payment of the registration fee provided for herein, the Police Department
shall issue to the owner a permit and/or a registration sticker ( collectively
hereinafter "permit" or "registration") to be firmly attached to the bicycle in
such a manner as the Chief of Police shall prescribe. The permit must be
visible and shall not be removed from the low-speed electric bicycle or a low-
speed gas bicycle while it is operating on a City Street.
   (C)   The annual registration fee for any low-speed electric or gas bicycle
permit shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00), which shall be due at the time of
registration.
   (D)   Permits issued under this Chapter shall be effective for a maximum
period of one calendar year and shall expire April 30th of each year,
regardless of the date of issuance. Registration fees will not be pro-rated
after May 1, 2025.
   (E)   Permits under this Chapter shall not be transferrable in the event of
a change of ownership. A new registration fee will be required of the new owner
(s) of the low-speed electric bicycle or a low-speed gas bicycle, and it is the
registered owners' responsibility to notify the City upon the transfer of any
ownership in order to terminate the Permit. No refund of the original
registration fee is allowed in the event of the change of ownership. (Ord.
4468, 5-20-2025)
9-13-3: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Traffic Laws Apply to Persons Riding Low-Speed Electric Bicycles and
Low-Speed Gas Bicycles: Every person riding a low-speed electric bicycle and
low-speed gas bicycle upon a City Street shall be subject to all of the duties
applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the Illinois Vehicle Code or the
Canton Municipal Code, except as to special regulations in Chapter, Article XV
of Chapter 11 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, and those provisions of the
Illinois Vehicle Code or Canton Municipal Code which by their nature can have
no application. It is a violation of this subsection to do any act forbidden or
fail to perform any act required in Article XV of Chapter 11 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, the provisions of
Article XV of Chapter 11 of the Illinois Vehicle Code and ordinances that apply
to bicycles also apply to low-speed electric bicycles and low-speed gas
bicycles.
   (B)   Certain Roadways, Highways and Streets Prohibited: A person may
operate a low-speed electric bicycle or low-speed gas bicycle upon a City
Street pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter or other applicable law. A
person may not operate a low-speed electric bicycle or low-speed gas bicycle on
any City Street or public bicycle path within the City where the posted speed
limit exceeds thirty-five (35) miles per hour; however, a person may cross
(e.g. perpendicularly) any City Street or public bicycle path within the City
where the speed limit exceeds thirty-five (35) miles per hour, subject to other
applicable law and provided said crossing is at an intersection or other lawful
crossing.
   (C)   Age Restrictions:
      1.   A person may operate a low-speed gas bicycle only if the person is
at least sixteen (16) years of age. A person must be at least sixteen (16)
years of age may ride as a passenger on a low-speed gas bicycle, and said
bicycle must also be designed to accommodate passengers in order for a person
to ride as a passenger.
      2.   A person may operate a Class 3 low-speed electric bicycle only if he
or she is sixteen (16) years of age or older. A person must be at least
fourteen (14) years to age to ride as a passenger on a Class 3 low-speed
electric bicycle, and said bicycle must also be designed to accommodate
passengers in order for a person to ride as a passenger.
      3.   A person may operate a Class 1 or Class 2 low-speed electric bicycle
only if he or she is fourteen (14) years of age or older. A person must be at
least fourteen (14) years of age to ride a Class 1 or Class 2 low-speed
electric bicycle, and said bicycle must also be designed to accommodate
passengers in order for a person to ride as a passenger.
      4.   For purposes of this subsection "be designed to accommodate
passengers" does not include riding on pegs or handlebars or in or on trailers.
The low-speed electric bicycle or low-speed gas bicycle must have an affixed
seat that may reasonably and safely transport a passenger.
   (D)   Speed Restrictions: A person may not operate a low-speed electric
bicycle or low-speed gas bicycle at a speed greater than twenty (20) miles per
hour upon any City Street.
   (E)   Use on Sidewalks and Public Places Prohibited: A person may not
operate a low-speed electric bicycle or a low-speed gas bicycle on a sidewalk.
A person shall not operate a low-speed electric bicycle or low-speed gas
bicycles on walking/biking paths, in City parks, or other city-owned public
places ( except for permitted City Streets), other than designated parking
areas.
   (F)   Equipment Requirements: Every low-speed electric bicycle and low-speed
gas bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the front
which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least five hundred
feet (500') to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type
approved by the Illinois Department of Transportation which shall be visible
from all distances from one hundred feet (100') to six hundred feet (600') to
the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor
vehicle, except that a lamp emitting a steady or flashing red light visible
from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the rear may be used in addition
to or instead of the red reflector. Every low-speed electric bicycle and low-
speed gas bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will adequately control
movement of and stop and hold such low-speed electric bicycle or low-speed gas
bicycle. All
   (G)   Safety Equipment: Any person under the age of sixteen (16) that is
operating or is a passenger on a low-speed electric bicycle or low-speed gas
bicycle shall wear a helmet while operating or riding on any City Street. All
persons operating or that are a passenger on a low-speed electric bicycle or
low-speed gas bicycle shall be protected by glasses, goggles or a transparent
shield.
   (H)   Driving Under the Influence of Drugs and/or Alcohol: A person may not
operate or be in physical control of a low-speed electric bicycle or low-speed
gas bicycle on a highway, street, or roadway in the City of Canton in violation
of 625 ILCS 5/11-501.
   (I)   Sirens Prohibited: A low-speed electric bicycle or low-speed gas
bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a low-speed
electric bicycle or low-speed gas bicycle any siren. This subsection does not
apply to a low-speed electric bicycle or low-speed gas bicycle that is a police
vehicle or fire department vehicle.
   (J)   Additional Requirements Specific to Low-Speed Electric Bicycles:
      1.   A Class 2 low-speed electric bicycle shall operate in a manner so
that the electric motor is disengaged or ceases to function when the brakes are
applied.
      2.   A Class 1 low-speed electric bicycle and a Class 3 low-speed
electric bicycle shall operate in a manner so that the electric motor is
disengaged or ceases to function when the rider stops pedaling.
      3.   Each low-speed electric bicycle operating in the City shall comply
with equipment and manufacturing requirements adopted by the United States
Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 CPR§ 1512.
      4.   Each Class 3 low-speed electric bicycle shall be equipped with a
speedometer that displays the speed the bicycle is traveling in miles per hour.
      5.   No person shall knowingly tamper or modify the speed capability of a
low-speed electric bicycle without replacing the label required under 625 ILCS
5/11-1517(c).
   (K)   Any person owning or operating a low-speed electric bicycle, or low-
speed gas bicycle in the City of Canton does so under the acknowledgment that
the City of Canton shall not under any circumstances be liable for any expense
incurred by an applicant or permit holder for the costs of rendering a low-
speed electric bicycle or low-speed gas bicycle compliant with the requirements
as set forth in this Chapter for the purpose of its operation on City Streets.
(Ord. 4468, 5-20- 2025)
9-13-4: PENALTY; IMPOUNDMENT:
   (A)   Penalty; Owners Responsible. Any person found to be in violation of
any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to a fine of no less
than twenty- five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each such violation. Every day that a violation occurs shall
constitute a separate offense. All registered owners of any low-speed electric
bicycle or low-speed gas bicycle that is operated in violation of this Chapter
may be cited and fined for said violation and all registered owners shall be
strictly liable for any violations of this Chapter, regardless of whether the
registered owner was operating the low-speed electric bicycle or low-speed gas
bicycle in violation of this Chapter.
   (B)   Suspension. A second or subsequent violation of any of the provisions
of this Chapter, in relation to any particular low-speed electric bicycle or
low-speed gas bicycles (regardless of the operator), in addition to any fine
imposed, shall be grounds for the revocation of any permit issued for that low-
speed electric bicycle or low-speed gas bicycle of up to one (1) year. If, at
any time, the Chief of Police determines that permitting any particular low-
speed electric bicycle or low-speed gas bicycle to be operated by the owner, or
his or her authorized user, on any City Street would jeopardize public safety,
the Chief of Police may suspend or revoke, subject to subsection (d) below, any
permit issued under this Chapter for periods ofup to one (1) year or more.
   (C)   Impoundment. In addition to fines as set forth in subsection (a) above
and suspension set forth in subjection (b) above, any low-speed electric
bicycle or low-speed gas bicycle operated within the City of Canton shall be
subject to impoundment. The chief of police is hereby authorized and empowered
to impound, for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days, any low-speed electric
bicycle or low-speed gas bicycle in violation of the Canton Municipal Code, so
far as they are applicable. When the owner of any low-speed electric bicycle or
low-speed gas bicycle is known, he or she shall be given or sent a letter to
his or her last known address notifying him or her that the low-speed electric
bicycle or low-speed gas bicycle has been impounded and informing the owner how
to claim the impounded low-speed electric bicycle or low-speed gas bicycle.
      Where the owner/rider of the low-speed electric bicycle or low-speed gas
bicycle is under age eighteen (18), a copy of the letter may be sent to his or
her parent or legal guardian, if known. Any low-speed electric bicycle or low-
speed gas bicycle impounded under this section may be redeemed after thirty
(30) days or after the owner's first appearance in Court, whichever occurs
first, unless otherwise approved by the Chief of Police. The redemption fee for
any impounded property shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). This fee is in
addition to any fines or penalties, which may be assessed for the violation of
the Canton Municipal Code. After sixty (60) days, all unclaimed low-speed
electric bicycles or low-speed gas bicycles shall be deemed property of the
City.
   (D)   Revocation or Denial of Registration.
      1.   The Chief of Police may suspend or revoke any registration
authorized under this Chapter if the Chief of Police determines that permitting
said low-speed electric bicycle or low-speed gas bicycle to be operated by the
owner, or his or her authorized user, on any street or alley of the City would
jeopardize public safety.
      2.   The Chief of Police may deny registration authorized under this
Chapter if the Chief of Police determines, in his or her sole judgement, that
permitting said vehicle to be operated by the owner, or his or her authorized
user, on any City Street would jeopardize public safety.
      3.   The Chief of Police may suspend or revoke any registration
authorized under this Chapter or deny future registration under this Chapter if
the owner, or his or her authorized user, is convicted of a violation of
Article V of the Illinois Vehicle Code while operating the low-speed electric
or low-speed gas bicycle on the roadways of the City of Canton.
      4.   The Chief of Police shall issue his or her suspension, revocation or
denial, in writing, which shall be personally delivered to the owner, mailed
via U.S. Mail to the address included on the owner's application for
registration, or sent via e-mail to the e-mail address included on the owner's
application for registration.
      5.   If the Chief of Police suspends, revokes or denies any registration
under this Chapter, then the owner may appeal the Chief of Police's decision
within ten (10) days of receipt of the Chief of Police's written decision. The
request for appeal must be. in writing, must include the reasons for the
appeal, and must be personally delivered to the Mayor's office during business
hours or postmarked within said ten (10) days. The City Council will then
consider whether to affirm, amend, and/or reverse the Chief of Police's
decision within thirty (30) days, unless a further extension agreed upon with
the owner, of receipt of the request for appeal. The owner may appear at the
City Council meeting to be heard regarding his or her appeal. The owner may be
represented by an attorney at the meeting, if he or she desires. The City
Council's decision to affirm, amend, and/or reverse the Chief of Police's
decision shall be final.
      6.   In the event a registration is denied under this section, then the
application fee shall be refunded to the owner. If a registration is suspended
or revoked, then the owner shall not be entitled to a refund of his or her
registration fee without approval of the Chief of Police or, in the case of an
appeal, the City Council. (Ord. 4468, 5-20-2025)
TITLE 10
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
OBJECTIVES AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Objectives
10-1-2: Definitions
10-1-1: OBJECTIVES:
To the end that adequate light, pure air, and safety from fire and other
dangers may be secured, that the taxable value of land and buildings throughout
the city may be conserved, that congestion in the public streets may be
lessened or avoided, that the hazards to persons and damage to property
resulting from the accumulation or runoff of storm or flood waters may be
lessened or avoided, and that the public health, safety, comfort, morals and
welfare may be otherwise promoted, the city council enacts this zoning title.
(Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this title, certain terms shall be interpreted or defined as
follows: When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present
tense include the future tense, words in the singular number include the plural
number and words in the plural number include the singular number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The term "person" shall
mean an individual, partnership, corporation or other association or their
agents. The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel". The word "used" or
"occupied" shall include the words "intended, arranged or designed, to be used
or occupied". Terms not herein defined shall have the meanings customarily
assigned to them.
ACCESSORY USE: A use customarily and exclusively incidental and subordinate to
the main use of the premises.
ALLEY: A public or private way which affords only a secondary means of access
to abutting property and which is not intended for general traffic circulation.
ALTERATIONS: As applied to a building or structure, is a change or
rearrangement of building components, enlargement, or relocation of exit
facilities.
APARTMENT: A dwelling unit located in a building which contains more than two
(2) dwelling units.
APARTMENT HOUSE: A residential structure containing three (3) or more
apartments.
ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES: "Architectural features" of a building shall include
cornices, eaves, gutters, belt courses, sills, lintels, bay windows, chimneys
and decorative ornaments.
AREA, BUILDING: The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at the main
grade level of all principal and accessory buildings, exclusive of uncovered
porches or terraces.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR: General repair, engine rebuilding, rebuilding or
reconditioning of motor vehicles; collision services, such as body, frame, or
fender straightening and repair; overall painting and vehicle rustproofing.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: A building or structure designed or used for the
retail sale or supply of fuels (stored only in underground tanks), lubricants,
air, water, and other products for motor vehicles, and may include the
facilities for the installation of such products on or in such vehicles.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building partly below grade, but so located that
the vertical distance from the average ground level to the ceiling is less than
the vertical distance from the average ground level to the floor. If the
vertical distance from the average ground level to the ceiling is greater than
the distance from average ground level to the floor, such basement shall be
considered a full story. (See definition of Story.)
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT: An operator occupied residence providing
accommodations for a charge to the public with no more than five (5) guestrooms
for rent, in operation for more than ten (10) nights in a twelve (12) month
period. Breakfast may be provided to the guests only. Bed and breakfast
establishments shall not include motels, hotels, boarding houses, or food
service establishments pursuant to state statutes.
BED AND BREAKFAST OPERATOR: The owner of the bed and breakfast establishment,
or the owner's agent, who is required by this act to reside in the bed and
breakfast establishment, or on contiguous property.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded on all sides by any of the following:
   (A)   Streets;
   (B)   Public parks;
   (C)   Railroad rights of way, when located at or above ground level but not
including sidings or spurs in the same ownership as the zoning lot; or
   (D)   Corporate boundary lines of the city of Canton.
BLOCK, FRONT: All of the property on one side of a street and lying between the
two (2) nearest intersecting streets, or between one intersecting street and a
railroad right of way, unsubdivided acreage, river or lake; or between any of
the foregoing or any other barrier to the continuity of development.
BOARDING HOUSE: A building where the principal occupants thereof reside, and
provide meals or lodging and meals, for compensation to three (3) or more
persons other than members of the keeper's immediate family, by prearrangement
for definite periods of not less than one week, where individual cooking
facilities are prohibited.
BUILDING: A structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof supported
by columns or walls for the shelter, support, enclosure of persons, animals, or
chattels. Tents, awnings or vehicles situated on private property and used for
purposes of a building shall also be considered a building. When any portion of
a structure is completely separated from every other part thereof by load
bearing party walls from the ground up, and without openings, each such portion
of such structure shall be deemed a separate building.
BUILDING HEIGHT: See definition of Height Of Building.
BUILDING LINE: A line established, in general, parallel to the front lot line,
or right of way line, beyond which no part of a building shall project, except
as otherwise provided by this title. (See definition of Setback.)
BUILDING, MAIN OR PRINCIPAL: A building in which is conducted the principal use
of the lot on which it is situated.
CARPORT: A partially enclosed structure principally devoted to the storage of
motor vehicles.
CELLAR: See definition of Basement.
CLUB: A nonprofit organization of persons for special purposes or for the
promulgation of agriculture, sports, arts, science, literature, politics or the
like.
COMMISSION: The city joint planning and zoning commission of Canton, Illinois.
CONVALESCENT OR NURSING HOME: A home for the care of children or the aged, or
infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorder, wherein two (2)
or more persons are cared for. Said home shall conform to the requirements of
state law although state laws may not apply to such home because the number of
persons cared for as specified in this definition is less than the number set
forth in the state statutes.
COVERAGE: That percentage of the plot or lot area covered by the building(s).
DISTRICT: A portion or portions of the city of Canton within which uses of land
and buildings are permitted and wherein regulations and requirements apply
under the provisions of this title on a uniform basis.
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT: A business establishment so developed that all or any
part of its retail or service character is dependent on providing a driveway
approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons while in
the motor vehicle (e.g., restaurants, cleaners, banks, theaters).
DUPLEX: A building containing two (2) dwelling units. Each dwelling unit shall
be independent in terms of living facilities including kitchen, bath, sleeping
rooms, etc.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE: A building or portion thereof, used or designed for three
(3) or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A detached building, used or designed for not more
than one dwelling unit.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A detached building, used or designed for two (2) but not
more than two (2) dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT: Any building or portion thereof having cooking facilities which
is used or designed wholly as the residence of one family, or an individual,
whether permanently or transiently. In case of mixed commercial-residential
occupancy, where a building is occupied in part as a dwelling unit, the parts
so occupied shall be deemed as a dwelling unit for the purpose of this title
and shall comply with the provisions thereof relative to dwellings.
EFFICIENCY UNIT: A dwelling unit consisting solely of one principal room, and a
bathroom, kitchen, hallway, and closets.
ERECTED: Shall include the words built, reconstructed, moved upon, or any
physical operations on the premises required for the building. Building
excavations, fill, drainage, and the like shall be considered a part of
erection.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES: The erection or maintenance by public utilities, municipal
departments or commissions, of underground, surface or overhead gas,
communication, electrical, steam, fuel or water transmission or distribution
systems, collection, supply or disposal systems, including towers, poles,
wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarms, and police
call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and similar accessories in connection
therewith, but not including buildings which are necessary for the furnishing
of adequate service by such utilities or municipal departments for the general
public health, safety, convenience, or welfare.
EXCAVATING: The removal of sand, stone, gravel, or fill dirt below the average
elevation of the surrounding land and/or established grade, whichever shall be
the higher.
FAMILY: One or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single
housekeeping unit, whether or not related to each other by birth, adoption or
marriage, but no unrelated group shall consist of more than five (5) persons as
distinguished from a group occupying a boarding or lodging house, as herein
defined.
FENCE: A physical barrier separating two (2) independent land uses or dividing
land areas. Can provide physical and/or visual separation.
FILLING: The depositing or dumping of any matter onto, or into the ground,
except such as is related to common household gardening.
FILLING STATION: See definition of Automobile Service Station.
FLOOR AREA: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the
building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the
centerline of walls separating two (2) buildings. The "floor area" of a
building shall include the basement floor area when more than one-half (1/2) of
the basement height is above the established curb level, or average ground
level, whichever is higher. (See definition of Basement.) "Floor area" shall
include elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor, floor space used for
mechanical equipment (except equipment, open or enclosed, located on the roof),
attic space having headroom of seven feet ten inches (7'10") or more, interior
balconies, and mezzanines. Any space devoted to off street parking or loading
shall not be included in "floor area".
GARAGE, COMMERCIAL: Any building except those described as a private, community
or storage garage, available to the public and used principally for the storage
of automobiles or motor driven vehicles, for remuneration, hire or sale, where
any such vehicles or engines may also be equipped for operation, repaired,
rebuilt or reconstructed, and where vehicles may be greased, washed or
serviced.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building used primarily for the storage of self-
propelled vehicles for the use of the occupants of a lot on which such building
is located and with a capacity of not more than four (4) motor driven vehicles.
The foregoing definition shall be construed to permit the storage on any one
lot, for not more than one vehicle plus those of the occupants thereof. In no
instance shall the garage house more than one commercial vehicle. Such vehicle
shall not exceed a rated capacity of one and one-half (11/2) ton, and shall be
used solely by the occupants of the lot.
GARAGE, STORAGE: A building, except a private garage, used exclusively for the
storage of vehicles, and where such vehicles are not repaired or otherwise
serviced or cared for.
GRADE: The established grade of a lot shall be the elevation of the curb or
sidewalk at the midpoint of the front of the lot. In cases where there is no
curb or sidewalk, the grade shall be established by the city engineer. When a
lot has frontage on more than one street, the grade shall be considered to be
the average of the individual grades of each street on which the lot has
frontage.
GREENBELT: A strip of land planted with shrubs and/or trees to serve as an
obscuring screen or buffer strip. (See chapter 15 of this title.)
GROUND LEVEL, AVERAGE: The average elevation of the finished ground surface
adjacent to the walls or foundation of the principal structure on a lot.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING: The vertical distance from the finished ground level at the
center of the front of the building to the highest point of the roof surface of
a flat roof, to the deck line for a mansard roof, to the mean height level
between the eaves and ridge for hip, gabled and gambrel roofs.
HOSPITAL: An institution providing health services, primarily for patients who
remain overnight, and medical and surgical care of the sick or injured,
including as an integral part of the institution, such related facilities as
laboratories, outpatient departments, training facilities, central service
facilities and staff offices.
HOTEL, INN OR MOTOR HOTEL: A building occupied or used for the lodging of
individuals with or without meals, and in which there are more than five (5)
sleeping rooms, and in which no provision is made for cooking in any guestroom.
JUNK: Any motor vehicles, machinery, appliances, products, merchandise with
parts missing, or scrap metals or other scrap materials that are damaged,
deteriorated, or are in a condition which would preclude the product's use for
its originally designed purpose.
JUNKYARD: A lot or part thereof which is used for storage, keeping or
abandonment of junk, including scrap metal, vehicles, machinery or parts
thereof.
KENNEL: Any lot or premises on which four (4) or more dogs, four (4) months or
more old, are kept permanently or temporarily.
LABORATORY: A place devoted to experimental or routine study, such as testing
and analytical operations, and in which manufacturing or dumping of product(s)
is not permitted.
LOADING SPACE: An off street space on the same lot with a building or group of
buildings, for temporary parking for a commercial vehicle while loading and
unloading merchandise or materials.
LOT: A portion or parcel of land considered as a unit, devoted to a certain use
or occupied by a building or group of buildings that are united by a common
interest or use including open space or accessory uses belonging to same.
LOT AREA: The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot. For lots
fronting or lying adjacent to private streets, the lot area shall be
interpreted to mean that area within lot lines separating the lot from the
private street and not the area within said private street.
LOT, CORNER: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) streets or a lot
bounded on two (2) sides by a curving street, two (2) chords of which form an
angle of one hundred thirty five degrees (135°) or less. The point of
intersection of the street lot lines is the "corner". In the case of a corner
lot with curved street line, the corner is that point on the street lot line
nearest to the point of intersection of the chords described above.
LOT COVERAGE: The area of the lot occupied by buildings or structures,
including accessory buildings or structures.
LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance from the front property line to the
rear lot line.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: An interior lot having frontages on two (2) more or less
parallel streets, as distinguishable from a corner lot. In the case of a row of
double frontage lots, one street may be designated as the front street for all
lots in the plot.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot. Any portion of a corner lot more
than one hundred twenty feet (120') from the "corner", measured along a front
street lot line, shall be considered an interior lot, provided such portion is
of sufficient width, length, and area to meet the minimum requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located.
LOT LINE, FRONT: Any lot line which is a street line except that in the case of
a corner lot, the front line is the shorter of the two (2) intersecting lines.
In the case of a double frontage lot, either of the lines which are street
lines shall be considered front lot lines unless otherwise designated in the
plat.
LOT LINE, REAR: Ordinarily, that lot line which is opposite and most distant
from the front lot line of the lot. In the case of an irregular or triangular
shaped lot, a line ten feet (10') in length entirely within the lot parallel to
and at the maximum distance from the front lot line of the lot shall be
considered to be the rear lot line for the purpose of determining depth of rear
yard. In cases where none of these definitions are applicable, the zoning
administrator shall designate the rear lot line. (See definition of Lot, Double
Frontage.)
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot line which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
A side lot line separating a lot from a street is a side street lot line. A
side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot
line.
LOT LINE, STREET OR ALLEY: A lot line separating the lot from the right of way
of a street or an alley.
LOT LINES: The property lines bounding the lot.
LOT OF RECORD: An area of land which, prior to the effective date hereof, was
in separate ownership and has remained in separate ownership and which, prior
to such effective date either: a) was designated as a lot on a plat of
subdivision recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds of Fulton County;
or b) was recorded pursuant to statute in the office of the recorder of deeds
of Fulton County, Illinois.
LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at two
(2) points where the building line, or setback, intersects the side lot lines.
MINISTORAGE: An unattended structure containing four (4) or more separately
partitioned rental units to be used exclusively for the storage of personal
property by the public where the renter has direct access to the rental unit at
all times.
MOBILE HOME/HOUSE TRAILER: A structure meeting less than minimum construction
standards as established by the city building codes and designed to be used for
human habitation, carrying or storage of property, being able to be easily
equipped with wheels or other devices for the purpose of transportation from
place to place. Neither removal of wheels, placing of structure on foundation,
nor disguising the undercarriage with a metal apron shall change its
classification to other than a mobile home. Camping trailer is a vehicle
intended only for seasonal use but not for living purposes within the
municipality. For the purpose of this title, no trailer of any kind over thirty
two feet (32') in length shall be considered a camping trailer.
MOBILE HOME PARK OR TRAILER PARK: The premises upon which permanent facilities
are located for a specified minimum number of trailer coaches or mobile homes
as indicated in this title.
MOTEL: A series of attached, semidetached, or detached rental units containing
bedroom, bathroom and closet space.
MOTOR VEHICLE: A vehicle, motorcycle or truck which is self- propelled by
mechanical power. Definition excludes self- propelled motor homes or campers.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any use of land or a structure, or portions thereof, without
regard to land area or setback requirements, which does not conform to the use
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located; provided, however,
that said use was in existence on the date of adoption hereof or subsequent
amendments thereto which directly affect the land or structure in question.
Violations of existing regulations shall not hereafter be deemed legal
nonconforming uses.
OCCUPIED: The word "occupied" includes arranged, designed, built, altered,
converted to, rented or leased, or intended to be occupied.
OFF STREET PARKING LOT OR SPACE: An all weather surfaced area within the lot
lines, enclosed in the main building, in an accessory building, or unenclosed,
sufficient in size to store one standard automobile, and if the space is
enclosed comprising an area of not less than one hundred fifty (150) square
feet; if unenclosed, at least twenty feet by ten feet (20' x 10') with an all
weather surface permitting satisfactory ingress and egress of an automobile.
OPEN AIR BUSINESS USES: Open air business uses, if operated for profit, shall
include the following:
   (A)   Bicycle, trailer, motor vehicle, mobile and modular homes, boats or
home equipment sale or rental services.
   (B)   Outdoor display and sale of garages, swimming pools, and similar uses.
   (C)   Retail sale of fruits, vegetables, and perishable foods.
   (D)   Retail sale of trees, shrubbery, plants, flowers, seed, topsoil,
humus, fertilizer, trellises, lawn furniture, playground equipment, and other
home garden supplies and equipment.
   (E)   Tennis courts, archery courts, shuffleboard, horseshoe courts,
miniature golf driving ranges, children's amusement parks or similar recreation
uses.
OPEN FRONT STORE: A business establishment so developed that service to the
patron may be extended beyond the walls of the structure, not requiring the
patron to enter said structure.
PARCEL: A tract of land owned by one entity i.e., individual, family,
corporation, partnership, etc.
PORCH, ENCLOSED: A covered entrance to a building or structure which restricts
the free entry of air, natural light, or view by means of permanently installed
fixtures, and which projects out from the main wall of said building or
structure and has a separate roof or an integral roof with the principal
building or structure to which it is attached.
PORCH, OPEN: A covered entrance to a building or structure which is unenclosed
except for columns supporting the porch roof and railing which may be attached
thereto, and which projects out from the main wall of said building or
structure and has a separate roof or an integral roof with the principal
building or structure to which it is attached.
PUBLIC UTILITY: Any persons, firm, corporation, municipal department, board or
commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing, under federal, state or
municipal regulations, to the public, electricity, gas, steam, communications,
telegraph, transportation, or water services.
RESIDENCE DISTRICT: Any one or all of the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 districts.
ROOMING HOUSE: A building or part thereof, other than a hotel, in which
sleeping accommodations are provided for hire, but meals are not furnished and
in which individual cooking facilities are prohibited. (Also see definition of
Boarding House.)
ROW HOUSE OR TOWNHOUSE: A row of three (3) or more attached dwelling units, not
more than two and one-half (21/2) stories in height, each dwelling having its
own front and rear yards and entrances.
SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between the front of the building,
excluding steps and unenclosed porches and the front street or right of way
line. (See definition of Building Line.)
SIGN, OUTDOOR ADVERTISING: Any card, cloth, paper, metal, painted glass, wood,
plaster, stone or other object of any kind or character whatsoever which is
intended to direct attention to a business or profession, or to a commodity,
service or entertainment, and which is placed on the ground or on any wall,
tree, bush, rock, post, fence, building structure, or thing whatsoever. The
term "placed" as used in the definition of "outdoor advertising sign" and
"outdoor advertising structure" shall include erecting, constructing, posting,
painting, printing, tacking, nailing, gluing, sticking, carving, or other
fastening, affixing, or making visible to the public in any manner whatsoever.
SOIL REMOVAL: Shall mean removal of any kind of soil or earth matter, including
topsoil, sand, gravel, clay, rock or similar materials, or combination thereof,
except such as is related to common household gardening and agriculture.
STORY: That portion of a building, other than a basement or mezzanine (except
as hereinafter provided), included between the surface of any floor and the
surface of the floor next above, or if there be no floor above it, then the
space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
A "mezzanine" shall be deemed a full story when it covers more than fifty
percent (50%) of the horizontal area of the story underneath said mezzanine or,
if the vertical distance from the floor next below it, to the floor next above
it, is twenty feet (20') or more.
For the purpose of this title, a basement shall be as a full story; if the
average vertical distance from the average ground level to the ceiling is
greater than the average vertical distance from the ground level to the floor
level, if it is used for dwelling purposes, the basement shall be considered a
full story.
STORY, HALF: The part of a building between a pitched roof and the uppermost
full story, said part having a finished floor area which does not exceed one-
half (1/2) of the floor area of said uppermost full story.
STREET: A thoroughfare which affords traffic circulation and a principal means
of access to abutting property, including avenue, place, way, drive, lane,
boulevard, highway, road, and any other thoroughfare, except an alley.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change, other than incidental repairs, in the
supporting members of a building or structure such as bearing walls, or
partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any change in the width or number of
exits, or any substantial change in the roof.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected which requires permanent location on
the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground
and includes among other things, stadiums, platforms, radio towers, sheds,
storage bins, fences and display signs.
STRUCTURE, OUTDOOR ADVERTISING: Any structure of any kind or character erected
or maintained for outdoor advertising purposes, upon which any outdoor
advertising sign or billboard may be placed, including outdoor advertising
statuary.
SWIMMING POOL: Any structure or container intended for swimming or bathing,
located either above or below grade designed to hold water to a depth greater
than twenty four inches (24").
TEMPORARY BUILDING AND USE: A structure or use permitted to exist during
periods of construction of the main structure or use for special events, not to
exceed two (2) years.
YARD: An open space on a lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its
lowest level to the sky, except as otherwise permitted in this title. A
required yard extends along a lot line and at right angles to such line to a
minimum depth or width specified in the yard regulations and for the district
in which such lot is located.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending along the full width of a front lot line between
side lot lines and from the front lot line to the front building line in depth.
YARD, REAR: The portion of the yard on the same lot with the principal
building, located between the rear line of the building and the rear lot line
and extending for the full width of the lot.
YARD, SIDE: A yard extending along a side lot line between the front and rear
yards, except that a side yard abutting a street shall be defined as the yard
extending along a side lot line between the front yard and the rear lot line.
(Ord. 567, 11-1976; amd. Ord. 1115-A, 8-19-1986; Ord. 1565, 11-4-1997; Ord.
1714, 12-4-2001; Ord. 3041, 12-3-2013)
CHAPTER 2
ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Districts Established
10-2-2: Interpretation, District Boundaries
10-2-3: Transition Zoning
10-2-4: Application Of Regulations
10-2-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
The area of zoning jurisdiction is hereby divided into the following zoning
districts:
CO-1 Conservation district
AG-1 Agriculture district
R-1  One-family residential district
R-2  One-family residential district
R-3  Two-family residential district
R-4  Multiple-family residential district
B-1  Local commercial district
B-2  General business district
B-3  Central business district
I-1  Light industrial district
I-2  Heavy industrial district
 
The boundaries of such districts are as shown on the maps entitled "map A,
zoning district", Canton, Illinois, on file in the city hall of the city of
Canton, which, with all explanatory material thereon are hereby made a part of
this title by reference. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-2-2: INTERPRETATION, DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid
districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
   (A)   Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the
centerlines of streets or highways, street lines or highway right of way lines,
such centerlines, street lines or highway right of way lines shall be construed
to be such boundaries.
   (B)   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately
follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries.
   (C)   Where a district boundary line as established in this section or as
shown on the zoning map, divides a lot which was in a separate ownership and of
record at the time of enactment of this chapter, the use authorized thereon and
the other district requirements applying to the least restricted portion of
such lot, under this chapter, shall be considered as extending to the entire
lot, provided that the more restricted portion of such lot is entirely within
twenty five feet (25') of said dividing district boundary line. The use so
extended shall be deemed to be conforming.
   (D)   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately
parallel to the centerlines or street lines of streets, or the centerline or
right of way lines of highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as
being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the
zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the
use of the scale shown on said zoning map.
   (E)   Where the boundary of a district follows a railroad line, such
boundary shall be deemed to be located midway between the main tracks of said
railroad line.
   (F)   In areas not subdivided into lots and blocks, the district boundary
lines shall be determined by scale to the nearest ten feet (10'). (Ord. 567,
11-1976)
   (G)   Questions concerning the exact location of district boundary lines
which are not resolved by application of the foregoing rules shall be
determined by the city council, after recommendation from the joint planning
and zoning commission, according to rules and regulations which may be adopted
by said commission. (Ord. 567, 11-1976; amd. Ord. 3041, 12-3-2013)
10-2-3: TRANSITION ZONING:
   (A)   Where a lot in a business or industrial district abuts a lot in a
residential district, there shall be provided along such abutting lines a yard
equal in width or depth to that required in the residential district.
   (B)   Where the frontage on one side of a street between two (2)
intersecting streets is zoned partly as residential and partly as business or
industrial, the front yard depth in the business or industrial district shall
be equal to the required front depth of the residential district. (Ord. 567,
11-1976)
10-2-4: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS:
Except as hereinafter provided:
   (A)   No building or land or portion thereof hereinafter erected, moved,
remodeled, or otherwise altered, shall be used or occupied unless in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Except as may otherwise be permitted under the provisions of this
chapter, no building may be constructed so as:
      1.   To exceed the height;
      2.   To accommodate or house a greater number of families or dwelling
units;
      3.   To occupy a greater percentage of lot area; or
      4.   To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards,
inner or outer courts than is specified herein for the district in which such
building is located.
   (C)   No part of a yard or other open space required about any building for
the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be included
as part of a yard or other open space similarly required for another building.
   (D)   All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the city shall be
considered as being in the CO-1, if public, or AG-1, if private, or such other
zoning configuration under this chapter as may be approved by the city council,
and only after proper notice and hearings have been held in accord with this
chapter.
   (E)   Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official
actions of the city council, the zoning district adjoining such area shall be
automatically extended to the center of such vacation, or in those instances
where less than the entire public way is vacated, the zoning classification
shall be contiguous, and the area included in the vacation shall then
henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended districts. (Ord. 567,
11-1976)
CHAPTER 3
CONSERVATION AND AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-3-1: CO-1 District Permitted Uses
10-3-2: AG-1 District Permitted Uses
10-3-3: Special Use Exceptions
10-3-4: Lot Area, Width, Building Height
10-3-5: Yard Requirements
10-3-6: Off Street Parking
10-3-1: CO-1 DISTRICT PERMITTED USES:
Lakes (both natural and manmade).
Public and private picnic grounds, marinas, beaches, Boy Scout and Girl Scout
camps.
Public or semipublic utility substations, booster stations, radio and
television relay towers, repeater stations, etc., but not including power
generation or gas manufacturing plants.
Public parks, forest preserves, and farms. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-3-2: AG-1 DISTRICT PERMITTED USES:
Agricultural uses, including grain storage, and the raising or keeping of fowl
and livestock in compliance with subsections
10-3-4(C) and (D) of this chapter and subsection
6-4-2(G) of this code.
Community buildings; utility and service system buildings and lands; libraries
and museums; picnic grounds; religious, educational or charitable institutions.
Home occupations; one- and two-family residential dwellings (which provide the
minimum lot area as specified in section
10-3-4 of this chapter).
Unlighted signs notifying of sale, rental or lease of land or sale of farm
goods on the premises on which the sign is maintained having not over fifty
(50) square feet of sign area; signs announcing meeting time and place of civic
organizations. (Ord. 567, 11-1976; amd. Ord. 4027, 4-5-2016)
10-3-3: SPECIAL USE EXCEPTIONS:
Cemeteries.
Commercial resort uses such as lodges, restaurants, rental cottages, riding
stables, golf courses, swimming pools, tennis courts and other such
recreational facilities.
Uses of land including quarrying and mining of natural resources, sanitary
landfills, refuse disposal and dumps. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-3-4: LOT AREA, WIDTH, BUILDING HEIGHT:
   (A)   In The CO-1 Districts: Lot area, lot width and building height
limitations are not specified.
   (B)   In AG-1 Districts: No dwelling shall be located on a lot less than one
acre in area or less than one hundred fifty feet (150') in width. No primary
building shall exceed thirty feet (30') in height.
   (C)   Livestock: If livestock is to be kept, one and one-half (11/2) acres
are required for the first animal and an additional one acre is required for
each additional animal.
   (D)   Fences: In the event that livestock are kept, fences shall be erected
no closer than twenty five feet (25') from each property line so as to provide
a source of containment. (Ord. 4027, 4-5-2016)
10-3-5: YARD REQUIREMENTS:
 
           CO-1     AG-1
Front yard 100 feet 50 feet
Side yard  45 feet  15 feet
Rear yard  60 feet  30 feet
 
(Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-3-6: OFF STREET PARKING:
Adequate off street parking in accordance with provisions of chapter 14 of this
title. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
CHAPTER 4
R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-4-1: Statement Of Purpose
10-4-2: Permitted Uses
10-4-3: Special Use Exceptions
10-4-4: Building Height
10-4-5: Lot Requirements
10-4-6: Lot Coverage
10-4-7: Yard Requirements
10-4-8: Off Street Parking
10-4-1: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
The single-family residential districts are established as districts in which
the principal use of land is for single-family dwellings. For the single-family
residential districts in promoting the general purpose of this chapter, the
specific intent of this district is:
   (A)   To encourage the construction of, and the continued use of the land
for single-family dwellings.
   (B)   To prohibit business, commercial or industrial use of the land, and to
prohibit any other use which would be incompatible with continued development
of single-family dwellings in the district.
   (C)   To encourage the discontinuance of existing uses that would not be
permitted as new uses under the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   To discourage any land use which would generate traffic on minor or
local streets, other than normal traffic to serve the residences on those
streets.
   (E)   To discourage any use which, because of its character and size, would
create requirements and costs for public services such as fire and police
protection, water supply, and sewerage, substantially in excess of such
requirements and costs if the district were developed solely for single-family
dwellings. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-4-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses shall be permitted in an R-1 residence district:
Accessory uses customarily incident to the permitted uses in this chapter.
Golf courses, country clubs, private swimming clubs; provided that no building
shall be located within twenty five feet (25') of any lot line of an abutting
lot in any of the other residence districts.
Nurseries and greenhouses for growing plants.
One-family dwellings, excluding mobile homes.
Parks and recreational areas owned or operated by governmental agencies.
Public libraries, public museums, public schools, public buildings, memorial
buildings, water supply facilities, and cemeteries; provided, that no building
shall be located within twenty five feet (25') of any lot line of an abutting
lot in any of the residence districts. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-4-3: SPECIAL USE EXCEPTIONS:
Bed and breakfast.
Churches and other facilities normally incidental thereto, provided that the
proposed site for a church is not less than two (2) acres; that there is
adequate access to all required off street parking areas; that there is no
parking in the required front yard; and that the church site is adjacent to a
major thoroughfare.
Home occupations 1 .
Public hospital, but not including institutions for the care of the feeble
minded or mentally ill, provided that the hospital site is adjacent to a major
thoroughfare.
Public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electric transformer
stations and substations, and gas regulator stations, but not including service
or storage yards when operating requirements necessitate the locating within
the district in order to serve the immediate vicinity.
Residential planned unit developments subject to the provisions of chapter 13
of this title.
Signs when located on the same lot pertaining to the use of that particular
building or buildings; provided, that they will not overhang any public right
of way, shall not be illuminated, and shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet
in area.
Stables for the housing of no more than two (2) horses, provided that lot area
requirements set forth in section
10-4-5 of this chapter are met. (Ord. 567, 11-1976; amd. Ord. 1714, 12-4-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 10-15.1 of this title.
10-4-4: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Two and one-half (21/2) stories, but no more than thirty five feet (35'). (Ord.
567, 11-1976)
10-4-5: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Minimum lot area: Fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet or one and
one-half (11/2) acres if one horse is to be kept and one additional acre for
each additional horse to be kept. (Ord. 4027, 4-5-2016)
   (B)   Minimum width of lot: One hundred feet (100').
   (C)   Minimum floor space per dwelling unit: One thousand eight hundred
(1,800) square feet for one-story dwelling. Each dwelling with one and one-half
(11/2) or more stories shall have a minimum first floor area of not less than
one thousand (1,000) square feet. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-4-6: LOT COVERAGE:
Maximum coverage of all structures, including accessory buildings, shall be
thirty percent (30%) of the lot. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-4-7: YARD REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Front Yard: Forty feet (40'), corner lots shall provide a front yard
on each street side of the lot, except that the buildable width of a lot shall
not be reduced to less than thirty two feet (32').
   (B)   Side Yard: Must have two (2) side yards totaling twenty feet (20') in
width, neither of which can be less than eight feet (8') in width. See
additional requirements in chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
   (C)   Rear Yard: Twenty five feet (25') when rear yard abuts any public
alley, street or thoroughfare; also when rear yard contains or is abutting
property which contains easements for utilities, whether they be for
underground or overhead. When the rear yard abuts the side yard of adjacent
property then the required side yard setback for that adjacent property shall
be the setback for the rear yard when utilities are present along the property
line. When the rear yard contains no easements for utilities nor does not abut
property containing easements abutting subject property, then the minimum rear
yard setback shall be equal to the combined side yard required for that lot.
(Ord. 1307, 4-16-1991)
   (D)   Fences: In the event that horses are kept, fences shall be erected no
closer than twenty five feet (25') from each property line so as to provide a
source of containment. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-4-8: OFF STREET PARKING:
See chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
CHAPTER 5
R-2 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-5-1: Statement Of Purpose
10-5-2: Permitted Uses
10-5-3: Special Use Exceptions
10-5-4: Building Height
10-5-5: Lot Requirements
10-5-6: Lot Coverage
10-5-7: Yard Requirements
10-5-8: Off Street Parking
10-5-1: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
The single-family residential districts are established as districts in which
the principal use of land is for single- family dwellings. For the single-
family residential districts in promoting the general purpose of this title,
the specific intent of this district is:
   (A)   To encourage the construction of, and continued use of land for
single-family dwellings.
   (B)   To prohibit business, commercial or industrial use of the land, and to
prohibit any other use which would substantially interfere with development or
continuation of single-family dwellings in the district.
   (C)   To encourage the discontinuance of existing uses that would not be
permitted as new uses under the provisions of this title.
   (D)   To discourage any use which, because of its character and size, would
create requirements and costs for public services such as fire and police
protection, water supply, and sewerage, substantially in excess of such
requirements and costs if the district were developed solely for single-family
dwellings. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-5-2: PERMITTED USES:
Churches and other facilities normally incidental thereto; provided that the
proposed site for a church is not less than two (2) acres; that there is
adequate access to all required off street parking areas; that there is no
parking in the required front yard; and that the church site is adjacent to a
major thoroughfare.
Colleges, universities and similar type institutions for higher learning.
Mobile home parks as a planned unit development in accordance with chapter 13
of this title.
Municipal buildings and uses.
Nursery schools, day nurseries and childcare centers; provided, that for each
child so cared for, there is provided and maintained a minimum of one hundred
(100) square feet of outdoor play area. Such play space shall have a total
minimum area of at least one thousand (1,000) square feet, and shall be
buffered from any adjoining lot in any residential district (in accordance with
chapter 15 of this title). Up to three (3) children may be cared for.
One-family detached dwellings, excluding mobile homes.
Private noncommercial recreational areas.
Public, parochial and private elementary, intermediate schools, and/or high
schools offering courses in general education, not operated for profit.
Publicly owned or operated buildings, libraries, parks, parkways, and
recreational facilities. (Ord. 567, 11-1976; amd. Ord. 1493, 12-19-1995; amd.
Ord. 1493, 12-19-1995)
10-5-3: SPECIAL USE EXCEPTIONS:
Accessory buildings customarily incidental to the permitted uses in this
section.
Bed and breakfast.
"Home occupation" as defined in section 10-15.1-1 of this title. From four (4)
to seven (7) children may be cared for in a childcare center, nursery school or
day nursery as a home occupation in accordance with the provisions of section
10-15.1-1 of this title and the requirements of a buffer strip 1 .
Signs when located on the same lot pertaining to the use of that particular
building or buildings; provided, that they will not overhang any public right
of way, shall not be illuminated, and shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet
in area.
Special uses permitted in the R-1 district subject to all requirements of this
chapter. (Ord. 567, 11-1976; amd. Ord. 1493, 12-19-1995; Ord. 1714, 12-4-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  10-15-28 of this title.
10-5-4: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Two and one-half (21/2) stories, but not more than thirty five feet (35').
(Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-5-5: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Minimum lot area: Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet.
   (B)   Minimum width of lot: Sixty feet (60').
   (C)   Minimum floor space per dwelling unit: One thousand (1,000) square
feet. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-5-6: LOT COVERAGE:
Maximum lot coverage of all structures, including accessory buildings, shall be
forty percent (40%) of the lot. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-5-7: YARD REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Front yard: Twenty five feet (25'), corner lots shall provide a front
yard on each street side of the lot, except that the buildable width of a lot
shall not be reduced to less than thirty two feet (32').
   (B)   Side yard: Must have two (2) side yards totaling twelve feet (12') in
width, neither of which can be less than five feet (5') in width. See
additional requirements in chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
   (C)   Rear yard: Twenty five feet (25') when rear yard abuts any public
alley, street or thoroughfare; also when rear yard contains or is abutting
property which contains easements for utilities, whether they be for
underground or overhead. When the rear yard abuts the side yard of adjacent
property then the required side yard setback for that adjacent property shall
be the setback for the rear yard when utilities are present along the property
line. When the rear yard contains no easements for utilities nor does not abut
property containing easements abutting subject property, then the minimum rear
yard setback shall be equal to the combined side yard required for that lot.
(Ord. 1307, 4-16-1991)
10-5-8: OFF STREET PARKING:
See chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
CHAPTER 6
R-3 TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-6-1: Statement Of Purpose
10-6-2: Permitted Uses
10-6-3: Special Use Exceptions
10-6-4: Building Height
10-6-5: Lot Requirements
10-6-6: Lot Coverage
10-6-7: Yard Requirements
10-6-8: Off Street Parking
10-6-1: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
The two-family residential district is established as a district in which the
principal use of land is for single- and two-family dwellings. The specific
intent of this chapter is:
   (A)   To encourage the construction of, and continued use of the land for
residential purposes.
   (B)   To prohibit commercial and industrial use of the land, and to prohibit
any other use which would substantially interfere with the development or
continuation of residential uses in the district.
   (C)   To encourage the discontinuance of existing uses that would not be
permitted as new uses under the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   To ensure that only such single- and two-family residential uses as
can be properly designed and built will be allowed in this district, as not to
overcrowd the land, cause parking or traffic congestion, or to have injurious
effects on adjacent single- and two-family residential property. (Ord. 567, 11-
1976)
10-6-2: PERMITTED USES:
All uses permitted in residence R-1 and R-2 districts subject to all
requirements for such uses in zoning districts where first permitted unless
otherwise specified in this chapter.
Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to any of the permitted uses
including private garages serving the principal residential building,
containing space for not more than two (2) passenger vehicles for each dwelling
unit in the principal building on the lot.
Two-family dwellings, excluding mobile homes. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-6-3: SPECIAL USE EXCEPTIONS:
All special use exceptions permitted in the R-2 district subject to all
requirements of this chapter.
Bed and breakfast.
Signs when located on the same lot pertaining to the use of that particular
building or buildings; provided, that they will not overhang any public right
of way, shall not be illuminated, and shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet
in area. (Ord. 567, 11-1976; amd. Ord. 1714, 12-4-2001)
10-6-4: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Two and one-half (21/2) stories, but not more than thirty five feet (35').
(Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-6-5: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Minimum lot area: Five thousand (5,000) square feet for single-family
and three thousand (3,000) square feet for each unit in a two-family structure.
   (B)   Minimum width of lot: Fifty feet (50') for a single-family structure
and sixty feet (60') for each two-family structure.
   (C)   Minimum floor space per dwelling unit: Eight hundred (800) square
feet. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-6-6: LOT COVERAGE:
Maximum coverage of the principal structure shall not be more than forty
percent (40%) of the lot area. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-6-7: YARD REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Front yard: Twenty five feet (25'), corner lots shall provide a front
yard on each street side of the lot, except that the buildable width of a lot
shall not be reduced to less than thirty two feet (32').
   (B)   Side yard: Must have two (2) side yards totaling twelve feet (12') in
width, neither of which can be less than five feet (5') in width. See
additional requirements in chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
   (C)   Rear yard: Twenty five feet (25') when rear yard abuts any public
alley, street or thoroughfare; also when rear yard contains or is abutting
property which contains easements for utilities, whether they be for
underground or overhead. When the rear yard abuts the side yard of adjacent
property then the required side yard setback for that adjacent property shall
be the setback for the rear yard when utilities are present along the property
line. When the rear yard contains no easements for utilities nor does not abut
property containing easements abutting subject property, then the minimum rear
yard setback shall be equal to the combined side yard required for that lot.
(Ord. 1307, 4-16-1991)
10-6-8: OFF STREET PARKING:
See chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
CHAPTER 7
R-4 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-7-1: Statement Of Purpose
10-7-2: Permitted Uses
10-7-3: Special Use Exceptions
10-7-4: Building Height
10-7-5: Lot Requirements
10-7-6: Lot Coverage
10-7-7: Yard Requirements
10-7-8: Off Street Parking
10-7-9: Off Street Loading
10-7-1: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
The R-4 multiple-family residential district is designed to permit a more
intensive residential use of land with various types of multiple dwellings and
related uses. These areas would be located near major streets for good
accessibility. Various types and sizes of residential accommodations, for
ownership or rental, would thereby be provided to meet the needs of the
different age and family groups in the community. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-7-2: PERMITTED USES:
All uses permitted in R-1, R-2 and R-3 districts, subject to all requirements
for such uses in zoning districts where first permitted, unless otherwise
specified in this chapter.
Buildings converted from a lower density provided, however, that they conform
in every way to the provisions of this chapter.
Maintenance and management buildings designed and operated to exclusively serve
the multiple dwellings.
Multiple dwellings, excluding mobile homes, and including:
   (A)   Apartment houses.
   (B)   Row and town house dwellings.
Private garages serving the principal residential building, containing space
for no more than two (2) passenger vehicles for each dwelling unit in the
principal building on the lot.
Private swimming pools designed and operated only for occupants of the
principal building and their personal guests.
Signs when located on the same lot pertaining to the use of that particular
building or buildings; provided, that they will not overhang any public right
of way, shall not be illuminated, and shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet
in area. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-7-3: SPECIAL USE EXCEPTIONS:
All special exception uses permitted in the R-3 district, subject to all
requirements of that district.
A residential structure for a home for persons aged, handicapped or impaired or
a rest or convalescent home.
Bed and breakfast.
Boarding houses when located on a major thoroughfare.
Clubs and lodges operated not for profit, provided no advertising sign is
displayed.
Mortuaries and professional offices such as doctor, lawyer, engineer,
architect, dentist, or chiropractor, not including the office of a
veterinarian, when located on a street designated as a major thoroughfare; art
and music schools with programs and recitals incidental to the instruction
provided.
Residential planned unit developments subject to the provisions of chapter 13
of this title.
Signs when located on the same lot pertaining to the use of that particular
building or buildings; provided, that they will not overhang any public right
of way, shall not be illuminated, and shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet
in area. (Ord. 567, 11-1976; amd. Ord. 1493, 12-19-1995; Ord. 1592, 8-4-1998;
Ord. 1714, 12-4-2001)
10-7-4: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Building height shall not exceed ten (10) stories or one hundred twenty feet
(120'). (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-7-5: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Minimum Lot Area: No multiple dwelling structure shall be erected on a
lot or parcel of land which has an area of less than six thousand (6,000)
square feet or has a width of less than sixty feet (60'). The required lot area
per dwelling unit shall be computed as follows:
      1.   Efficiency unit, eight hundred fifty (850) square feet.
      2.   One bedroom unit, one thousand (1,000) square feet.
      3.   Two (2) bedroom unit, one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet.
      4.   Each additional bedroom, three hundred (300) square feet.
Provided, however, that if more than fifty percent (50%) of the units in any
structure are efficiency units, those efficiency units which are in excess of
fifty percent (50%) shall conform to the lot area requirements for one bedroom
units.
   (B)   Minimum Width Of Lot: Fifty feet (50').
   (C)   Minimum Floor Space Per Dwelling Unit: Where multiple dwellings are
permitted in an R-4 district, the required floor space per unit shall be as
follows:
      1.   Efficiency unit, three hundred (300) square feet.
      2.   One bedroom unit, five hundred (500) square feet.
      3.   Two (2) bedroom unit, six hundred fifty (650) square feet.
      4.   Three (3) bedroom unit, eight hundred (800) square feet.
Plus one hundred fifty (150) square feet for each bedroom in excess of three
(3) bedrooms in a dwelling unit. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-7-6: LOT COVERAGE:
Maximum coverage of the principal structure shall not exceed forty percent
(40%) of the lot. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-7-7: YARD REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Front yard: Twenty five feet (25').
   (B)   Side yard: Same as R-3 district. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
   (C)   Rear yard: Twenty five feet (25') when rear yard abuts any public
alley, street or thoroughfare; also when rear yard contains or is abutting
property which contains easements for utilities, whether they be for
underground or overhead. When the rear yard abuts the side yard of adjacent
property then the required side yard setback for that adjacent property shall
be the setback for the rear yard when utilities are present along the property
line. When the rear yard contains no easements for utilities nor does not abut
property containing easements abutting subject property, then the minimum rear
yard setback shall be equal to the combined side yard required for that lot.
(Ord. 1307, 4-16-1991)
10-7-8: OFF STREET PARKING:
See chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-7-9: OFF STREET LOADING:
See chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
CHAPTER 8
B-1 LOCAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-8-1: Statement Of Purpose
10-8-2: Permitted Uses
10-8-3: Special Use Exceptions
10-8-4: Building Height
10-8-5: Lot Requirements
10-8-6: Yard Requirements
10-8-7: Lot Coverage
10-8-8: Off Street Parking
10-8-9: Off Street Loading
10-8-10: Sign Regulations
10-8-1: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
The local commercial district as established in this chapter is intended to be
that district permitting retail business and service uses which are designated
to serve the surrounding residential areas. In order to promote such business
development so far as is possible and appropriate in each area, uses are
permitted which would not create hazards, offensive and loud noises, vibration,
smoke, glare, or excessive truck traffic. The intent of this district is also
to encourage the concentration of local business by locating proposed areas to
the mutual advantage of both the consumer and merchant. This will promote the
best use of land at certain strategic locations and avoid the encouragement of
marginal strip business development along major streets.
10-8-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory structures, uses, and signs customarily incidental to the permitted
uses herein, provided that signs are in accord with chapter 15 of this title.
Barbershops and beauty parlors.
Bicycle rental and repair shops.
Clinics, medical and dental.
Clubs and lodges, not for profit.
Dressmaking, millinery, and tailoring, clothes pressing and repair.
Eating and drinking places in which there is not dancing, a floor show, or
other live entertainment involving more than one person.
Greenhouses, retail food stores, including bakeries, provided that processing
of food shall be for retail sale on the premises only.
Laundry agency or dry cleaning agency, hand laundry, and laundry operated by
customers, such as launderettes, laundromat, and the like.
Mortuaries.
Offices, business, professional or governmental.
Publicly owned buildings and public utility buildings, including, but not
limited to, telephone exchanges, transformer stations and substations, and gas
regulator stations with service yards but not including storage yards.
Repairs: electrical or other household appliances, locks, radios, televisions,
and the like; shoes, timepieces.
Shops or stores for the sale of art supplies, beverage, including package
liquor outlets, confections, delicatessens, drugs, dry goods, flowers,
foodstuffs, gifts, hardware, household appliances, jewelry, leather goods,
music, notions, paint, periodicals, radio, television and the like.
Other uses similar to the above and subject to the following:
   (A)   All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments,
dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be
sold at retail exclusively on premises where produced.
   (B)   All business, servicing or processing, except for off street parking
or loading, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. (Ord. 567,
11-1976)
10-8-3: SPECIAL USE EXCEPTIONS:
A childcare center, nursery school or day nursery with no limit on the number
of children; provided, that the provisions of state law and chapter 15 of this
title are complied with.
Automobile service stations; providing, that such use is located at least five
hundred feet (500') from an entrance or exit to property on which is located a
public school, playground, play field, or park; that the minimum frontage on
any street shall be one hundred twenty five feet (125'), and that no storage
outside the building shall be permitted. The lot area minimum shall be fifteen
thousand (15,000) square feet.
Bed and breakfast.
Bus stations only if located on a major thoroughfare.
Commercial planned unit development, subject to the provisions of chapter 13 of
this title.
Multi-family dwellings, subject to the provisions of chapter 7 of this title.
Signs when located on the same lot pertaining to the use of that particular
building or buildings; provided, that they will not overhang any public right
of way, shall not be illuminated, and shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet
in area. (Ord. 567, 11-1976; amd. Ord. 1493, 12-19-1995; Ord. 1714, 12-4-2001)
10-8-4: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Two (2) stories, but not more than thirty five feet (35'). Planned developments
involving five (5) acres or more under one ownership, may exceed the height
limitations, subject to review and approval by the city council. (Ord. 567, 11-
1976)
10-8-5: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Minimum lot requirements: Not required.
   (B)   Minimum lot width: Fifty feet (50'). (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-8-6: YARD REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Front yard setback: None required, except that where located on a
street frontage within a residential district, the front yard regulations of
that district shall be required.
   (B)   Side yard: No side yards or rear yards are required along the interior
side lot lines, except as otherwise specified by the building code 1 . On the
exterior side yard or rear yard which borders on a residential district there
shall be provided a side yard equal to that required by the residential
district.
   (C)   Rear yard: Twenty feet (20'), except that where located adjacent to a
residential district, the yard regulations of that district shall apply. (Ord.
567, 11-1976)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 4, chapter 1 of this code.
10-8-7: LOT COVERAGE:
Not more than sixty percent (60%) of the lot area. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-8-8: OFF STREET PARKING:
See chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-8-9: OFF STREET LOADING:
See chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-8-10: SIGN REGULATIONS:
Exterior signs must relate solely to the business activity carried on in the
structure. The size of all signs shall be limited in area to one-half (1/2) of
the linear street frontage of the particular lot expressed in square feet.
Signs shall not extend above the roofline of the building, nor into public
rights of way. Each local commercial district may erect one freestanding sign,
the area of which shall be included in the total area of permitted signs. See
chapter 15 of this title for additional sign regulations. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
CHAPTER 9
B-2 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-9-1: Statement Of Purpose
10-9-2: Permitted Uses
10-9-3: Special Use Exceptions
10-9-4: Building Height
10-9-5: Lot Requirements
10-9-6: Yard Requirements
10-9-7: Lot Coverage
10-9-8: Off Street Parking
10-9-9: Off Street Loading
10-9-10: Sign Regulations
10-9-11: Dispensing Of Medical And Recreational Cannabis
10-9-1: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
The General Commercial District, as established in this chapter, is intended to
be that district permitting a wider range of business and entertainment
activities than those permitted in the Local Business District. The permitted
uses would serve not only surrounding residential areas, but also people
farther away, for major types of comparison businesses, offices, services, and
automotive service activities, including open air sales and uses requiring
location on a major highway or street. These uses would generate larger volumes
of vehicular traffic, would need more off street parking and loading and would
require more planning to integrate such districts with adjacent residential
areas. Such B-2 Districts in the community reflect major existing shopping
concentrations, other commercial uses along major highways, and desired future
commercial centers as may be needed to adequately serve the future population
of the community. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-9-2: PERMITTED USES:
Any retail business or service establishment permitted in the B-1 District,
under the same conditions as stated therein.
Accessory structures, uses and signs customarily incidental to the permitted
uses herein, subject to the following restrictions:
   (A)   Signs shall be regulated by chapter 15 of this title.
   (B)   Storage garages and commercial garages.
Any service establishment of an office-showroom or workshop in the nature of an
electrician, decorator, dressmaker, tailor, shoemaker, baker, printer,
upholsterer, photographic reproduction, and similar establishments that require
a retail adjunct and of no more objectionable character than the
aforementioned, subject to the provision that no more than five (5) persons
shall be employed at any time in the fabrication of goods.
Automobile service stations, automotive repair shops and public garages.
Automobile wash establishments when completely enclosed in a building.
Automotive, motorcycle, trailer, or boat showrooms.
Banks, credit unions and other financial institutions, including drive-in
facilities, remote or attached.
Blueprinting, photocopy, printing.
Bus passenger stations.
Business schools and colleges, or private schools operated for a profit.
Carpet, rug, linoleum, or other floor covering stores.
Catering establishments.
Clothing or costume rental establishments.
Department stores.
Eating and drinking establishments, except those having the principal character
of a drive-in facility wherein food is served to a customer in his vehicle.
Electrical, glazing, heating, painting, paper hanging, plumbing, roofing or
ventilation contractor's establishments, excluding outside storage yards.
Exterminators.
Furniture stores.
Governmental office or other governmental use; public offices, exchanges,
transformer stations, and service yards but not including outdoor storage
yards.
Hotels and motor hotels.
Interior decorating establishments.
Medical or dental laboratories for research or testing, not involving any
danger of explosion, nor of offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odorous matter,
heat, humidity, glare, or other objectionable effects.
Monument sales establishments, with incidental processing to order, but not
including the shaping of headstones.
Mortuary establishments.
Moving or storage offices, with storage limited to items for retail sale and to
one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of floor area per establishment.
Musical instrument repair shops.
New car sales rooms with accessory automotive repair facilities and used car
lots.
Off street parking and loading space as required in chapter 14 of this title.
Office or business machine stores, sales or rental.
Offices of veterinarians; provided, that all animals cared for on the premises
are kept within a fully enclosed building or fenced outside runs. (Fences shall
provide solid visual barrier.)
Photographic developing or printing establishments and studios.
Printing establishments.
Private clubs.
Public auction rooms.
Public garages.
Publicly owned buildings, public utility buildings and service yards but not
including storage yards.
Radio and television studios.
Sign painting shops, limited to two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet
of floor area per establishment.
Studios for music, dancing, or theatrical instruction.
Taxidermist shops.
Television, radio, or household appliance repair shops.
Theater, dance halls, assembly halls, lodge halls, or similar places of
assembly.
Typewriter or other small business machine repair shops.
Upholstering shops dealing directly with consumers.
Venetian blind, window shade, or awning shops, including repairs, limited to
two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of floor area per establishment.
Wedding chapels or banquet halls.
Other uses similar to the above and subject to the following regulations:
   (A)   All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments
dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be
sold at retail on the premises where produced.
   (B)   All business, servicing, or processing, except for off street parking,
loading, and those open air uses indicated as being permissible on special
approval in section
10-9-3 of this chapter, shall be conducted within completely enclosed
buildings. (Ord. 567, 11-1976; amd. Ord. 1587, 6-16-1998)
10-9-3: SPECIAL USE EXCEPTIONS:
A childcare facility as in a B-2 district.
Bed and breakfast.
Bowling lanes when the building is located at least one hundred fifty feet
(150') from any property zoned in a residential classification.
Commercial planned unit development, subject to the provisions of chapter 13 of
this title.
Drive-in establishment or open front store; provided, that the entrance or exit
to or from any such use is located at least one hundred feet (100') from the
intersection of any two (2) streets; that all such uses shall have direct
access to a major thoroughfare; that all lighting or illuminated display shall
not reflect onto any adjacent residential zone; and that consideration is given
to proximity of existing places of congregation of children (e.g., schools) and
their relationship to traffic safety and sanitation.
Ministorage facilities on a plot of not less than one acre.
Multi-family dwellings, subject to the requirements of chapter 7 of this title.
Open air business uses, subject to the following requirements:
   (A)   The minimum area of the site shall be ten thousand (10,000) square
feet.
   (B)   The minimum street frontage shall be one hundred feet (100').
   (C)   There shall be provided around all sides of the site, except at
entrances, exits, and along sides of premises enclosed by buildings, a fence or
wall five feet (5') in height in order to intercept windblown trash and other
debris. Where the side abuts any residentially zoned district, the requirements
for protective screening shall apply as specified in the particular zoning
district in which said use is located.
   (D)   Lighting shall be installed in a manner which will not create a
driving hazard on abutting streets or which will not cast direct illumination
on adjacent properties.
   (E)   Before approval is given for any use, a site plan shall be first
submitted to the joint planning and zoning commission for review and
recommendations as to suitability of location of entrances and exits to the
site, parking area, fencing, lighting, and other design features.
   (F)   All other open air business uses shall comply with all city and county
health regulations regarding sanitation and general health conditions.
Parking lots accessory to uses in the B-3 central business district, provided
such parking lots are within three hundred feet (300') of a B-3 district.
Signs when located on the same lot pertaining to the use of that particular
building or buildings; provided, that they will not overhang any public right
of way, shall not be illuminated, and shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet
in area.
Wholesale or jobbing businesses. (Ord. 567, 11-1976; amd. Ord. 1493, 12-19-
1995; Ord. 1565, 11-4-1997; Ord. 1714, 12-4-2001; Ord. 3041, 12-3-2013)
10-9-4: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Four (4) stories or forty eight feet (48'), except for multi- family uses which
shall be limited to ten (10) stories or one hundred twenty five feet (125').
(Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-9-5: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Minimum lot area: Not required.
   (B)   Minimum lot width: Fifty feet (50'). (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-9-6: YARD REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Front yard setback: None required, except that where located on a
street frontage within a residential district, the front yard regulations of
the residential district shall be required.
   (B)   Side yard: No side yards or rear yards are required along the interior
side lot lines, except as otherwise specified by the building code. On the
exterior side yard or rear yard which borders on a residential district, there
shall be provided a side yard equal to that required by the residential
district.
   (C)   Rear yard: Twenty feet (20'). (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-9-7: LOT COVERAGE:
Not more than sixty percent (60%) of the lot area. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-9-8: OFF STREET PARKING:
See chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-9-9: OFF STREET LOADING:
See chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-9-10: SIGN REGULATIONS:
Signs shall be regulated by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-9-11: DISPENSING OF MEDICAL AND RECREATIONAL CANNABIS:
   (A)   Areas designated and established as B-2 for zoning purposes may have
an additional permitted use, upon attaining a conditional use permit as set
forth herein, involving the sale and distribution of medical cannabis pursuant
to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1, et
seq.), and the sale and distribution of recreational cannabis pursuant to the
Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1, et seq.). The city authorizes
three (3) recreational cannabis dispensary centers, as defined herein, to
operate within the city and obtain conditional use permits to operate within
the city. Said three (3) recreational cannabis dispensary conditional use
permits shall include those also operating with a medical cannabis dispensing
conditional use permit. The cost of a recreational cannabis dispensary
conditional use permits shall total ten thousand dollars and no cents
($10,000.00) per year. The conditional use permit fee herein shall be initially
be due on January 1, 2020, or whenever the conditional use permit is issued
initially to anyone granted and issued a conditional use permit, but shall then
be due January 1 of each subsequent year, regardless of the month and specific
date an initial conditional use permit is issued to anyone granted and issued a
conditional use permit. Conditional use permits shall be issued at the sole
discretion of the City Council of the City of Canton and said conditional use
permits may be terminated and revoked at the sole discretion of the City
Council of the City of Canton for reasons deemed appropriate in the sole
discretion of the City Council of the City of Canton.
   (B)   Definitions:
MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION, OR DISPENSING ORGANIZATION, OR
DISPENSARY ORGANIZATION: Means a facility operated by an organization or
business that is registered by the Department of Financial and Professional
Regulation to acquire medical cannabis from a registered cultivation center for
the purpose of dispensing cannabis, paraphernalia, or related supplies and
educational materials to registered qualifying patients, individuals with a
provisional registration for qualifying patient cardholder status, or an Opioid
Alternative Pilot Program participant.
RECREATIONAL CANNABIS DISPENSARY CENTER: Means a facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Department of Financial and
Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from a cultivation center, craft
grower, processing organization, or another dispensary for the purpose of
selling or dispensing cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds,
paraphernalia, or related supplies under the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act to
purchasers or to qualified registered medical cannabis patients and caregivers.
As used in this Act, dispensary organization shall include a registered medical
cannabis organization as defined in the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis
Pilot Program Act or its successor Act that has obtained an early approval
adult use dispensing organization license.
   (C)   Conditions Of Use: It shall be lawful to operate a medical cannabis
dispensing organization or recreational cannabis dispensary center so long as
the following applies and is adhered to:
      1.   The organization or center is licensed by the Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation through the State of Illinois;
      2.   The organization has a conditional use permit, as set forth in this
section, issued by the City of Canton;
      3.   That the center or organization is not located within one thousand
feet (1,000') of the property line of a pre-existing public or private
preschool, or elementary or secondary school or daycare center, daycare home,
group daycare home, part day childcare facility. A dispensing center or
organization may not be located in a house, apartment or condominium;
      4.   No medical dispensing organization or recreational dispensary center
may be located within one thousand five hundred feet (1,500') of another
organization or center;
      5.   A center or organization may not be located in the offices of a
physician;
      6.   A center or organization may be open from the hours of seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on any day of the week, including
holidays;
      7.   A center or organization may not utilize amplified music outdoors;
      8.   Cannabis, cannabis infused products and cannabis concentrate may not
be displayed or stored in an area accessible to the public;
      9.   A center or organization shall have appropriate security employed
and security measures implemented at all times, in accordance with State
regulations, to deter and prevent theft of cannabis and unauthorized entrance
into areas containing cannabis, cannabis infused products and cannabis
concentrate;
      10.   Medical cannabis may not be consumed on the site of the medical
organization;
      11.   No person, organization or center who is licensed to sell cannabis,
at retail, shall sell, give or deliver cannabis to any person as to whom the
prohibition thereof any applicable law of the State would apply;
      12.   Organizations and centers shall fully comply with all requirements
of the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act 1 , and the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act.
   (D)   Purchase And Possession; Restrictions: It shall be lawful for a person
twenty one (21) years of age or older to purchase and possess from a licensed
(or otherwise permitted under this section) organization or center cannabis,
cannabis infused products, and cannabis concentrate based upon the following
restrictions:
      1.   For a resident of this State, the possession limit is as follows: a)
thirty grams (30 g) of cannabis flower; b) no more than five hundred milligrams
(500 mg) of THC contained in cannabis-infused product; c) five grams (5 g) of
cannabis concentrate; and d) for registered qualifying patients, any cannabis
produced by cannabis plants grown under subsection (b) of section 10-5,
provided any amount of cannabis produced in excess of thirty grams (30 g) of
raw cannabis or its equivalent must remain secured within the residence or
residential property in which it was grown.
      2.   For a person who is twenty one (21) years of age or older and who is
not a resident of this State, the possession limit is: a) fifteen grams (15 g)
of cannabis flower; c) 2.5 grams of cannabis concentrate; and c) two hundred
fifty milligrams (250 mg) of THC contained in a cannabis-infused product.
      3.   The possession limits found in subsections (D)1 and (D)2 of this
section are to be considered cumulative.
      4.   No person shall knowingly obtain, seek to obtain, or possess an
amount of cannabis from a dispensing organization, center or craft grower that
would cause him or her to exceed the possession limit under this subsection,
including cannabis that is cultivated by a person under the Cannabis Regulation
and Tax Act or obtained under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot
Program Act.
      5.   A person who violates any of the provisions in this section shall be
subject to a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) but no
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). An organization or center
granted and issued a conditional use permit under these provisions shall be
subject to a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a
violation of any provision herein, in addition to being subject to having their
conditional use permit terminated and revoked for a violation of any provision
herein.
   (E)   Additional Limitations And Penalties:
      1.   This section does not permit any person to engage in, and does not
prevent the imposition of any civil, criminal, or other penalties for engaging
in, any of the following conduct:
         (a)   Undertaking any task under the influence of cannabis when doing
so would constitute negligence, professional malpractice, or professional
misconduct;
         (b)   Possessing cannabis:
            (1)   In a school bus, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or
caregiver pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program
Act;
            (2)   On the grounds of any preschool or primary or secondary
school, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or caregiver pursuant to the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act;
            (3)   In any correctional facility;
            (4)   In a vehicle not open to the public unless the cannabis is in
a reasonably secured, sealed container and reasonably inaccessible while the
vehicle is moving; or
            (5)   In a private residence that is used at any time to provide
licensed child care or other similar social service care on the premises;
         (c)   Using cannabis:
            (1)   In a school bus, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or
caregiver pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program
Act;
            (2)   On the grounds of any preschool or primary or secondary
school, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or caregiver pursuant to the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act;
            (3)   In any correctional facility;
            (4)   In any motor vehicle;
            (5)   In a private residence that is used at any time to provide
licensed child care or other similar social service care on the premises;
            (6)   In any public place; or
            (7)   Knowingly in close physical proximity to anyone under twenty
one (21) years of age who is not a registered medical cannabis patient under
the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act;
         (d)   Smoking cannabis in any place where smoking is prohibited under
the Smoke Free Illinois Act;
         (e)   Operating, navigating, or being in actual physical control of
any motor vehicle, aircraft, or motorboat while using or under the influence of
cannabis in violation of section 11-501 or 11-502.1 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code;
         (f)   Facilitating the use of cannabis by any person who is not
allowed to use cannabis under this Act or the Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Pilot Program Act;
         (g)   Transferring cannabis to any person contrary to this Act or the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act;
         (h)   The use of cannabis by a law enforcement officer, corrections
officer, probation officer, or firefighter while on duty; or
         (i)   The use of cannabis by a person who has a school bus permit or a
commercial driver's license while on duty.
As used in this section, "public place" means any place where a person could
reasonably be expected to be observed by others. "Public place" includes all
parts of buildings owned in whole or in part, or leased, by the State or a unit
of local government. "Public place" does not include a private residence unless
the private residence is used to provide licensed child care, foster care, or
other similar social service care on the premises.
      2.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the arrest or
prosecution of a person for reckless driving or driving under the influence of
cannabis if probable cause exists.
      3.   Nothing in this section shall prevent a private business from
restricting or prohibiting the use of cannabis on its property, including areas
where motor vehicles are parked.
      4.   Nothing in this section shall require an individual or business
entity to violate the provisions of Federal law, including colleges or
universities that must abide by the Drug-Free Schools and Communities Act
Amendments of 1989, that require campuses to be drug free. (Ord. 4153, 8-6-
2019; amd. Ord. 4171, 10-15-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 410 ILCS 130/1, et seq.
CHAPTER 10
B-3 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-10-1: Statement Of Purpose
10-10-2: Permitted Uses
10-10-3: Special Use Exceptions
10-10-4: Building Height
10-10-5: Lot Requirements
10-10-6: Lot Coverage
10-10-7: Yard Requirements
10-10-8: Off Street Parking
10-10-9: Off Street Loading
10-10-10: Sign Regulations
10-10-11: Garbage Refuse Containers
10-10-1: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
The central business district regulations as specified in this chapter are
intended to permit a wide range of business activities commensurate with the
diversified nature of the central business area of the city. The intent of the
regulations is to permit the concentrated activity which traditionally takes
place in the central area, taking into account the need for compactness within
the framework of the traffic circulation. The central business district is
intended to encourage and strengthen the regional character of the central
area. Parking facilities are to be provided in large, combined parking areas to
serve shoppers and employees in the central business district. (Ord. 567, 11-
1976)
10-10-2: PERMITTED USES:
Any retail business or service establishment permitted in the B-1 district,
under the same conditions as stated therein; provided, however, that
ministorage units shall not be permitted in the B-3 district.
Accessory structures, uses and signs customarily incidental to the above
permitted uses, subject to the following restrictions:
   (A)   Signs shall be regulated by chapter 15 of this title.
   (B)   Storage garages and commercial garages as an accessory to a permitted
use.
Any service establishment or an office-showroom or workshop in the nature of an
electrician, decorator, dressmaker, tailor, shoemaker, baker, printer,
upholsterer, photographic reproduction, and similar establishments that require
a retail adjunct and of no more objectionable character than the
aforementioned, subject to the provision that no more than five (5) persons
shall be employed at any time in the fabrication of goods.
Blueprinting, photocopy, printing.
Bus passenger stations.
Business schools and colleges, or private schools operated for profit.
Carpet, rug, linoleum, or other floor covering stores.
Catering establishments.
Clothing or costume rental establishments.
Department stores.
Eating or drinking establishments, except those having the principal character
of a drive-in facility wherein food is served to a customer in his vehicle.
Furniture stores.
Governmental office or other governmental use; public offices, exchanges,
transformer stations, and service yards, but not including outdoor storage
yards.
Hotels and motor hotels.
Interior decorating establishments.
Medical or dental laboratories for research or testing, not involving any
danger of explosion, nor of offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odorous matter,
heat, humidity, glare, or other objectionable effects.
Monument sales establishments, with incidental processing to order, but not
including the shaping of headstones.
Mortuary establishments.
Moving or storage offices, with storage limited to items for retail sale and to
one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of floor area per establishment.
Musical instrument repair shops.
Off street parking and loading space as required in chapter 14 of this title.
Office or business machine stores, sales or rental.
Photographic developing or printing establishments and studios.
Printing establishments.
Private clubs.
Public auction rooms.
Public garages.
Publicly owned buildings, public utility buildings and service yards but not
including storage yards.
Radio and television studios.
Studios for music, dancing, or theatrical instruction.
Television, radio, or household appliance repair shops.
Theater, dance halls, assembly halls, lodge halls or similar places of
assembly.
Typewriter or other small business machine repair shops.
Wedding chapels or banquet halls.
Other uses similar to the above and subject to the following regulations:
   (A)   All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments
dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be
sold at retail on the premises where produced.
   (B)   All business, servicing, or processing, except for off street parking,
loading, and those open air uses indicated as being permissible on special
approval in section
10-10-3 of this chapter, shall be conducted within completely enclosed
buildings. (Ord. 567, 11-1976; amd. Ord. 1565, 11-4-1997)
10-10-3: SPECIAL USE EXCEPTIONS:
Bed and breakfast.
Multi-family dwellings subject to the provisions of
chapter 7  of this title.
Microbreweries and wineries, as said businesses are defined in Section
3-8-1  of this Code.
Open air business uses, subject to the following regulations:
Open air business uses, subject to the following regulations:
   (A)   The minimum area of the site shall be ten thousand (10,000) square
feet.
   (B)   The minimum street frontage shall be one hundred feet (100').
   (C)   There shall be provided around all sides of the site, except at
entrances, exits, and along sides of premises enclosed by buildings, a fence or
wall, five feet (5') in height, in order to intercept windblown trash and other
debris. Where the side abuts any residentially zoned district, the requirements
for protective screening shall apply as specified in the particular zoning
district in which said use is located.
   (D)   Lighting shall be installed in a manner which will not create a
driving hazard on abutting streets or which will not cast direct illumination
on adjacent properties.
   (E)   Before approval is given for any use, a site plan shall be first
submitted to the joint planning and zoning commission for review and
recommendation as to suitability of location of entrances and exits to the
site, parking area, fencing, lighting, and other design features.
   (F)   All other open air business uses, a site plan shall be first submitted
to the joint planning and zoning commission for review and recommendation as to
suitability of location of entrances and exits to the site, parking area,
fencing, lighting, and other design features.
   (G)   Bowling lanes and buildings when located at least one hundred fifty
feet (150') from any property zoned in a residential classification.
Signs when located on the same lot pertaining to the use of that particular
building or buildings; provided, that they will not overhang any public right
of way, shall not be illuminated, and shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet
in area.
Single-family residential utilization by owner, of second floor of business
building. Emergency egress must conform to current code. (Ord. 567, 11-1976;
amd. Ord. 1714, 12-4-2001; Ord. 1860, 4-4-2006; Ord. 3041, 12-3-2013; Ord.
4302, 10- -2022)
10-10-4: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Six (6) stories or eighty feet (80'), except for multi-family uses which shall
be limited to ten (10) stories or one hundred twenty five feet (125'). (Ord.
567, 11-1976)
10-10-5: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
No restriction. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-10-6: LOT COVERAGE:
No restriction. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-10-7: YARD REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Front Yard Setback: None required, except that where located on a
street frontage within a residential district, the front yard regulations of
the residential district shall be required.
   (B)   Side Yard: No side yards or rear yards are required along the interior
side lot lines, except as otherwise specified by the building code. On the
exterior side yard or rear yard which borders on a residential district, there
shall be provided a side yard equal to that required by the residential
district.
   (C)   Rear Yard: No rear yards are required. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-10-8: OFF STREET PARKING:
See chapter 14 of this title. Lots with a width of less than forty feet (40')
and/or less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in area are excepted from
off street parking requirements. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-10-9: OFF STREET LOADING:
See chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-10-10: SIGN REGULATIONS:
Signs shall be regulated by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-10-11: GARBAGE REFUSE CONTAINERS:
   (A)   The owner, manager or operator of every establishment or otherwise,
producing garbage, vegetable and/or food wastes or other putrescible materials
shall provide, and at all times, cause to be used, leakproof containers having
close fitting covers for storage of such materials until such time as the waste
is removed from the premises for disposal.
   (B)   Any garbage dumpster or other garbage refuse container, including
grease traps (collectively "garbage refuse containers"), that are situated
within the B-3 zoning district shall be governed by the following regulations:
      1.   All garbage refuse containers are to be placed on private property.
Where it is not possible to place garbage refuse containers on private
property, they may be placed in public alleys within the B-3 zoning district
after written notification is submitted to and approved by the head of the
public works department.
      2.   No garbage refuse containers can be placed on any public
thoroughfares, sidewalks or parking lots.
   (C)   Any individual or entity who utilizes the alleys in the B-3 zoning
district for the placement of their garbage dumpsters agrees to defend,
indemnify and hold harmless the city of Canton, its officials, agents, and
employees against all injuries, deaths, loss, damages, claims, suits,
liabilities, judgments, cost and expenses (including attorney fees) which may
in any way accrue against the city of Canton, its officials, agents and
employees, arising in whole or in part or in consequence of the placement and
use of said garbage dumpster.
   (D)   The city of Canton reserves the right to order a garbage refuse
container removed or moved if it is found to violate any of the aforementioned
standards or otherwise compromise the public health, safety or general welfare.
The cost of removal will be billed to and is the responsibility of the garbage
refuse container owner/operator/lessee.
   (E)   Temporary removal may be required to facilitate activities such as
snow removal, street cleaning or alley improvements. (Ord. 2098, 10-2-2012)
CHAPTER 11
I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-11-1: Statement Of Purpose
10-11-2: Permitted Uses
10-11-3: Special Use Exceptions
10-11-4: Building Height
10-11-5: Lot Requirements
10-11-6: Lot Coverage
10-11-7: Yard Requirements
10-11-8: Off Street Parking
10-11-9: Off Street Loading
10-11-10: Sign Regulations
10-11-11: Protective Screening
10-11-1: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
The I-1 light industrial district is designed so as to primarily accommodate
wholesale activities, warehouses, and industrial operations whose external,
physical effects are restricted to the area of the district and which will not
cause adverse effects on adjacent residential or commercial property. (Ord.
567, 11-1976)
10-11-2: PERMITTED USES:
Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the permitted uses.
Any of the following uses conducted wholly within a completely enclosed
building, or within a designated area enclosed on all sides with a seven foot
(7') obscuring wall or fence:
Building material sales.
Dwellings for caretakers or watchmen accessory to any of the uses in this
section.
Laboratories; experimental, film, or testing.
Manufacture and repair of electric or neon signs, light sheet metal products,
including heating and ventilation equipment, cornices, eaves, and the like.
Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties, and metal or rubber
stamps, or other small molded rubber products.
Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and
devices, radios and phonographs (excluding large stampings).
Offices of veterinarians.
Publicly owned buildings, public utility buildings, telephone exchanges,
transformer stations, and substations with service yards, but without storage
yards, water and sewage pumping stations, when operation requirements
necessitate the locating of said facilities within the district in order to
serve the immediate vicinity.
The compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of such products as: bakery
goods, candy, cosmetics, food products, flour, grain, pharmaceuticals,
toiletries, hardware, and cutlery; tool, die, gauge and machine shops.
The manufacture, compounding, assembling, or improvement of articles or
merchandise from the following previously prepared materials: canvas,
cellophane, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fibre, fur, glass, hair, leather,
paper, plastics, precious or semiprecious metals or stones, shell, textiles,
tobacco, wax, wire, wood and yarns.
The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products
using only previously pulverized clay, and kilns fired only by electricity or
gas.
Warehouses, storage and transfer, and electric and gas service buildings and
yards, railroad transfer and storage tracks. Heating and electric power
generating plants, and all necessary uses. Water and gas tanks and holders.
Passenger and/or freight terminals; railroad rights of way.
Warehousing and wholesale establishments, and storage (other than accessory to
a permitted retail use).
Yards, docks and transfer facilities for motor freight.
Any retail or commercial use allowed in the B-2 general commercial district.
Off street parking and loading space as required in chapter 14 of this title.
Uses of a light manufacturing nature, employing electricity or other
unobjectionable motive power, utilizing hand labor or unobjectionable machinery
or processes, and free from any objectionable odors, fumes, dirt, vibration or
noise. Such uses shall not be established without an application for a permit
which shall be accompanied by evidence indicating that every reasonable
provision will be taken to eliminate or minimize gas fumes, odors, dirt,
vibration or noise. Such application for permit shall be approved by the zoning
administrator. In the event of the denial of such permit, an applicant shall
have a right of appeal to the joint planning and zoning commission, in
accordance with the procedure hereinafter set forth in chapter 17 of this
title. (Ord. 567, 11-1976; amd. Ord. 3041, 12-3-2013)
10-11-3: SPECIAL USE EXCEPTIONS:
Metal plating, buffing and polishing, subject to appropriate measures to
control the type of process to prevent noxious results and/or nuisances.
Rustproofing shops.
Other uses of a similar and no more objectionable character to the above uses.
(Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-11-4: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Same as B-2 district. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-11-5: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
No minimum area is required; minimum width, fifty feet (50'). (Ord. 567, 11-
1976)
10-11-6: LOT COVERAGE:
Seventy percent (70%) of the lot area. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-11-7: YARD REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Front Yard: Twenty five feet (25').
No parking shall be permitted in the front yard except after review and
approval of the parking plan layout and points of access.
   (B)   Side Yard: Must have two (2) side yards totaling twenty five feet
(25'), neither of which can be less than ten feet (10') in width.
   (C)   Rear Yard: Not less than twenty five feet (25'). Provided, further
loading space shall be provided in the rear yard in the ratio required in
chapter 14 of this title and shall be computed separately from the off street
parking requirements. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-11-8: OFF STREET PARKING:
See chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-11-9: OFF STREET LOADING:
See chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-11-10: SIGN REGULATIONS:
Signs shall be regulated by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-11-11: PROTECTIVE SCREENING:
Those sides of a lot or parcel in an I-1 district which abut or are across an
alley from a lot or parcel in an R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-4 district shall be
provided with buffer strips in accordance with chapter 15 of this title. (Ord.
567, 11-1976)
CHAPTER 12
I-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-12-1: Statement Of Purpose
10-12-2: Permitted Uses
10-12-3: Special Use Exceptions
10-12-4: Building Height
10-12-5: Lot Requirements
10-12-6: Lot Coverage
10-12-7: Yard Requirements
10-12-8: Off Street Parking
10-12-9: Off Street Loading
10-12-10: Sign Regulations
10-12-11: Protective Screening
10-12-12: Cannabis Craft Grower Conditional Use Permits
10-12-1: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
The intent of this chapter is to permit certain industrial uses to locate in
desirable areas of the city, which uses are primarily of a manufacturing,
assembling, and fabricating character, including large scale or specialized
industrial operations requiring good access by road and/or railroad, and
needing special sites or public and utility services. Reasonable regulations
apply to uses in this district, so as to permit the location of industries
which will not cause adverse effects on residential and commercial areas in the
city. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-12-2: PERMITTED USES:
All permitted uses in the I-1 light industrial district.
Automobile accessory manufacturing, not including tires.
Automobile body shops where primary use is such.
Dwellings for caretakers or watchmen accessory to any of the uses in this
section.
Electrical fixtures, batteries, and other electrical apparatus manufacturing.
Furniture and upholstering manufacturing.
Hardware and cutlery manufacturing.
Heavy equipment manufacturing and assembly.
Leather goods and luggage manufacturing.
Machine shops.
Manufacturing of paper and/or paper products.
Mattress manufacturing.
Metal buffing, plating and polishing.
Metal molding and extrusion.
Millwork, lumber and planing mills.
Off street parking and loading in accordance with chapter 14 of this title.
Painting and varnishing shops.
Plastic molding and extrusion.
Railroad yards and terminals.
Rustproofing shops.
Wearing apparel manufacturing, including shoes, handbags, etc.
Welding shops. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-12-3: SPECIAL USE EXCEPTIONS:
Body plants.
Brewing or distillation of malt beverages or liquors.
Canning factories.
Chemical plants.
Drive-in theaters.
Junkyards.
Lumber or planing mills.
Metal stamping and pressing plants.
Open storage yards of building and construction contractors.
Other types of heavy industrial uses not listed in chapter 16 of this title.
Residential/institutional structure for a home that provides care for persons
who are aged, handicapped or impaired, or a rest or convalescent home.
Uses of a manufacturing nature wherein it can be demonstrated to the city
council, no objectionable odors, fumes, dirt, vibration or noise will be
present beyond the property lines of the property in such heavy manufacturing
use. (Ord. 567, 11-1976; amd. Ord. 4013, 10-20-2015)
10-12-4: BUILDING HEIGHT:
Same as B-2 district. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-12-5: LOT REQUIREMENTS:
No minimum area is required; width, fifty feet (50'). (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-12-6: LOT COVERAGE:
Seventy percent (70%) of the lot area. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-12-7: YARD REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Front Yard: Twenty five feet (25').
No parking shall be permitted in the front yard except after review and
approval of the parking plan layout and point of access.
   (B)   Side Yard: Must have two (2) side yards totaling twenty five feet
(25'), neither of which can be less than ten feet (10') in width.
   (C)   Rear Yard: Not less than twenty five feet (25'). Provided, further
loading space shall be provided in the rear yard in the ratio required in
chapter 14 of this title and shall be computed separately from the off street
parking requirements. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
   (D)   Junkyard: Any junkyard allowed as a special use under this chapter or
which exists as a nonconforming use shall have on all sides of the site, except
at the entrance, exits or along sides of the premises enclosed by buildings, a
fence or wall at least eight feet (8') in height, in order to be a sight
barrier as well as to intercept windblown trash and other debris. Where the
side abuts any residentially zoned district, the requirements for protective
screening shall apply as specified in the particular zoning district which is
abutted by said junkyard. (Ord. 1481, 9-5-1995)
10-12-8: OFF STREET PARKING:
See chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-12-9: OFF STREET LOADING:
See chapter 14 of this title. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-12-10: SIGN REGULATIONS:
Signs shall be regulated by chapter 15 of this title. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-12-11: PROTECTIVE SCREENING:
Those sides of a lot or parcel in an I-2 district which abut or are across an
alley from a lot or parcel in an R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, B-1, B-2, or B-3 district
shall be provided with buffer strips in accordance with chapter 15 of this
title. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-12-12: CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS:
   (A)   Additional Permitted Use: Areas designated and established as I-2
(Heavy Industrial District) for zoning purposes may have an additional
permitted use, upon attaining a conditional use permit as set forth herein,
involving the establishment of a Cannabis Craft Grower ("Craft Grower")
pursuant to the Illinois Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-1 et
seq.). The city authorizes three (3) craft grower conditional use permits to
operate within the City of Canton. The cost of a craft grower conditional use
permit shall total four thousand and no/100 dollars ($4,000.00) per year, pro-
rated only upon the date of issuance if issued after January 1, 2020 and during
the year 2020. The conditional use permit fee herein shall be initially be due
on January 1, 2020, or whenever the conditional use permit is issued initially
to anyone granted and issued a conditional use permit, but shall then be due
January 1 of each subsequent year, regardless of the month and specific date an
initial conditional use permit is issued to anyone granted and issued a
conditional use permit. Conditional use permits shall be issued at the sole
discretion of the City Council of the City of Canton and said conditional use
permits may be terminated and revoked at the sole discretion of the City
Council of the City of Canton for reasons deemed appropriate in the sole
discretion of the City Council of the City of Canton.
   (B)   Definitions: All definitions set forth in 410 ILCS 705/1-10, as
amended from time to time, are hereby adopted and fully incorporated herein.
   (C)   Conditions of Use: It shall be lawful to operate a craft grower
facility so long as the following applies and is adhered to:
      1.   Craft growers must be licensed by the Department of Agriculture
through the State of Illinois;
      2.   Craft growers must have a craft grower conditional use permit, as
set forth in this section, issued by the City of Canton;
      3.   All cultivation of cannabis by a craft grower must take place in an
enclosed, locked facility at the physical address provided to the Department of
Agriculture and the City of Canton during the licensing/permitting process;
      4.   The craft grower location shall only be accessed by the agents
working for the craft grower, the Department of Agriculture staff performing
inspections, the Department of Public Health staff performing inspections,
state and local law enforcement or other emergency personnel, contractors
working on jobs unrelated to cannabis, such as installing or maintaining
security devices or performing electrical wiring, transporting organization
agents as provided in this Act, or participants in the incubator program,
individuals in a mentoring or educational program approved by the state, or
other individuals as provided by rule. However, if a craft grower shares a
premises with an infuser or dispensing organization, agents from those other
licensees may access the craft grower portion of the premises if that is the
location of common bathrooms, lunchrooms, locker rooms, or other areas of the
building where work or cultivation of cannabis is not performed. At no time may
an infuser or dispensing organization agent perform work at a craft grower
without being a registered agent of the craft grower;
      5.   Craft growers must not be located within one thousand feet (1,000')
of the property line of a pre-existing public or private preschool, or
elementary or secondary school or daycare center, daycare home, group daycare
home, part day childcare facility;
      6.   Craft grower facilities may not be located in a house, apartment or
condominium;
      7.   Craft growers may not be located in an area zoned for residential
use;
      8.   Craft growers may not be located within 1,000 feet of the property
line of a pre-existing property zoned or used for residential purposes;
      9.   Craft growers may not be located within 1,500 feet of another craft
grower or cultivation center;
      10.   Craft growers may not sell or distribute any cannabis to any person
other than a cultivation center, a craft grower, an infuser organization, a
dispensing organization, or as otherwise authorized by rules promulgated under
the Act;
      11.   Craft growers may not display or store cannabis, cannabis-infused
products and cannabis concentrate in an area accessible to the public;
      12.   Craft growers may process cannabis, cannabis concentrates, and
cannabis-infused products, in accordance with state and local law;
      13.   Craft growers may enter into a contract with a transporting
organization to transport cannabis to a cannabis business establishment, in
accordance with state and local law;
      14.   Craft growers shall have appropriate security employed and security
measures implemented at all times, in accordance with state regulations, to
deter and prevent theft of cannabis and unauthorized entrance into areas
containing cannabis, cannabis infused products and cannabis concentrate;
      15.   Craft growers shall fully comply with all requirements of the
Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act and any other laws or regulations of the City
of Canton, Illinois Department of Agriculture, and/or the State of Illinois;
      16.   Craft growers must comply with any other requirements or
prohibitions set by administrative rule of the Department of Agriculture.
   (D)   Additional Limitations and Penalties:
      1.   Craft grower shall comply with all state and any applicable Federal
rules and regulations regarding the use of pesticides.
      2.   Craft growers are subject to random inspections by local safety or
health inspectors.
      3.   Craft growers shall notify local law enforcement within twenty-four
(24) hours of the discovery of any loss or theft. Notification shall be made by
phone, in person, or written or electronic communication.
      4.   Craft grower shall not transport cannabis or cannabis-infused
products to any other cannabis business establishment without a transport
organization license unless the cannabis business establishment receiving the
cannabis is within fifteen (15) miles of the craft grower.
      5.   No on-site use or consumption of cannabis shall be permitted at any
craft grower facility in the City of Canton.
      6.   A person who violates any of the provisions in this Section
10-12-12 shall be subject to a fine of not less than five hundred dollars
($500.00) but no more than seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00). A
cannabis craft grower granted and issued a conditional use permit under these
provisions shall be subject to a fine of not less than five hundred dollars
($500.00) but no more than seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00) for a
violation of any provision herein, in addition to being subject to having their
conditional use permit terminated and revoked for a violation of any provision
herein. (Ord. 4180, 2-18-2020)
CHAPTER 13
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
SECTION:
10-13-1: Purpose And Intent
10-13-2: General Provisions
10-13-3: Procedure
10-13-4: Basis For Approval
10-13-5: Determination Of City Council
10-13-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   (A)   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to provide regulations which
govern the procedure and requirements for the review and approval, or denial,
of proposed planned unit developments, and to provide for the possible
relaxation of certain development standards pertaining to other standard zoning
districts.
   (B)   Intent: This district is intended to provide more incentives for
redevelopment in areas of the community which are experiencing a lack of
reinvestment, or which require flexible zoning treatment because of factors
which are specific to the site. This district is designed to promote both the
aesthetic and economic objectives of the city by controlling the site design
and the land use, appearance, density, or intensity of development within the
district in a manner which is consistent with sound land use, urban design, and
economic revitalization principles. They are also intended to provide for
flexible development standards to accommodate unique sites, mixtures of land
uses, or development configurations. In exchange for such flexibility, the
planned unit development (PUD) shall provide a much higher level of site
design, architectural control and other aspects of aesthetic and functional
excellence than normally required for other developments. The application of
these standards will ensure long term progress and broad participation toward
these principles.
PUDs are required to meet certain procedural requirements applicable only to
PUDs, in addition to the general requirements of this title. A public hearing
process is required to review a request for a PUD. This process shall
essentially combine the process for a zoning map amendment with that required
for a conditional use, with several additional requirements. (Ord. 1832, 4-19-
2005)
10-13-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Permitted Location: A PUD may be established for any parcel or tract
of land that has a minimum size of one acre (43,560 square feet). PUDs shall be
permitted with the approval of a PUD zoning district, specific to the approved
PUD, within any one or more standard zoning districts identified in section
10-2-1 of this title.
   (B)   Flexible Development Standards: The following exemptions to the
development standards of the underlying zoning district may be provided with
the approval of a PUD:
      1.   Land Use Requirements: All land uses listed in the districts
established in section
10-2-1 of this title may be permitted within a planned unit development.
      2.   Density And Intensity Requirements: All requirements listed in
chapters 4 through 12 of this title for residential density and nonresidential
intensity may be waived within a planned unit development.
      3.   Bulk Requirements: All requirements listed in chapters 4 through 12
of this title may be waived within a planned unit development.
      4.   Landscaping Requirements: All requirements listed in subsection 10-
15.2-10(B)3 of this title may be waived within a planned unit development.
      5.   Parking And Loading Requirements: All requirements listed in chapter
14 of this title may be waived within a planned unit development. (Ord. 1832,
4-19-2005)
   (C)   Requirements To Depict All Aspects Of Development: Only development
which is explicitly depicted on the required general development plan
(discussed in greater detail later in this chapter) approved by the city
council as part of the approved planned unit development, shall be permitted,
even if such development (including all aspects of land use, density and
intensity, bulk, landscaping, and parking and loading) is otherwise listed as
permitted in chapters 4 through 12 of this title. Requested exemptions from
these standards shall be made explicit by the applicant in the application, and
shall be recommended by the joint planning and zoning commission and approved
explicitly by the city council. If not so requested and approved, such
exemptions shall not be permitted. (Ord. 1832, 4-19-2005; amd. Ord. 3078, 9-16-
2014)
The burden of providing evidence and persuasion that any such exceptions are
necessary and desirable shall in every case rest with the applicant. It shall
not be sufficient to base justification for approval upon an already existing
planned unit development. Each planned unit development shall be presented and
judged on its own merits.
   (D)   Initiation Of Request For Approval Of A Planned Unit Development:
Proceedings for approval of a planned unit development shall be initiated by:
      1.   An application of the owner(s) of the subject property; (Ord. 1832,
4-19-2005)
      2.   A recommendation of the joint planning and zoning commission; or
(Ord. 1832, 4-19-2005; amd. Ord. 3078, 9-16-2014)
      3.   By action of the city council. (Ord. 1832, 4-19-2005)
10-13-3: PROCEDURE:
   (A)   Application Requirements: All applications for proposed planned unit
developments, regardless of the party of their initiation per subsection
10-13-2(D) of this chapter, shall be approved as complete by the zoning
administrator a minimum of two (2) weeks prior to the initiation of this
procedure. The zoning administrator shall forward copies of said complete
application to the office of the city clerk. Said application shall apply to
each of the process steps in subsections (B) through (E) of this section.
   (B)   Staff Review Of Concept Plan: The applicant shall provide the economic
development director and the zoning administrator with a draft PUD concept plan
submittal for a review. The submittal shall contain all of the following items:
      1.   Legal description of the subject property.
      2.   A location map of the subject property and its vicinity at eleven
inches by seventeen inches (11" x 17"), as depicted on a copy of the city of
Canton land use plan.
      3.   A general written description of the proposed planned unit
development including:
         (a)   General project themes and images;
         (b)   The general mix of dwelling unit types and/or land uses;
         (c)   Approximate residential densities and nonresidential intensities
as described by dwelling units per acre, floor area ratio and impervious
surface area ratio;
         (d)   The general treatment of natural features;
         (e)   The general relationship to nearby properties and public
streets;
         (f)   The general relationship of the project to the comprehensive
plan;
         (g)   An initial draft list of zoning standards which will not be met
by the proposed PUD and the location(s) in which they apply, and a complete
list of zoning standards which will be more than met by the proposed PUD and
the location(s) in which they apply. The purpose of this listing shall be to
provide the city staff with information necessary to determine the relative
merits of the project in regard to private benefit versus public benefit and in
regard to the mitigation of potential adverse impacts created by design
flexibility.
      4.   A written description of potentially requested exemption from the
requirements of the underlying zoning district, in the following order:
         (a)   Land use exemptions;
         (b)   Density and intensity exemptions;
         (c)   Bulk exemptions;
         (d)   Landscaping exceptions;
         (e)   Parking and loading requirements exceptions.
      5.   A conceptual plan drawing (at 11 inches by 17 inches) of general
land use layout and general location of major public streets and/or private
drives. Applicant may submit copies of a larger version of the plan in addition
to the eleven inch by seventeen inch (11" x 17") reduction. (Ord. 1832, 4-19-
2005)
      6.   At the staff level meeting, the applicant shall engage in an
informal discussion regarding the PUD concept plan submittal. Appropriate
topics for discussion may include any of the information provided in the PUD
concept plan submittal or other items as determined by the joint planning and
zoning commission. (Ord. 1832, 4-19-2005; amd. Ord. 3078, 9-16-2014)
      7.   Points of discussion and conclusions reached in this stage of the
process shall in no way be binding upon applicant or the city, but should be
considered as an informal, nonbinding basis for proceeding to the next step.
The preferred procedure is for one or more iterations of city staff review of
the concept plan to occur prior to introduction of the formal rezoning petition
which accompanies general development plan (GDP) application. (Ord. 1832, 4-19-
2005)
   (C)   PUD Process Step 1; General Development Plan (GDP): The applicant
shall provide the zoning administrator with a draft GDP plan submittal for a
determination of completeness prior to placing the proposal on the joint
planning and zoning commission agenda for review.
      1.   The submittal shall contain all of the following items, with the
number of copies to be determined by the zoning administrator, prior to its
acceptance by the zoning administrator and placement of the item on a joint
planning and zoning commission agenda for review: (Ord. 1832, 4-19-2005; amd.
Ord. 3078, 9-16-2014)
         (a)   Legal description of the subject property.
         (b)   A location map of the subject property and its vicinity at
eleven inches by seventeen inches (11" x 17"), as depicted on a copy of the
city of Canton land use plan.
         (c)   A map of the subject property showing all lands for which the
planned unit development is proposed, and all other lands within three hundred
feet (300') of the boundaries of the subject property, together with the names
and addresses of the owners of all lands on said map as the same appear on the
current records of the register of deeds of Fulton County (as provided by the
city of Canton). Said map shall clearly indicate the current zoning of the
subject property and its environs, and the jurisdiction(s) which maintains that
control. Said map and all its parts and attachments shall be at a scale which
is not less than one inch equals eight hundred feet (1" = 800'). All lot
dimensions of the subject property, a graphic scale, and a north arrow shall be
provided.
         (d)   A general written description of proposed planned unit
development including:
            (1)   General project themes and images;
            (2)   The general mix of dwelling unit types and/or land uses;
            (3)   Approximate residential densities and nonresidential
intensities as described by dwelling units per acre, floor area ratio and
impervious surface area ratio;
            (4)   The general treatment of natural features;
            (5)   The general relationship to nearby properties and public
streets;
            (6)   The general relationship of the project to the comprehensive
plan;
            (7)   Statement of rationale outlining the need for planned unit
development zoning. This shall identify barriers that the applicant perceives
in the form of requirements of standard zoning districts and opportunities for
community betterment the applicant suggests are available through the proposed
PUD zoning; (Ord. 1832, 4-19-2005)
            (8)   A complete list of zoning standards which will not be met by
the proposed PUD and the location(s) in which they apply and a complete list of
zoning standards which will be more than met by the proposed PUD and the
location(s) in which they apply shall be identified to provide the joint
planning and zoning commission with information necessary to determine the
relative merits of the project in regard to private benefit versus public
benefit, and in regard to the mitigation of potential adverse impacts created
by design flexibility; (Ord. 1832, 4-19-2005; amd. Ord. 3078, 9-16-2014)
            (9)   A written description of potentially requested exemption from
the requirements of the underlying zoning district, in the following order:
               A.   Land use exemptions;
               B.   Density and intensity exemptions;
               C.   Bulk exemptions;
               D.   Landscaping exceptions;
               E.   Parking and loading requirements exceptions.
         (e)   A general development plan drawing at a minimum scale of one
inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') (11 inch by 17 inch reduction shall
also be provided by applicant) of the proposed project showing at least the
following information in sufficient detail to make an evaluation against
criteria for approval:
            (1)   A conceptual plan drawing (at 11 inches by 17 inches) of the
general land use layout and the general location of major public streets and/or
private drives. The applicant may submit copies of a larger version of the plan
in addition to the eleven inch by seventeen inch (11" x 17") reduction;
            (2)   Location of recreational and open space areas and facilities
and specifically describing those that are to be reserved or dedicated for
public acquisition and use; (Ord. 1832, 4-19-2005)
            (3)   Statistical data on minimum lot sizes in the development, the
approximate areas of large development lots and pads, density/intensity of
various parts of the development, floor area ratio, impervious surface area
ratio and landscape surface area ratio of various land uses, expected staging,
and any other plans required by the joint planning and zoning commission or
city council; and (Ord. 1832, 4-19-2005; amd. Ord. 3078, 9-16-2014)
            (4)   Notations relating the written information provided in
subsections (C)1(d)(1) through (C)1(d)(6) of this section to specific areas on
the GDP drawing.
         (f)   A general conceptual landscaping plan for subject property,
noting approximate locations of foundation, street, yard and paving,
landscaping, and the compliance of development with all landscaping
requirements of chapter 15.2 of this title (except as noted in the listing of
exceptions) and the use of extra landscaping and buffer strips.
         (g)   A general signage plan for the project, including all project
identification signs and concepts for public fixtures and signs (such as
streetlight fixtures and/or poles or street sign faces and/or poles) which are
proposed to vary from city standards or common practices.
         (h)   Written justification for the proposed planned unit development.
(The applicant is advised to use the requirements of the conditional use
procedure to develop said written justification.)
      2.   The process for review and approval of the GDP shall be identical to
that for a zoning amendment as outlined in section
10-17-8, "Amendments", of this title. The approval of a GDP by the city council
shall establish a PUD/GDP overlay district that is depicted as such on the
official zoning map. The previous zoning, however, shall control development
within the area of the GDP until all or portions of the GDP are approved as a
specific implementation plan (SIP) as outlined in subsection (D) of this
section.
      3.   Where a land division or lot consolidation is proposed, a
preliminary plat, final plat or CSM of the entire development area included in
the GDP shall meet all requirements of title 11 of this code, the city's land
division and subdivision regulations.
      4.   For multilot planned unit development districts, a detailed
neighborhood development plan showing the arrangement, design, and uses of
different lots, buildings, driveways, parking areas, parks and open spaces, and
paths.
      5.   All portions of an approved GDP not fully developed within five (5)
years of final city council approval shall expire, unless extended by
resolution of the city council following a public hearing. (Ord. 1832, 4-19-
2005)
   (D)   PUD Process Step 2; Specific Implementation Plan (SIP): After the
effective date of the rezoning to PUD/GDP, the applicant may file an
application for a proposed specific implementation plan with the joint planning
and zoning commission.
      1.   The SIP submittal shall contain all of the following items, prior to
its acceptance by the zoning administrator and placement of the item on a joint
planning and zoning commission agenda for review. The number of copies to be
submitted shall be determined by the zoning administrator. (Ord. 1832, 4-19-
2005; amd. Ord. 3078, 9-16-2014)
         (a)   A location map of the subject property and its vicinity at
eleven inches by seventeen inches (11" x 17"), as depicted on a copy of the
city of Canton land use plan map.
         (b)   Compliance with the submittal requirements as outlined in
section 10-15.2-7, "BSO Plan Submittal Requirements", section 10-15.2-10, "Site
Design Standards", and section 10-15.2-11, "Architectural Guidelines", of this
title.
         (c)   Statement of rationale outlining the need for planned unit
development zoning. This shall identify barriers that the applicant perceives
in the form of requirements of standard zoning districts and opportunities for
community betterment the applicant suggests are available through the proposed
PUD zoning. (Ord. 1832, 4-19-2005)
         (d)   A complete list of zoning standards which will not be met by the
proposed SIP and the location(s) in which they apply and a complete list of
zoning standards which will be more than met by the proposed SIP and the
location(s) in which they apply shall be identified to provide the joint
planning and zoning commission with information necessary to determine the
relative merits of the project in regard to private benefit versus public
benefit, and in regard to the mitigation of potential adverse impacts created
by design flexibility. (Ord. 1832, 4-19-2005; amd. Ord. 3078, 9-16-2014)
         (e)   Location of recreational/open space areas and facilities,
specifically describing those that are to be reserved or dedicated for public
acquisition and use.
         (f)   A written description which demonstrates the full consistency of
the proposed SIP with the approved GDP. Any and all variations between the
requirements of the applicable PUD/GDP zoning district and the proposed SIP
development shall be identified. (Ord. 1832, 4-19-2005)
         (g)   The joint planning and zoning commission or city council may
specify other plans, documents or schedules that must be submitted prior to
consideration or approval of the SIP, as such may be relevant to review. (Ord.
1832, 4-19-2005; amd. Ord. 3078, 9-16-2014)
      2.   The area included in a specific implementation plan may be only a
portion of the area included in a previously approved general development plan.
The proposed SIP shall comply with the requirements outlined in section 10-
15.2-7, "BSO Plan Submittal Requirements", section 10-15.2-10, "Site Design
Standards", and section 10-15.2-11, "Architectural Guidelines", of this title.
      3.   Where a land division or lot consolidation is proposed, a
preliminary plat, final plat or CSM of the entire development area included in
the SIP shall meet all requirements of title 11 of this code, the city's land
division and subdivision regulations. The approval of an SIP shall establish a
PUD/SIP district that is depicted as such on the official zoning map.
      4.   For multilot planned unit development districts, a detailed
neighborhood development plan showing the arrangement, design, and uses of
different lots, buildings, driveways, parking areas, parks and open spaces, and
paths.
      5.   All portions of an approved PUD/SIP not fully developed within two
(2) years of final city council approval shall expire, unless extended by
resolution of the city council following a public hearing.
      6.   The city may require the applicant to provide surety and/or
contractual agreement, with the approval of the city attorney, to ensure the
development of public and private improvements. (Ord. 1832, 4-19-2005)
   (E)   Consolidated PUD Approval Process: The applicant may file an
application for simultaneous approval of the GDP and SIP with the joint
planning and zoning commission and city council. The consolidated process shall
include all the steps outlined in subsections (A) through (D) of this section,
and decisions shall be made in accordance with section
10-13-4, "Basis For Approval", of this chapter. (Ord. 1832, 4-19-2005; amd.
Ord. 3078, 9-16-2014)
10-13-4: BASIS FOR APPROVAL:
The joint planning and zoning commission in making their recommendations and
the city council in making its determination shall give consideration and
satisfy themselves as to the following: (Ord. 1832, 4-19-2005; amd. Ord. 3078,
9-16-2014)
   (A)   That the proposed development is consistent with the spirit and intent
of these regulations and produces significant benefits in terms of improved
environmental design sufficient to justify the application of the "planned unit
development" concept.
   (B)   That the site development plan reflects proper consideration of the
natural features of the site, with particular concern for preservation of open
space and careful grading to ensure proper drainage and conservation of natural
features.
   (C)   That the general character of the development produces an attractive
environment appropriate to the intensity of uses proposed and which is
compatible with existing developments in the surrounding area, and with general
community development plans and policies.
   (D)   That the development can be provided with appropriate municipal
services or their equivalent in private services.
   (E)   That proposed design standards provide adequately for practical
operation and maintenance of circulation, parking, emergency services, delivery
services, and snowplowing.
   (F)   That the proponents of the proposed development have demonstrated that
they intend to start construction within a reasonable period following the
approval of the project and requested overlay of the PUD district, that the
project appears economically sound, that a surety/proof of financing is
provided to the city, and that the development will be carried out according to
a reasonable construction schedule satisfactory to the city.
   (G)   That the proposed development is consistent in all respects to the
spirit and intent of this chapter, is in conformity with the general plans for
community development, would not be contrary to the general welfare and
economic prosperity of the city or of the immediate neighborhood, that the
specific development plans have been prepared with competent professional
advice and guidance, and that the benefits and improved design of the resultant
development justifies the variation from the normal requirements of this
chapter through the application of the PUD district.
   (H)   In the case of proposed residential developments:
      1.   That such development will create an attractive residential
environment of sustained desirability and economic stability, compatible with
the character established for the area by the community comprehensive plan, and
where the economic impact of the development in terms of income levels,
property values, and service demands is at least as beneficial to the community
as that which could be anticipated under the base zoning.
      2.   The population composition of the development will not alter
adversely the impact upon school or other municipal service requirements as
anticipated under the existing basic zoning and comprehensive plan.
      3.   That the total average residential density of the project will be
compatible with the comprehensive plan.
      4.   That the aggregate open space of the development will be no less
than would have resulted from the application of open space requirements of the
previous district.
      5.   That adequate guarantee is provided for permanent retention as "open
space area" of the residual open land area resulting from the application of
these regulations, either by private reservation for the use of the residents
within the development or by dedication to the public.
Ownership, maintenance, and tax liability of private open space reservation
shall be established in a manner acceptable to the municipality and made a part
of the conditions of the plan approval.
   (I)   In the case of proposed PUD planned unit development overlays for
commercial developments:
      1.   That the economic practicality of the proposed development can be
justified on the basis of purchasing potential, competitive relationship and
demonstrated tenant interest.
      2.   That the proposed development will be adequately served by off
street parking and truck service facilities.
      3.   That the locations for entrances and exits have been designed to
prevent unnecessary interference with the safe and efficient movement of
traffic on surrounding streets, and that the development will not create an
effect upon the general traffic pattern of the area incompatible with that
anticipated under the comprehensive plan.
      4.   That the architectural design, landscaping, control of lighting, and
general site development will result in an attractive and harmonious service
area compatible with and not creating an effect upon the property values of the
surrounding neighborhood incompatible with that anticipated under the
comprehensive plan.
   (J)   In the case of mixed use developments:
      1.   That the proposed mixture of uses produces a unified composite which
is compatible within itself and which as a total developmental entity is
compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and consistent with the general
objectives of the comprehensive plan.
      2.   That the various types of uses conform to the general requirements
as herein set forth, applicable to projects of such use character. (Ord. 1832,
4-19-2005)
10-13-5: DETERMINATION OF CITY COUNCIL:
   (A)   The city council, after due consideration and recommendation by the
joint planning and zoning commission, may deny the petition, approve the
petition as submitted or approve the petition subject to additional conditions.
A planned unit development may only be approved by an ordinance adopted by the
city council. Any ordinance approving a planned unit development shall specify
the special conditions and restrictions imposed on the planned unit development
and shall include the development plan and plat of subdivision, provided that a
plat or redivision or consolidation may be approved by the city council as part
of the planned unit development and must be recorded before permits may be
issued. Said ordinance shall further contain a legal description of the
property subject to such planned unit development and said ordinance shall be
recorded in the office of the register of deeds of Fulton County before any
permits may be obtained.
   (B)   The approval of a petition and consequent amending of the zoning map
to include the PUD district shall be based on and include as conditions to
comply with the building, site and operational (BSO) plans for the development
as well as all other commitments offered or required with regard to project
value, character or other factor pertinent to assuring that the project will be
developed basically as presented in the official submittal plans as approved by
the city council and shall be mapped and recorded as provided for special uses
under section
10-17-8, "Amendments", of this title. Such plans, however, need not necessarily
be completely detailed at the time of zoning provided they are of sufficient
detail to satisfy the joint planning and zoning commission and city council as
to the general character, scope, and appearance of the proposed development as
outlined in the general development plan.
   (C)   Any subsequent change or addition to the plans or use shall first be
submitted for approval to the city council and if in the opinion of the city
council upon recommendation of the joint planning and zoning commission such
change or addition constitutes a substantial alteration of the original plan, a
public hearing before the city council shall be required and notice thereof
given pursuant to section
10-17-8 of this title. (Ord. 1832, 4-19-2005; amd. Ord. 3078, 9-16-2014)
   (D)   No permits, as outlined in section
10-17-9 of this title, shall be approved or issued for any use or construction
activity in a planned unit development without final approval of an SIP by
ordinance of the city council. (Ord. 1832, 4-19-2005)
CHAPTER 14
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
10-14-1: General Parking Regulations
10-14-2: Off Street Parking
10-14-3: Layout And Construction Of Parking And Loading Areas
10-14-4: Off Street Loading Requirements
10-14-1: GENERAL PARKING REGULATIONS:
Off street vehicular parking in conjunction with all land or building uses
shall be provided, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy as
herein prescribed. In all zoning districts, off street parking requirements for
the storage and parking of self-propelled motor vehicles for the use of
occupants, employees and patrons of the building hereafter erected, altered or
extended after the effective date hereof, shall be provided as herein
prescribed. Such space shall be maintained and shall not be encroached upon as
long as said main building or structure remains, unless an equivalent number of
such spaces are provided elsewhere in conformance with this chapter.
   (A)   When units or measurements determining number of required parking
spaces result in requirements of a fractional space, such fractional space
shall be reflected as one parking space.
   (B)   The off street loading space as required in this chapter shall not be
construed as supplying off street parking space.
   (C)   Whenever a use requiring off street parking is increased in floor area
and such use is located in a building existing on or before the effective date
of this title, the minimum number of parking spaces required at the time of the
increase in floor area shall be based on the usable floor area of the entire
building including the addition.
   (D)   Off street parking for other than residential use shall be either on
the same lot or within three hundred feet (300') of the building it is intended
to serve, measured without crossing any major thoroughfare, from the nearest
point of the building to the nearest point of the off street parking facilities
and such off street parking shall be provided either by an off street parking
lot or by a garage. In the case off street parking is provided in a garage, the
maximum height of such garage shall be twenty feet (20') and may occupy the
required side or rear space, but shall not be closer than twenty feet (20')
from a lot line in a residential district. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
   (E)   Residential off street parking spaces shall consist of dust free
parking strips, driveway, or combination thereof and shall be located on the
premises they are intended to serve, not closer than three feet (3') from any
street lot line. Garages and carports shall conform to the appropriate
regulations of the zoning district in which they are located.
All required parking in R-3, R-4, B-1, B-2, B-3, and I districts and that
required for churches and assembly places shall be paved as follows:
      1.   A one and one-half inch (11/2") bituminous concrete surface on a
four inch (4") base of bituminous aggregate mix; or
      2.   A two inch (2") bituminous concrete surface on an eight inch (8")
base of crushed gravel or crushed stone; or
      3.   A five inch (5") surface of portland cement concrete or structural
equivalent of any of the foregoing as determined by the city engineer.
These specifications are minimum standards; parties anticipating use of parking
lots by heavy vehicles or very high volumes of traffic should use a higher
standard of pavement design. (Ord. 1937, 7-2-2008)
   (F)   For uses not specifically mentioned herein, the requirements for off
street parking facilities for a use which is mentioned, and which use is most
similar as interpreted by the city council after hearing and recommendation of
the joint planning and zoning commission shall apply. (Ord. 567, 11-1976; amd.
Ord. 3041, 12-3-2013)
   (G)   In case of mixed uses, the total requirements for off street loading
space shall be the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed
separately as specified in the preceding subsection, and the off street loading
space for one use shall not be considered as providing the required off street
loading space for any other use.
   (H)   Any area once designed as required off street parking shall not be
changed to any other use unless and until equal facilities are provided
elsewhere.
   (I)   Off street parking existing at the effective date of this title in
connection with the operation of an existing building or use shall not be
reduced to an amount less than hereinafter required for a similar new building
or prior use.
   (J)   Two (2) or more buildings or uses may collectively provide the
required off street parking in which case the required number of parking spaces
shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the several individual
uses computed separately. Where the required number of parking spaces exceeds
one hundred (100) cars, the requirements may be reduced by ten percent (10%).
   (K)   The required off street parking shall be for occupants, employees,
visitors, and shall be limited in use to motor vehicles. The storage of
merchandise, motor vehicles for sale, or the repair of vehicles is prohibited
in required off street parking areas.
This requirement shall not be interpreted to prohibit the posting of a "for
sale" sign in a personal vehicle which is used regularly by a resident of the
structure for which the parking space is an accessory use. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
   (L)   In cases of dual functioning of off street parking where operating
hours do not overlap, the joint planning and zoning commission may grant a
variation. Parking spaces already provided to meet off street parking
requirements for theaters, stadiums, auditoriums, and other places of public
assembly, stores, office buildings and industrial establishments located within
five hundred feet (500') of a church, as measured along lines of public access,
and that are not normally used between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on Sundays and are made available for other parking,
may be used to meet not more than seventy five percent (75%) of the off street
parking requirements of a church. There shall be a written agreement between
all parties concerned where this arrangement is permitted. (Ord. 567, 11-1976;
amd. Ord. 3041, 12-3-2013)
   (M)   Where lighting facilities are provided, they shall be so arranged as
to reflect the light away from the adjacent residential districts or zones.
   (N)   The amount of required off street parking space for new uses or
buildings, additions thereto, and additions to existing buildings as specified
above shall be determined in accordance with the following table, and the space
so required shall be stated in the application for a building permit and shall
be irrevocably reserved for such use and/or shall comply with the initial part
of this section.
   (O)   No certificate of occupancy will be issued upon completion of any
building or repair operations unless and until all off street parking
requirements, shown upon the plans, or made a part of the building permit,
shall be in place and ready for use. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-14-2: OFF STREET PARKING:
Off street parking shall be provided in accordance with the following table:
Use Required Number Of Customer Parking Spaces Per Each Unit Of Measure
Use                                     Required Number Of Customer Parking
                                        Spaces Per Each Unit Of Measure
Banks, other than drive-in type, post
offices, business offices or            1 per 400 square feet of usable floor
professional offices of lawyers,        area
architects, engineers, or similar or
allied professions
Beauty parlor or barbershops            2 per each chair for barber and/or
                                        beauty shops
Bowling alleys                          10 per each bowling lane
Churches, with fixed seats or pews      1 per 8 feet of pew or 4 seats
Dance halls, exhibition halls, assembly
halls, billiard halls, and churches     1 per 100 square feet of floor space
without fixed seats
                                        1 per teacher, employee or
Elementary and intermediate schools     administrator in addition to the
                                        requirements of the auditorium or
                                        assembly hall
Establishments for sale and consumption 1 per 100 square feet of usable floor
on the premises of beverages, food or   area or per 2 seats, whichever is the
refreshments                            smaller
Furniture and appliances, household
equipment, repair shops, showroom of a  1 per 600 square feet of usable floor
plumber, decorator, electrician, or     area occupied in processing or
similar trade, clothing and shoe repair manufacturing for which requirements
and laundry, motor vehicle sales        are indicated below
showroom, hardware stores, wholesale
stores, and machinery stores
Hospitals, convents, homes for the      1 per 4 beds, plus 1 space for each
aged, convalescent homes, sanatoriums   full time staff member and attending
and children's homes                    physician
                                        1 per 2 employees computed on the basis
Industrial establishment including      of the greatest number of persons,
manufacturing, research and testing     employed at any 1 period during the day
laboratories, creameries, bottling      or night. Space on the site shall also
works, printing, plumbing or electrical be provided for all construction
workshops                               workers during periods of plant
                                        construction.
Mortuary establishments, and funeral    1 per 50 square feet of floor space in
homes                                   the slumber rooms, parlors, or
                                        individual service rooms
Private clubs, fraternities, and        1 for each 2 beds plus 1 for each 200
dormitories                             square feet of usable floor area
Professional office of doctors and      5 for each doctor or dentist
dentists
Residential, single-family              2 per dwelling unit
Residential, two-family, row house and  1.5 per dwelling unit
multiple dwelling
Retail store, except as otherwise       3 per 1,000 square feet of usable floor
specified herein                        area
                                        1 per teacher, employee, or
                                        administrator, and for every 10
Senior high schools                     students in addition to the
                                        requirements of the auditorium or
                                        assembly hall
Stadiums and sports arenas              1 per 4 seats or 6 feet of benches
Theaters and auditoriums and assembly   1 per 6 seats based on maximum seating
halls                                   capacity in the main place of assembly
                                        therein
Tourist homes and motels and hotels     1 per guest bedroom
 
(Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-14-3: LAYOUT AND CONSTRUCTION OF PARKING AND LOADING AREAS:
Whenever an off street parking lot is a requirement, such lot shall be laid
out, constructed and maintained in accordance with the following regulations:
   (A)   Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot by means of clearly
limited and defined drive shall be provided for vehicles. All drives and aisles
shall be surfaced in a manner equivalent to that which is hereinafter provided
for parking areas.
   (B)   All spaces shall be laid out in the dimensions of ten feet by twenty
feet (10' x 20') or two hundred (200) square feet of space, exclusive of area
required in subsection (C) of this section.
   (C)   All space shall be provided adequate access by means of maneuvering
lanes.
   (D)   Where the parking lot is contiguous with a residentially zoned
district which has common frontage in the same block with the parking lot,
there shall be established a setback equal to that required for buildings in
the applicable residential zone buffered in accord with chapter 15 of this
title.
   (E)   Where a parking lot lies across the street and opposite a
residentially zoned district wherein the lots front on such street, there shall
be established a setback line ten feet (10') from the front lot line. In lieu
of this setback a buffer strip may be provided (see chapter 15 of this title).
   (F)   Where the parking lot lies across the street and opposite or
contiguous to and in the same block with residentially zoned property which has
only side lot lines on the street, there shall be established a setback line
ten feet (10') from the lot line. In lieu of this setback a buffer may be
provided.
   (G)   Where the parking lot abuts rear property lines of a residentially
zoned district, there shall be established a setback line of ten feet (10')
from the rear property line. In lieu of this setback a buffer may be provided.
   (H)   The land between the setback line and the lot line in a parking lot is
for the purpose of this chapter called a buffer strip.
   (I)   There shall be bumper stops or wheel chocks of concrete or similar
permanent material, provided so as to prevent any vehicle from projecting over
the buffer strip. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
   (J)   Wherever a buffer strip is not practical or reasonable, a continuous
unpierced masonry wall of specified height and materials may be substituted if
approved by the city council after hearing and recommendation by the joint
planning and zoning commission. (Ord. 567, 11-1976; amd. Ord. 3041, 12-3-2013)
   (K)   Where buffer strips are not required, bumper stops or wheel chocks
will be provided, so located as to prevent any vehicle from projecting over the
lot line.
   (L)   The parking lot shall be drained to eliminate any standing surface
water.
   (M)   The surface of the parking lot excepting the buffer strips shall have
dust free concrete or asphaltic surfacing.
   (N)   Plans for the layout of the parking lot must be approved by the zoning
administrator. Plans for the layout of the parking lot shall show a total
dimension across two (2) tiers of spaces and one aisle (maneuvering lane) of at
least the following for the various patterns:
      1.   Ninety degree (90°) pattern: Sixty feet (60') for two (2) tiers of
space, including one aisle (maneuvering lane), with the minimum aisle being
twenty feet (20') in width.
      2.   Sixty degree (60°) pattern: Fifty five feet (55') for two (2) tiers
of spaces including one aisle (maneuvering lane), with the minimum aisle being
fifteen feet (15') in width.
      3.   Forty five degree (45°) pattern: Fifty feet (50') for two (2) tiers
of spaces including one aisle (maneuvering lane), with the minimum aisle being
fifteen feet (15') in width.
      4.   Forty five degree (45°) herringbone pattern: Forty three feet (43')
for two (2) tiers of spaces and one aisle (maneuvering lane), with the minimum
aisle being twelve feet (12') in width. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
   (O)   Notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained in this chapter, the
setback requirements required hereby may be modified by the joint planning and
zoning commission with respect to the number of feet required for any case when
it appears an undue hardship will arise from the strict enforcement of the
requirements above set forth. (Ord. 567, 11-1976; amd. Ord. 3041, 12-3-2013)
10-14-4: OFF STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
On the same premises with every building, structure, or part thereof, erected
and occupied for manufacturing, storage warehouse, goods display, department
store, wholesale store, market, hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry
cleaning establishment, other retail establishments, or other uses similarly
involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles or materials or merchandise,
there shall be provided and maintained on the lot adequate space for standing,
loading and unloading in order to avoid undue interference with public use of
the streets or alleys. Such loading and unloading space, unless otherwise
adequately provided for, shall be an area twelve feet by fifty feet (12' x 50')
with a fifteen foot (15') high clearance and shall be provided according to the
following schedule:
 
Gross Floor Area In Square Feet Loading And Unloading Spaces Required In Terms
                                Of Square Feet Of Usable Floor Area
0 - 4,999                       None
5,000 - 9,999                   1 space
10,000 - 69,999                 1 space plus 1 space for each 10,000 square
                                feet or fraction thereafter
70,000 and above                5 spaces plus 1 space for each 40,000 square
                                feet in excess of 100,000 square feet
 
Multi-family buildings shall provide one off street loading space for each
building containing twenty (20) or more dwelling units. Such loading and
unloading space shall be an area ten feet by forty feet (10' x 40') with a
twelve foot (12') height clearance. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
CHAPTER 15
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-15-1: Conflicting Regulations
10-15-2: Scope
10-15-3: Streets, Alleys, And Railroad Rights Of Way
10-15-4: Permitted Uses
10-15-5: Permitted Area
10-15-6: Permitted Height
10-15-7: Lot Limitations
10-15-8: Lots, Yards, And Open Spaces
10-15-9: Porches
10-15-10: Projections Into Yards
10-15-11: Substandard Lots
10-15-12: Required Street Frontage
10-15-13: Storage Of Travel Trailers, Campers, Recreational Vehicles, And Boats
In Residential Areas
10-15-14: Dwellings In Other Than Main Structure
10-15-15: Accessory Buildings In Residential Districts
10-15-16: Occupancy
10-15-17: Building Grades
10-15-17-1: Drainage Of Water
10-15-18: Buildings To Be Moved
10-15-19: Restoring Unsafe Buildings
10-15-20: Construction Begun Prior To Adoption Of This Chapter
10-15-21: Voting Place
10-15-22: Approval Of Plats
10-15-23: Essential Services
10-15-24: Signs
10-15-25: Radio, Television, Communications And Cell Towers
10-15-26: Swimming Pools
10-15-27: Fences, Walls, Barriers And Other Obstructions
10-15-28: Buffer Strips
10-15-29: Waste, Garbage, And Rubbish
10-15-30: Waste Receptacles
10-15-31: Storage, Dumping Of Waste, Junk, Or Garbage
10-15-32: Removal Of Soil, Sand, Or Other Material
10-15-33: Zoning District Classification Of Areas Annexed Subsequent To The
Effective Date Of This Chapter
10-15-34: Sewer Connections
10-15-35: Post Office Boxes
10-15-36: Effective Rezoning Date
10-15-1: CONFLICTING REGULATIONS:
Whenever any provision of this chapter conflicts with the requirements,
regulations, restrictions or limitations that are imposed or required of any
other law or ordinance, then the more restrictive provisions shall govern.
(Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-15-2: SCOPE:
No building or structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected,
constructed, reconstructed, or altered and maintained, and no new use or change
of use shall be made or maintained on any building, structure or land, or part
thereof, except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 567,
11-1976)
10-15-3: STREETS, ALLEYS, AND RAILROAD RIGHTS OF WAY:
All streets, alleys, and railroad rights of way, if not otherwise specifically
designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the property immediately
abutting upon such streets, alleys, or railroad rights or way. Where the
centerline of a street or alley, or railroad right of way serves as a district
boundary, the zoning of such street or alley, or railroad right of way, unless
otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of
the abutting property up to the centerline of such street, alley, or railroad
right of way. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-15-4: PERMITTED USES:
No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or
structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used, designed or
arranged for any purpose other than is permitted in the district in which the
building or land is located, except as otherwise provided herein. (Ord. 567,
11-1976)
10-15-5: PERMITTED AREA:
No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or
structurally altered, except in conformity with the area and placement
regulations of the district in which the building is located. (Ord. 567, 11-
1976)
10-15-6: PERMITTED HEIGHT:
No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or
structurally altered to exceed that height limit herein established for the
district in which the building is located, except that penthouses or roof
structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans, or
similar equipment, required to operate and maintain a building, and fire and
parapet walls, skylights, towers, steeples, stage lofts and screens, flagpoles,
chimneys, smokestacks, individual domestic radio, television aerials and
wireless masts, water tanks, or similar structures may be erected to exceed by
not more than fifteen feet (15') the height limits of the district in which it
is located; nor shall such structure have a total area greater than ten percent
(10%) of the roof area of the building; nor shall such structure be used for
any residential, commercial or industrial purpose other than a use incidental
to the main use of the building. The erection of commercial radio and
television transmitting, relay, or other types of antenna towers where
permitted, shall abide by the regulations set forth for such uses in this
chapter. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-15-7: LOT LIMITATIONS:
In all residential districts, only one principal building shall be placed on a
zoning lot except as may be permitted under chapter 13 of this title. (Ord.
567, 11-1976)
10-15-8: LOTS, YARDS, AND OPEN SPACES:
No space which has been counted or calculated as part of a required side yard,
rear yard, front yard, or other required open space, or required lot area per
dwelling unit required by this chapter, may, by reason of change in ownership
or otherwise, be counted or calculated to satisfy or comply with a yard or
other open or lot area space requirement for any other building.
   (A)   When the majority (in excess of 50 percent of the street frontage) of
the lots of record in a block front have been built upon at the time of the
adoption of this chapter and where the front yards on the built up lots are
less than that required under the regulations in this chapter, the average
front yard shall be established as the minimum required front yard for all the
properties in that block front.
   (B)   On lots of record, the side yard requirement on the side street of the
corner zoning lot shall be not less than the distance of the front yard depth
requirement for the lot to the rear thereof when said lot to the rear thereof
has frontage along said side street, and in such case no accessory building on
said corner zoning lot shall project toward said side street closer than the
distance of the front yard depth requirement for the lot to the rear thereof;
provided, that this regulation shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the
buildable width of a corner lot to less than thirty two feet (32'), nor to
prohibit the erection of an accessory building where compliance with this
regulation cannot reasonably be had.
   (C)   On lots or parcels which are not lots of record, the side yard width
on the street side of a corner lot shall be not less than the required front
yard for the district in which the lot is located.
   (D)   For the purpose of side yard regulations, any two-family or any
multiple dwelling shall be considered as one building occupying one lot. (Ord.
567, 11-1976)
10-15-9: PORCHES:
An open, unenclosed porch or paved patio may project into a required front yard
for a distance not exceeding ten feet (10'). (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-15-10: PROJECTIONS INTO YARDS:
Architectural features, not including vertical projections, may extend or
project into a required side yard not more than two inches (2") for each one
foot (1') of required width of such side yard, and may extend or project into a
required front yard not more than three feet (3'). Architectural features shall
not include those details which are normally demountable. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-15-11: SUBSTANDARD LOTS:
Any lot of record existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter, that
does not meet the requirements of this chapter for lot width and depth and
available open space of yards, may be used for single-family residential
purposes, provided the lot width and depth and available open space for yards
is not less than sixty six and two-thirds percent (662/3%) of that required by
this chapter, excepting that vacant lots having in the aggregate a continuous
frontage of one hundred twenty feet (120') or more in a block shall not be
subject to the above provision. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-15-12: REQUIRED STREET FRONTAGE:
Every dwelling or principal building shall be located on a lot which shall
front upon a public street. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-15-13: STORAGE OF TRAVEL TRAILERS, CAMPERS, RECREATIONAL VEHICLES, AND BOATS
IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS:
Storage of travel trailers, campers, and other recreational vehicles is
permitted in residential districts provided no such vehicle, not exceeding six
feet (6') in height may be stored in a front yard setback. All recreational
vehicles, trailers and boats must be equipped with wheels or stored on a mobile
conveyance with wheels. No recreational vehicles, trailers or boats may be
permanently installed on the lot and no such vehicle, trailer or boat may be
used for dwelling purposes. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-15-14: DWELLINGS IN OTHER THAN MAIN STRUCTURE:
No dwelling units other than the main structure shall be erected upon a lot
with another dwelling unit. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-15-15: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
In residential districts, accessory buildings, except as otherwise permitted in
this chapter, shall be subject to the following regulations:
   (A)   Where the accessory building is structurally attached to a main
building it shall be subject to, and must conform to all the regulations of
this chapter applicable to main buildings.
   (B)   A detached accessory building, not exceeding one story, or fourteen
feet (14') in height, may occupy not more than twenty five percent (25%) of a
required rear yard, plus forty percent (40%) of any nonrequired rear yard area;
provided that, in no instance shall the accessory building exceed the ground
floor area of the main building. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
   (C)   A detached accessory building shall be located only in a rear yard
except for carports or garages which may be located at the rear of row or town
house dwellings, and apartment buildings after review by the joint planning and
zoning commission and subsequent approval on findings that adequate light and
air is assured to the dwelling units. (Ord. 567, 11-1976; amd. Ord. 3041, 12-3-
2013)
   (D)   When an accessory building is located on a corner lot, the side lot
line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot
to its rear, said building shall not project beyond the front yard line
required on the lot to the rear of such corner lot. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
   (E)   No accessory structure shall be erected or allowed on a lot prior to
the existence or construction of the primary residence. (Ord. 4012, 10-20-2015)
10-15-16: OCCUPANCY:
Occupancy of temporary garages, accessory buildings, and basement apartments is
prohibited. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-15-17: BUILDING GRADES:
Any building requiring yard space shall be located at such an elevation that a
sloping grade shall be maintained to cause the flow of surface water to run
away from the walls of the building. A sloping grade shall be maintained and
established from the finished ground level line at the front lot line at the
sidewalk level. However, this shall not prevent the grading of a yard space to
provide sunken or terraced areas, provided proper means are constructed and
maintained to prevent the runoff of surface water from flowing onto the
adjacent properties except as provided by natural drainage courses or drainage
easements.
When a new building is constructed on a vacant lot between two (2) existing
buildings or adjacent to an existing building, the existing established grade
shall be used in determining the ground elevation around the new building. The
yard around the new building and vacant lots to be filled shall be graded as
far as practicable, in such a manner as to meet existing grades and not to
permit runoff surface water to flow into the adjacent properties except as
provided by natural drainage courses or drainage easements. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-15-17-1: DRAINAGE OF WATER:
   (A)   No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity shall
directly or indirectly cause any water, above or below the surface, to be
released or discharged from property under that entity's control onto property
of another in an amount substantially greater than that which would naturally
flow onto said property or create an obstruction which substantially impedes
the drainage of water from the property of another, and which creates thereon a
structural health hazard or nuisance. In addition no entity shall allow or
permit the same to be done by any agent, employee, tenant, occupant or other
person or other entity connected with the controlled premises.
   (B)   The city engineer shall have the authority to establish rules and
regulations concerning the format and content of the engineering documents to
be submitted to the city in evidence of compliance with this section by the
party changing, altering or causing the discharge of such stormwater. (Ord.
1586, 6-2-1998)
10-15-18: BUILDINGS TO BE MOVED:
Any building or structure which has been wholly or partially erected on any
premises located within the city shall not be moved and/or be placed upon any
premises in the city until a building permit for such removal shall have been
secured from the zoning administrator. Any such building or structure shall
fully conform to all the provisions of this chapter in the same manner as a new
building or structure. No building or structure shall be moved into the city
from outside the city limits unless permission is secured from the zoning
administrator. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-15-19: RESTORING UNSAFE BUILDINGS 1 :
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe
condition of any part of any building or structure declared unsafe by the
building inspector, provided such building or structure is not a nonconforming
use in the district in which it is located. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 16 of this title for restoration of nonconforming buildings.
10-15-20: CONSTRUCTION BEGUN PRIOR TO ADOPTION OF THIS CHAPTER:
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require any change in the plans,
construction or designed use of any building upon which actual construction was
lawfully begun prior to the adoption of this chapter, and diligently carried
on, provided that such building shall be completed within two (2) years from
the date of adoption of this chapter. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-15-21: VOTING PLACE:
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed as to interfere with the
temporary use of any property as a voting place in connection with a municipal
or other public election. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-15-22: APPROVAL OF PLATS:
No proposed plat of a new or redesigned subdivision shall hereafter be approved
by the city council unless the lots within such plat equal or exceed the
minimum size and width requirements set forth in the various districts of this
title, and unless such plat fully conforms with the statutes of the state and
the subdivision regulations of the city. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-15-23: ESSENTIAL SERVICES:
Essential services shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law and
other ordinances of the city in any use district, it being the intention hereof
to exempt such essential services from the application of this chapter. (Ord.
567, 11-1976)
The council, after hearing and recommendation of the joint planning and zoning
commission, shall have the power to permit the erection and use of a building,
or an addition to an existing building, of a public service corporation or for
public utility purposes, in any district wherein permitted to a greater height
or of larger area than the district of a public utility building, structure or
use, if the joint planning and zoning commission shall find such use, height,
area, building or structure reasonably necessary for the public convenience and
service. (Ord. 567, 11-1976; amd. Ord. 3041, 12-3-2013)
10-15-24: SIGNS:
   (A)   Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
APPROVED COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS: Wood, or materials not more combustible than
wood.
APPROVED COMBUSTIBLE PLASTICS: Those which, when tested in accordance with
American Society For Testing Materials standard method for test for
flammability of plastics over 0.050 inch in thickness, burn no faster than two
and five- tenths inches (2.5") per minute in sheets of 0.060 inch thickness.
AWNING SIGN: A sign on or attached to a temporary retractable shelter that is
supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building. This definition does
not include any off premises sign.
CANOPY SIGN: A sign on or attached to a permanent overhanging shelter that
projects from the face of the building and is supported only partially by the
building. This definition does not include any off premises sign.
COMBINATION SIGN: Any sign which combines the characteristics of two (2) or
more types of signs, including roof projecting and ground projecting signs.
DISPLAY SURFACE: The entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing
the extreme limits of a sign. However, such perimeter shall not include any
structural elements lying outside the limits of such sign and not forming an
integral part of the display.
ELECTRICAL SIGN: Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs,
faces, backgrounds or outlines illuminated by incandescent or fluorescent lamps
or luminous tubes as part of the sign proper, these light sources being either
external or internal, or signs which may have movable parts which are moved by
electrical force.
FACING: The surface of the sign upon, against or through which the message of
the sign is exhibited.
FRONT YARD: The area from one side lot line to the other side lot line and from
the main building to the front lot line.
GROUND SIGN: A sign which is supported by one or more poles, uprights or braces
in or upon the ground, which are not a part of a building, other than pole or
pylon signs as defined in this chapter. This definition does not include any
off premises sign.
MARQUEE SIGN: A sign which is attached to a fixed shelter used only as a roof
which is entirely supported by the building to which it is attached. The
definition does not include any off premises sign.
OFF PREMISES SIGN: Any sign that advertises activities, goods, products,
services or facilities that are not sold or offered upon the premises where the
sign is located (e.g., billboard).
ON PREMISES SIGN: Any sign related to a business or profession conducted, or a
commodity or service sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is
located.
POLITICAL SIGN: A sign or poster announcing a candidacy for public political
office or a public issue.
PORTABLE SIGN: Any sign which is mounted on a trailer or its own wheels or is
otherwise capable of being moved from place to place, and includes such a sign
even though the wheels of such sign have been removed and the remaining chassis
is attached to the ground.
PROJECTING SIGN: A sign other than a wall sign suspended from or supported by a
building or structure or steel column and projecting out therefrom. This
definition does not include any off premises sign.
PYLON OR POLE SIGN: A sign supported by or suspended from a freestanding column
or columns of structural steel pipe or poles. Such sign may be either an off
premises or on premises sign.
REAL ESTATE SIGN: A sign advertising the sale or rental of the premises, or a
part thereof, on which such sign is located. This definition does not include
any off premises sign.
RIGHT OF WAY: The entire expanse of a roadway including the terrace. Private
property starts where right of way ends.
ROOF SIGN: A sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet of a building. Such
sign may be either an off premises or on premises sign.
SIGN: Means and includes every sign, billboard, ground sign, wall sign,
illuminated sign, projecting sign, temporary sign, pylon or pole sign, marquee,
awning, canopy and street clock, and shall include any announcement,
declaration, demonstration, display, illustrations or insignia used to
advertise or promote the interest of any person, business, idea, activity,
goods, product, service or facility when the same is placed out of doors in
view of the general public. This definition does not include any type of indoor
sign or window display.
SIGN SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between the street right of way
line and any portion of the sign, including its supporting framework or
bracing.
SKELETON PARAPET SIGN: Individual letters mounted on a parapet wall.
STREET (SIGN) FRONTAGE: The horizontal distance of a piece of property which
faces a street right of way or is accessible to the street right of way.
STRUCTURAL TRIM: The molding, battens, capping, nailing strips, latching,
platforms and letters, figures, characters or representations in cutout or
irregular form which are attached to the sign structure.
STRUCTURE: The supports, uprights, bracing and framework for the sign or
display.
TEMPORARY SIGNS (Including Political Signs): A sign advertising a candidate or
candidates, an issue, a garage or yard sale or other one time occurrence. It
also includes signs of cloth or other combustible material (usually attached to
the outside of a building on a wall or storefront) for a period of not more
than thirty (30) days. This definition does not include any off premises signs.
WALL SIGN: A sign attached to or erected against the wall of a building or
structure, with the exposed face located approximately parallel to the plane of
the wall. Such sign may be either an on premises or off premises sign. (Ord.
1599, 9-15-1998; amd. Ord. 1665, 8-15-2000)
   (B)   Applicability And Purpose:
      1.   Applicability: This chapter shall relate to outdoor signs in the
city.
      2.   Statement Of Purpose And Legislative Findings:
         (a)   The city council finds and declares that these regulations on
outdoor advertising signs are necessary to preserve, protect and promote the
public health, safety, morals, aesthetic beauty and general welfare of the
city.
         (b)   The sign regulations, controls and provisions set forth in this
section are made in accordance with an overall plan and program for the public
safety, area development, preservation of property rights and values, and the
general welfare of the city, and are intended to aid in the traffic control and
traffic safety; preserve and protect property values; lessen congestion of land
and air space; provide against undue concentrations of signs which distract and
endanger traffic safety and traffic flow; establish reasonable standards for
commercial and other advertising through the use of signs in order to maintain
and encourage business activity and area development; avoid uncontrolled
proliferation of signs; recognize the rights of the public in roads, streets
and highways; preserve the wholesome and attractive character of the city; and
to recognize that the general welfare includes a community plan that provides
for a community that shall be beautiful as well as healthful, spacious as well
as clean, and well balanced in its growth and development.
   (C)   Sign Area: The area of a sign shall be measured by the smallest
square, rectangle, triangle, circle or combination thereof which will encompass
the entire sign facing.
   (D)   Alterations: A sign which was erected before passage of this section
shall not be rebuilt, relocated, enlarged or extended without conforming to the
requirements of this section. Such a sign, however, may be repaired and
maintained. The changing of movable parts or the repainting or reposting of
display matters shall not be deemed an alteration.
   (E)   Maintenance: All components of a sign shall be kept in good repair at
all times. The zoning officer may order the removal of any sign that is not
maintained in accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (F)   Housekeeping: The area in proximity to the signs shall be maintained
and kept free of litter, debris, and excess grass or weeds. The zoning officer
may order the removal of any sign that is not maintained in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
   (G)   Installation:
      1.   No sign shall be erected, constructed or maintained so as to prevent
free passage from one part of the roof to any other part thereof.
      2.   No sign shall be attached in any manner to any fire escape; or
erected, constructed or maintained so as to obstruct such fire escape.
      3.   No sign shall be placed in a manner so as to interfere with required
light and ventilation openings (windows, doors, vents or similar devices).
      4.   No sign shall be erected, constructed or maintained which closes off
the effective use of any required wall opening.
   (H)   Relocation: Any sign that is moved to another location, either on the
same or other premises, shall be considered a new sign; and a permit shall be
secured for any work performed in connection therewith.
   (I)   Display Of Unauthorized Signs, Signals Or Markings:
      1.   No sign shall be constructed which resembles any official marker
erected by the city or any other governmental agency.
      2.   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any
street or highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which
purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles any official traffic control
device, railroad sign or railroad signal, or which attempts to direct the
movement of traffic.
      3.   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any
street or highway any sign which hides from view or interferes with the
movement of traffic, or inhibits the effectiveness of any traffic control
device, railroad sign or railroad signal.
      4.   No person shall place or maintain upon any street or highway traffic
sign or signal any commercial advertising or handbill of any kind.
      5.   When it is deemed necessary for municipal purposes by the city
council that a sign be moved or removed, the sign owner shall, within ten (10)
days after notification from the zoning officer, move or remove any sign which
extends into a street right of way. (Ord. 2077, 4-17-2012)
   (J)   Administration And Enforcement:
      1.   Appeals: An appeal of the sign ordinance requirements may be
requested by any person affected. Such an appeal shall be taken to the joint
planning and zoning commission.
         (a)   Commission; Powers: The commission shall have the power to:
(Ord. 2077, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. 3041, 12-3-2013)
            (1)   Hear and decide appeals by the sign permit applicant where it
is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the building inspector in the enforcement of this
section.
            (2)   Grant variances from the requirements of this section where
the zoning officer has denied to grant a sign permit as a result of
noncompliance with the requirements of this section. (Ord. 2077, 4-17-2012)
         (b)   Commission; Criteria For Decision: The commission shall grant a
variance from the provisions or requirements of this section only where: (Ord.
2077, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. 3041, 12-3-2013)
            (1)   The literal interpretation and strict application of the
provisions and requirements of this section would cause undue and unnecessary
hardship to the sign user because of unique or unusual conditions pertaining to
the specific building or property in question.
            (2)   The granting of the requested variance would not be
detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort or
general welfare.
            (3)   The granting of the variance would not be injurious to the
use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity nor substantially
diminish or impair property values within the adjacent area.
            (4)   The unusual conditions applying to the specific property do
not apply generally to other buildings or properties in the city.
            (5)   The granting of the variance will not be contrary to the
general objectives. (Ord. 2077, 4-17-2012)
         (c)   Commission; Determination Of Conditions: In granting a variance,
the commission may impose such conditions regarding the location, character or
other features of the proposed sign as it may deem necessary to carry out the
purpose and intent of this section. (Ord. 2077, 4-17-2012; amd. Ord. 3041, 12-
3-2013)
      2.   Permit:
         (a)   Required: No person shall install, erect, repair, alter,
relocate, demolish or dismantle a sign without approval from the zoning officer
and obtaining a permit, if applicable.
         (b)   Application: Application for the approval permit under this
subsection (J)2 shall be made upon a form provided by the zoning officer who
may include the following information:
            (1)   Name, address and telephone number of the property owner.
            (2)   Address or location of property where sign is to be installed
or removed.
            (3)   Zoning of property where sign is to be installed.
            (4)   Description of sign to be erected.
            (5)   Location of sign in relation to the building, structure or
lot to or upon which it is to be erected or removed.
            (6)   Name, address and telephone number of person, firm or
corporation installing or removing the sign, if different from the owner.
            (7)   Evidence that the person who will install or remove the sign
has the appropriate insurance.
         (c)   Fees: Will comply with BOCA construction schedule.
         (d)   Penalties: Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects,
or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the
provisions of this section shall be fined not less than thirty five dollars
($35.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. Each day that a
violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
   (K)   Regulations For Specific Types Of Signs:
      1.   Flashing Sign:
         (a)   Flashing signs shall not be used in a manner that will create a
traffic hazard or where their use may be confused with traffic control devices
or emergency vehicle signals.
         (b)   Revolving beacons shall not be used where they will conflict
with traffic signals or emergency vehicles.
         (c)   The flashing bulb in a flashing sign shall not be larger than a
forty (40) watt incandescent bulb.
         (d)   The bulb in a traveling light sign shall not be greater than a
forty (40) watt incandescent bulb.
      2.   Illuminated Sign:
         (a)   All illuminated signs shall be constructed in accordance with
the standard for electric (UL 48) of Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.
         (b)   No sign shall be so illuminated that it interferes with the
effectiveness or obscures an official traffic sign, signal or device.
         (c)   Signs which are not effectively shielded to prevent beams or
rays from being directed at any portion of traveled ways and are of such
intensity or brilliance to cause glare or impair the vision of the driver of
any motor vehicle or which otherwise interfere with any driver's operation of a
motor vehicle are prohibited.
      3.   Portable Sign: Except as otherwise expressly provided in this
section, no portable sign shall be erected or displayed in this city.
         (a)   Signs of this nature shall be allowed only in commercial
districts (B-1, B-2 and B-3) with the exception of temporary portable signs in
residential districts as set forth in this section. In any district where
allowed, portable signs may not obstruct parking spaces or vehicle or
pedestrian travel lanes. Such signs shall not be located so as to obstruct or
interfere with traffic vision and lighting shall be of a type that cannot be
confused with traffic control devices and cannot cause distraction of vehicle
operators. All connections to an energy source for lighting shall be in accord
with all city codes and shall not be exposed in any way that may constitute a
safety hazard to the public. All signs must conform to placement standards for
freestanding signs. Placement of signs on the terraces or sidewalks is strictly
forbidden. The police department shall be empowered to remove summarily any
sign which is in violation of this section. Although desirable, notice to the
property owner and request for removal shall not be required before removal by
the police department.
         (b)   Temporary portable signs in residential districts (R-1 through
R-4) shall be allowed provided that all of the provisions in subsection (K)3(a)
of this section concerning placement, safety and removal shall apply. Location
of signs on terraces or sidewalks is strictly forbidden. Sign illumination, if
any, shall not be permitted between ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. local time. At no time shall any sign in a residential district
advertise, in whole or in part, any commercial venture or direct the public to
a separate location.
      4.   Projecting, Awning, Canopy Or Marquee Sign:
         (a)   A clear space of not less than eight feet (8') shall be provided
between the lowest portion of the sign and the ground surface.
         (b)   Projecting signs shall be securely attached to buildings or
structures by bolts, anchors, chains, rods or guys.
         (c)   No nails or staples shall be used to secure any projecting sign
to a building or structure.
      5.   Off Premises Signs: All off premises signs are to be discouraged;
however, specific requests will be considered by the city council and must
conform to all erection standards and each will be considered on its own merit.
      6.   Roof Sign:
         (a)   All roof signs shall be secured to masonry, bearing walls,
columns, girders or roof joists.
         (b)   A roof sign shall not extend above the roofline or top of a
parapet wall by more than fifteen feet (15').
      7.   Wall Sign:
         (a)   All wall signs shall be securely fastened to a wall by means of
metal anchors, bolts, expansion screws or similar connectors.
         (b)   A wall sign which is attached to a wood wall must be anchored
with wood blocks used in connection with bolts and screws.
         (c)   An unbraced parapet wall shall not be used to entirely support a
wall sign.
         (d)   The ends of a wall sign shall not extend beyond the ends of the
wall surface.
         (e)   A wall sign shall not project out more than fifteen inches (15")
from the wall surface.
         (f)   The top of a wall sign shall not extend above the top of the
wall.
      8.   House Or Building Identification Sign:
         (a)   One sign per dwelling unit.
         (b)   Characters shall be at least three inches (3") high.
         (c)   Shall be affixed to structure.
         (d)   No permit required.
      9.   Temporary Sign:
         (a)   Maximum sign area of eight (8) square feet per side.
         (b)   Maximum of two (2) sides per sign.
         (c)   Shall be located on premises and not in the public right of way.
         (d)   No sign may be posted more than thirty one (31) days prior to
the event and all signs must be removed within forty eight (48) hours after the
event provided, however, that the time for removal of temporary signs may be
extended by council resolution due to special extenuating circumstances.
         (e)   Any illuminated sign must be darkened between ten o'clock (10:
00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
         (f)   No permit required.
      10.   Signs On Utility Poles: No sign or handbill is allowed on a utility
pole or traffic control device at any time. Police and enforcement personnel
can remove so positioned sign or handbill immediately. Any person responsible
is subject to fines under this section.
      11.   Contractual Signs:
         (a)   Signs advertising contractual work are permitted while the work
is being performed.
         (b)   Maximum of eight (8) square feet.
         (c)   Maximum of two (2) sides.
         (d)   Must be removed within fourteen (14) days of completion of work.
         (e)   No sign is to be located in the terrace.
      12.   On Premises Freestanding (Pole, Pylon, Etc.) Or Ground Sign: The
following on premises signs shall be permitted in the commercial zoning
districts and erected in accordance with the following standards:
         (a)   No sign shall extend over any public right of way more than
eight inches (8") unless approved by the city council. The base and standard of
all freestanding signs shall be set back at least five feet (5') from all
public or private road right of way or easement lines and from all interior lot
or property lines. Any sign located within thirty five feet (35') of the
intersection of any two (2) street right of way lines shall be so designed,
located and constructed that a free and unobstructed view is provided from the
established grade to a height of ten feet (10') above the established grade.
         (b)   Signs in commercial and industrial districts (exterior signs)
must relate solely to the business activity carried on in the structure. The
size of all signs shall be limited in area to the linear street frontage of the
particular occupancy expressed in square feet. Signs shall not extend above the
roofline of the building. Except as hereinafter provided, each local commercial
district or commercial planned unit development, may erect one freestanding
sign, the area of which shall be included in the total area of permitted signs.
Corner lots may erect two (2) freestanding signs, one on each frontage.
         (c)   Maximum of two (2) sides per sign.
         (d)   "Entrance" only and "Exit" only signs shall not be counted as a
sign, providing they contain no more than ten (10) square feet of display
surface on each side.
      13.   Real Estate, Contractor Or Developer Sign:
         (a)   One sign per development one hundred (100) square feet which
must be removed upon the completion of seventy five percent (75%) of the total
development.
         (b)   One directional sign six (6) square feet nominal.
         (c)   Lot and directional signs must be removed immediately upon
closing of sale, lease, or rental.
         (d)   No permit required.
         (e)   Shall be located on premises and not in the public right of way.
      14.   Political Signs:
         (a)   Maximum sign area of eight (8) square feet in area on
residential property and thirty two (32) square feet in area on nonresidential
property.
         (b)   Maximum of two (2) sides per sign.
         (c)   Shall be located on private property and not on public property
or in the public right of way, including the terrace (area between curb and
sidewalk) or medians. Signs on private property cannot be placed in a manner
that obstructs vehicular traffic (either by physical obstruction or sight
lines) or pedestrian traffic.
         (d)   Any illuminated sign must be darkened between ten o'clock (10:
00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
         (e)   No permit required. (Ord. 2077, 4-17-2012)
10-15-25: RADIO, TELEVISION, COMMUNICATIONS AND CELL TOWERS:
   (A)   Generally: This section establishes parameters for the siting of
commercial wireless telecommunications facilities. By enacting this section, it
is the city of Canton's intent to:
      1.   Encourage the use of existing monopoles, towers, utility poles and
other structures for the collocation of telecommunications facilities;
      2.   Encourage the location of new monopoles and towers in nonresidential
areas;
      3.   Minimize the number of new monopoles and towers that would otherwise
need to be constructed by encouraging the use of existing structures;
      4.   Encourage the location of monopoles and towers, to the extent
possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community will be minimal;
      5.   Minimize the potential adverse effects associated with the
construction of monopoles and towers through the implementation of stealth
telecommunication facilities; reasonable design, landscaping and construction
practices;
      6.   Ensure public health, safety, welfare, and convenience.
All public broadcast radio, television and other transmitting or relay antenna
towers may be permitted in a B-2, I-1, and I-2 district, provided such has
access upon a major street and do not exceed one hundred eighty feet (180') in
height from ground level to the top of the highest point of the combined
antenna and support structure. Towers exceeding one hundred eighty feet (180')
in height must obtain a variance from the joint planning and zoning commission.
Any commercial tower or monopole located adjacent to a residential property
must have a horizontal separation distance to the nearest point of the property
line at least equal to one-half (1/2) the height of the tower. If the location
will not allow for a tower height setback, the petitioner can submit a
structural analysis by a licensed structural engineer specifying a tower design
that, in the event of overloading due to extreme weather, will result in a
"bent/kinked" tower but one that will not fall to the ground. In this instance,
the required setbacks will be the maximum possible for the specific site
location but in no event less than the minimum setback requirements from the
lot lines as required by the zoning district in which the facility is to be
located.
All facilities must observe the minimum setback requirements from the lot lines
as required by the zoning district the facility is to be located, and a
building permit must be issued prior to the start of construction.
All antenna support structures shall be constructed consistent with standard
engineering practice and shall comply with, or exceed, the manufacturer's
specifications. All such structures may not be loaded beyond the manufacturer's
specifications.
Commercial cellular antennas and related equipment may be mounted on existing
privately owned, noncommercial towers in residential areas for the purpose of
filling in areas of poor communications, without the involvement of the zoning
administrator or the joint planning and zoning commission. It is recommended
that there be a written agreement between the cellular provider(s) and the
tower owner.
   (B)   Exemptions: Ordinary maintenance of existing telecommunications
facilities and support structures, existing and operational as of the effective
date hereof and as defined herein, shall be exempt from zoning and permitting
requirements. In addition, the following facilities are not subject to the
provisions of this section: 1) antennas used by residential households solely
for broadcast radio and television reception; 2) satellite antennas used solely
for residential or household purposes; 3) television and AM/FM radio broadcast
towers and associated facilities; and 4) towers and antennas used for private,
noncommercial hobby and recreational communications and experimentation,
including, but not limited to, operations in the amateur radio service, the
family radio service, and the citizens' radio service.
   (C)   Stealth Telecommunications Facilities: Facility for providing wireless
service that is not readily apparent to the casual observer.
      1.   Stealth telecommunications facilities shall be permitted in all
zoning districts after approval by the zoning administrator in accordance with
the requirements below:
         (a)   Antennas must be enclosed, camouflaged, screened, obscured or
otherwise not readily apparent to a casual observer.
         (b)   The structure utilized to support the antennas must be allowed
within the underlying zoning district. Such structures may include, but are not
limited to, flagpoles, bell towers, clock towers, crosses, monuments,
smokestacks, parapets, and steeples.
         (c)   Setbacks for the supporting structure shall be governed by the
setback requirements of the underlying zoning district.
         (d)   Stealth telecommunications facilities shall be designed to
accommodate the collocation of other antennas whenever economically and
technically feasible or aesthetically appropriate, as determined by the joint
planning and zoning commission or zoning administrator.
   (D)   Aesthetics:
      1.   Lighting And Marking: Telecommunications facilities or support
structures shall not be lighted or marked unless required by the federal
communications commission (FCC) or the federal aviation administration (FAA).
      2.   Signage: Signs located at the telecommunications facility shall be
limited to ownership and contact information, FCC antenna registration (if
required) and any other information as required by government regulation.
Commercial advertising is strictly prohibited.
      3.   Landscaping: In all districts, the joint planning and zoning
commission or zoning administrator shall have the authority to impose
reasonable landscaping requirements surrounding the equipment. Required
landscaping shall be consistent with surrounding vegetation and shall be
maintained by the facility owner. The joint planning and zoning commission or
zoning administrator may choose to not require landscaping for sites that are
not visible from the public right of way or adjacent property or in instances
where in the judgment of the joint planning and zoning commission or zoning
administrator, landscaping is not appropriate or necessary.
   (E)   Electromagnetic Interference:
      1.   In the event of electromagnetic interference to collocated or nearby
(within 100 feet) installations, the owner, operator, or installer of the most
recent or newest installation shall resolve the issue within five (5) calendar
days of being informed of, or becoming aware of, the interference.
      2.   In the event of electromagnetic interference to public safety,
emergency medical, emergency management, and/or public works communications,
the interfering signal shall immediately be shut off and the problem corrected
by the owner, operator, or installer, upon notification or upon becoming aware
of the problem.
      3.   Interference issues involving consumer electronics (radios,
televisions, entertainment systems, etc.) are not included in this section, and
should be resolved between the parties involved or affected. (Ord. 3094, 3-17-
2015)
10-15-26: SWIMMING POOLS:
All swimming pools erected in the city shall comply with the swimming pool
ordinance 1  and the following requirements:
Minimum side yard setbacks shall comply with the provisions of the district.
Furthermore, the pool fence must not be built within the required front yard or
required corner lot side yard. Rear yard setbacks shall not be less than six
feet (6') between pool wall and any building on the lot. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 4, chapter 3 of this code.
10-15-27: FENCES, WALLS, BARRIERS AND OTHER OBSTRUCTIONS:
All fences of any nature, type or description located in the City shall conform
to the following regulations:
It shall be unlawful to erect, construct, or alter, or cause to be erected,
constructed, or altered, any fence, wall, barrier or other obstruction, without
a permit. The fee for a permit hereunder shall be ten dollars ($10.00). All
shall be erected in compliance with this section. As applicable, the following
minimum regulations shall apply:
   (A)   All fences hereafter erected shall be of an ornamental nature. Barbed
wire, spikes, nails, any other sharp point or instrument of any kind on top or
on the sides of any fence, or electric current or charge in said fence is
prohibited without the written permission of the Zoning Administrator. Barbed
wire cradles may be placed on top of fences enclosing public buildings or as
deemed necessary in the interest of public safety.
   (B)   No fence, wall, structure, planting, sign, or obstruction shall be
erected, established, or maintained on any corner lot which will obstruct the
view of a driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection, excepting that
shade trees are permitted where all branches are not less than seven feet (7')
above the road level. Such unobstructed corner shall mean a triangular area
formed by the street curb lines or existing street edge if no curb line exists
and line connecting them at points twenty five feet (25') from the intersection
of the street lines, or in the case of a rounded corner, from the intersection
of the street lines, as extended.
   (C)   No fence shall exceed three feet (3') in height located within the
minimum front yard setbacks established for buildings.
   (D)   Fences located in the side yards and rear yards in Residence Districts
shall not exceed six feet (6') in height.
   (E)   Wherever property lines are known to exist fences should be erected up
to them. This section shall not apply to pool enclosures, decorative or garden
type fences located within a property but shall be applicable to all perimeter
fences.
   (F)   No fence located within Residence Districts shall be located closer
than twelve inches (12") from any alley, driveway, or public sidewalk.
   (G)   Fences in Industrially zoned areas or in other districts as required
for public safety may exceed six feet (6') in height. Fences in Industrially
zoned areas must provide a sight barrier and comply with section
10-11-2 of this title.
   (H)   Variances from the requirements of this section may be requested and
obtained in conformity with variance procedures from time to time set forth in
this title.
   (I)   A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less
than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
Each and every day or portion thereof, during which a violation continues shall
be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 4145, 5-21-2019)
10-15-28: BUFFER STRIPS:
Wherever a greenbelt is required, it shall be made fertile and be planted
within six (6) months from the date of issuance of a permit for use, and
thereafter reasonably maintained with permanent materials to provide a suitable
screen from adjacent properties in conformance with the following standards:
   (A)   Minimum planting width shall be three feet (3').
   (B)   Plant materials, if adjacent to a fence line, shall not be placed
closer than four feet (4').
   (C)   Plant materials shall be in sufficient density and height to provide
for an effective screening of view on a year round basis from adjacent
properties. A mixture of evergreen and deciduous plant materials which would
include between twenty percent (20%) and forty percent (40%) evergreen is
suggested. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-15-29: WASTE, GARBAGE, AND RUBBISH:
No garbage, sewage, filth, refuse, or other obnoxious matter shall be kept in
open containers or piled on the open ground. No business or industrial use
shall permit waste materials, cans, cartons, etc., to be scattered over open
ground. All waste materials must be periodically disposed of at least once in
each thirty (30) day period. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-15-30: WASTE RECEPTACLES:
The occupant or occupants of every building where waste accumulates, and in
case of a semidetached or terraced building, the owner, lessor or agent, shall
cause to be provided for said building, kept clean and in place, proper
receptacles for said wastes, either stationary or portable. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-15-31: STORAGE, DUMPING OF WASTE, JUNK, OR GARBAGE:
The use of land for the storage or collection or accumulation of wood, and
other used materials, or for the dumping or disposal of scrap iron, junk,
automobiles, trucks, boats, machinery, tires, paper, garbage, rubbish, or other
refuse or of ashes, slag, or other industrial wastes or byproducts shall not be
permitted in any district, except under a temporary certificate from the zoning
administrator after approval of the joint planning and zoning commission and
Illinois environmental protection agency which may be issued in appropriate
cases upon the filing of an application accompanied by a suitable agreement and
bond that such dumping or disposal will not pollute the waters of the city or
cause stagnant water to collect, or leave the surface of the land, at the
expiration date of such permit, in an unstable condition or unfit for the
growing of turf or for other land uses permitted in the district in which such
dumping occurs. The dumping of dirt, sand, rock, or other material excavated
from the earth is permitted in any district provided the surface of such
materials is graded within a reasonable time in a manner preventing the
collection of stagnant water and which leaves the ground surface in a condition
suitable for the growing of turf or for other land uses permitted in the
district. (Ord. 567, 11-1976; amd. Ord. 3041, 12-3-2013)
10-15-32: REMOVAL OF SOIL, SAND, OR OTHER MATERIAL:
The use of land for the removal of topsoil, sand, gravel, or other material
from the land is not permitted in any district except under a certificate from
the zoning administrator, after approval by the city engineer that such removal
of soil will not be below the normal grade established from the nearest
existing or proposed street, when such building grade has been established and
approved by the zoning administrator for which a certificate may be issued in
appropriate cases upon the filing of an application accompanied by a suitable
agreement or bond that such removal will not cause water to collect or leave
the surface of the land at the expiration date of such permit in an unstable
condition or unfit for the growing of turf or for other land uses permitted in
the district in which such removal occurs. This regulation shall not prohibit
the normal removal of soil for the construction of an approved building or
structure when such plans have been approved by the building inspector, and a
building permit has been issued for said building. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-15-33: ZONING DISTRICT CLASSIFICATION OF AREAS ANNEXED SUBSEQUENT TO THE
EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS CHAPTER:
Areas which shall be annexed to the city of Canton after this chapter shall
take effect shall automatically be rezoned CO-1, if public, or AG-1, if
private. If uses other than those permitted by the CO-1 or AG-1 district are
contemplated, a separate rezoning application must be submitted and be
subjected to review and approval procedures set forth elsewhere in this
chapter. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-15-34: SEWER CONNECTIONS:
In all instances where building is permitted under this chapter on property not
now served with a sanitary sewer line, an occupancy permit may be granted
without benefit of sanitary service. However, the permit will be conditioned on
the applicant's agreement to, in the future, connect to any sanitary sewer line
that is constructed within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the subject
property. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-15-35: POST OFFICE BOXES:
No postal box, either drop off or storage, shall be placed without prior
approval by the city council after hearing and recommendation by the joint
planning and zoning commission as to location in regard to vehicular
accessibility. (Ord. 567, 11-1976; amd. Ord. 3041, 12-3-2013)
10-15-36: EFFECTIVE REZONING DATE:
In those instances where a particular parcel of land is rezoned, the petition
for rezoning shall be accompanied by exhibits and documentation required for
obtaining a zoning compliance certificate 1 . Upon passage of the ordinance by
the council, approving the rezoning petition, a zoning compliance certificate
shall be granted. The effective date of rezoning ordinance shall be the date of
the construction start, i.e., initial excavation or placement of the initial
structural components. If the construction start fails to take place within six
(6) months from the grant of the zoning compliance certificate, the ordinance
shall not take effect, and the property shall continue to be subject to zoning
in effect at the time of the filing of the petition. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 17 of this title.
CHAPTER 15.1
HOME OCCUPATIONS
SECTION:
10-15.1-1: Home Occupation Defined
10-15.1-2: Terms Defined
10-15.1-3: Uses Allowed
10-15.1-4: Application Procedure
10-15.1-5: Guidelines
10-15.1-6: Permit
10-15.1-7: Exemptions
10-15.1-8: Periodic Review
10-15.1-9: Fees And Costs
10-15.1-10: Revocation
10-15.1-11: Penalty
10-15.1-12: Existing Home Occupations
10-15.1-13: Childcare Provisions
10-15.1-14: Severability Clause
10-15.1-1: HOME OCCUPATION DEFINED:
A "home occupation" is an occupation or profession (but not a business)
conducted entirely within a dwelling or garage and carried on by the residents
legally residing in such dwelling. Such occupation or profession shall be
clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential
purposes. Home occupations may not be conducted upon or in any accessory
building. A home occupation shall be allowed only in districts zoned for
residential purposes. (Ord. 1115-A, 8-19-1986)
10-15.1-2: TERMS DEFINED:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A building or structure used for the benefit of the main
building or dwelling; e.g., toolshed, outbuildings.
BUSINESS: A vocation, trade, or calling for profit which principally takes up
one's time, thought, and energies wherein items, property, or things are sold
at either retail or wholesale.
DWELLING: The house or other structure in which a person or persons live; a
residence; abode; habitation. A dwelling does not include accessory buildings,
garages, or other structures or buildings.
FLOOR AREA: The area included within the surrounding exterior walls of a
building or portion thereof, exclusive of vent shafts and courts. The floor
area of a building, or portion thereof, not provided with surrounding exterior
walls shall be the usable area under the horizontal projection of the roof or
floor above.
GARAGE: A building, or a portion of a building, not more than one thousand
(1,000) square feet in area, in which only motor vehicles used by the occupant
of the building or buildings on the premises are stored or kept.
OCCUPANT: A person having lawful possession of and possessory rights in and to
the dwelling. That person who has the lawful use, possession, or control of the
dwelling.
OCCUPATION: A vocation, trade, or calling for profit which principally takes up
one's time, thought, and energies; especially, one's regular employment,
excluding the sale at retail or wholesale of property, real or personal. As a
prerequisite, an occupation frequently is typified by a specialized trades
course or courses. The labor and skill involved is predominately physical or
manual, rather than mental or intellectual.
PREMISES: The land and tenements; the estate, including the land and buildings
thereon.
PROFESSION: A vocation, calling, or employment involving labor, skill,
education, special knowledge, and compensation for profit, but the labor and
skill involved is predominately mental or intellectual, rather than physical or
manual. As a prerequisite, a profession usually is typified by long and
intensive academic preparation beyond the undergraduate level. (Ord. 1115-A, 8-
19-1986)
10-15.1-3: USES ALLOWED:
A home occupation is allowed only if an occupant of the premises has obtained a
home occupation permit as required by this chapter. The allowance of home
occupations is not intended to nor shall it be construed to abrogate or
otherwise modify other zoning restrictions, subdivision restrictions or
covenants, or other restrictions that may apply to property for which a home
occupation permit is granted. (Ord. 1115-A, 8-19-1986)
10-15.1-4: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
Any person desiring to obtain a permit for a home occupation shall make an
application for same with the planning and zoning commission of the city. The
application shall be made on such forms as required by the city. There shall be
a nonrefundable fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the initial application.
(Ord. 1115-A, 8-19-1986)
10-15.1-5: GUIDELINES:
A person obtaining a home occupation permit shall operate and conduct same in
conformity with all of the following conditions unless a waiver pursuant to
subsection (N) of this section is granted:
   (A)   The home occupation shall be carried on only in the dwelling and/or
garage subject to the following restrictions:
      1.   In the dwelling, the area used for a home occupation shall not
exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total gross floor area.
      2.   The garage may be used for home occupation purposes provided that
the area used does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the gross ground floor
area of the garage, and further provided that such usage does not cause the
garage to be permanently unusable for parking purposes.
      3.   In no event shall the total area used for a home occupation in the
dwelling and garage exceed three hundred (300) square feet.
   (B)   No persons other than the people legally residing at the premises
shall be employed for a salary, commission or upon any other remunerative
basis; nor shall any such person report for work at or near the premises.
   (C)   No mechanical or electrical equipment shall be used in a home
occupation other than that which is customarily used for domestic or hobby
purposes.
   (D)   No exterior evidence or indication that a home occupation is being
conducted on the premises is allowed, nor shall any variance for signs for a
home occupation be allowed, except that one nonilluminated nameplate, not more
than two (2) square feet in area, may be attached to the dwelling or garage in
which the home occupation is located, which nameplate shall contain only the
name and occupation or profession of the permit holder.
   (E)   The home occupation shall not generate heat, noise, glare, vibration,
smoke emission, noxious or toxic fumes, odors, vapors, or electrical
interference which are readily detectable at any point on the boundaries of the
premises.
   (F)   The home occupation shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles
for the delivery of materials to or from the premises, except that reasonable
deliveries for uses as set forth in subsection 10-15.1-7(D) of this chapter are
allowed.
   (G)   No article shall be sold or offered for sale on the premises except
such as is produced on the premises or is provided incidental to the service or
profession conducted therein.
   (H)   Exterior storage of material or equipment is expressly prohibited.
   (I)   Only one home occupation permit per premises shall be allowed.
   (J)   The proposed home occupation use shall be such that it will not
adversely affect other property in the neighborhood.
   (K)   Adequate facilities, access roads, drainage, and other necessary
supporting facilities are available or will, if necessary, be provided by the
applicant.
   (L)   Any additional traffic and/or parking problems reasonably expected to
be generated by the one occupation shall not be such that it could be
reasonably expected to adversely affect the residential character of the
neighborhood, unduly impede surrounding traffic flows, or create hazardous or
unsafe conditions in the neighborhood.
   (M)   The home occupation shall comply with all applicable federal, state,
county and city laws, rules, regulations, and ordinances.
   (N)   A person may be entitled to a waiver of one or more of the guidelines
set forth in subsections (A) through (L), inclusive, of this section upon the
showing of all of the following:
      1.   That such waiver is necessary because strict compliance with all of
the guidelines would prohibit the granting of a home occupation permit as
requested.
      2.   That there is no other practical method in which the applicant could
conduct the home occupation without the allowance of a waiver.
      3.   That strict compliance with all of the guidelines would cause a
hardship to the applicant, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience.
      4.   The allowance of a waiver shall not be in derogation of any of the
guidelines set forth in subsections (J) through (M), inclusive, of this
section; and the applicant shall show by clear and convincing evidence the
necessity for granting a waiver.
   (O)   Such other terms and conditions as may be imposed upon the granting of
a home occupation permit. (Ord. 1115-A, 8-19-1986)
10-15.1-6: PERMIT:
In the event an application is approved, then a home occupation permit shall be
issued to the applicant. Said permit shall apply only to the applicant,
occupation, and premises stated in the application. The permit is
nontransferable and nonassignable and shall remain in full force and effect
unless revoked pursuant to section 10-15.1-10 of this chapter. Said permit
shall also be deemed to be automatically revoked upon the earliest of the
following: the applicant dies; the applicant moves from the premises where the
permit was granted; or the applicant otherwise ceases engaging in the home
occupation.
The permit upon original issuance shall be valid for a period of twenty four
(24) months from and including the date of its issuance. The permit may be (but
need not be) renewed for a like period of time upon reapplication conforming to
the requirements of original application.
The permit shall be prominently and publicly displayed in that portion of the
premises affected by the permit. (Ord. 1115-A, 8-19-1986)
10-15.1-7: EXEMPTIONS:
A person shall not be considered to be engaged in a home occupation under the
following circumstances:
   (A)   The use of a residence by a physician, surgeon, dentist, lawyer,
clergyman, or other professional person for consultation or emergency
treatment, but not for the general practice of the profession; nor shall such
usage be on a routine or regular basis. Such use shall not be considered exempt
if a person advertises his or her availability for consultation at the
residence.
   (B)   The listing of the premises in a telephone book or similar directory
whereby a business name is used, which in and of itself shall not be considered
to mean that a person is engaging in a home occupation.
   (C)   A person using a premises as defined and allowed in this section shall
not engage in or permit other persons to visit the premises for the purpose of
conducting or transacting business except on a sporadic basis. It is the intent
of this section to prohibit such usage that would occur on a regular basis or
as a part of the conducting of a business but not otherwise isolated or
sporadic visits.
   (D)   Any person engaged in wholesaling, jobbing, or retail business, if
said activity is conducted entirely by mail and/or telephone.
   (E)   Teaching or other types of instruction shall not be considered a home
occupation provided same is limited to one pupil at a time.
   (F)   The aforesaid activities described in this section shall be considered
exempt only if the person conducting same is not engaged in any activity that
would otherwise be prohibited by section 10-15.1-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 1115-
A, 8-19-1986)
10-15.1-8: PERIODIC REVIEW:
The planning and zoning commission shall annually review all outstanding home
occupation special use permits for compliance with the terms and conditions of
this chapter and for compliance with the terms and conditions of the permit.
Notice by publication shall be given of the review in the same manner as notice
by publication of hearing on original applications. Should the commission find
as a result of such a review that the permit holder is not or has not complied
as aforesaid, the commission may either: a) grant a reasonable period of time
not to exceed sixty (60) days for the permit holder to come into compliance and
to prove compliance at a subsequent review; b) recommend to the city council
that the permit be revoked; or c) both. (Ord. 1115-A, 8-19-1986)
10-15.1-9: FEES AND COSTS:
The original applicant or permit holder shall be charged and shall pay all
reasonable costs and expenses incurred by or on behalf of the commission or
city council in the investigation of the original applications and in the
review of permit holders. Examples of such costs are, but are not limited to:
the costs of professional assistance such as by the city engineer or the city
attorney; the cost of city support staff; and the cost of notice by
publication. Failure of the applicant or permit holder to pay all such costs
within thirty (30) days of the costs being billed shall constitute an automatic
revocation of the permit. (Ord. 1115-A, 8-19-1986)
10-15.1-10: REVOCATION:
In the event a person is granted a home occupation permit and such person is
convicted of violating any of the provisions of the title or of violating any
other provision of this code, then such home occupation permit shall be
automatically revoked. (Ord. 1115-A, 8-19-1986)
10-15.1-11: PENALTY:
Any person who conducts a home occupation in violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day that a
violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
In addition to the foregoing penalty provisions, the proper authorities of the
city may institute any appropriate action or proceedings, including the
obtaining of an injunction to prevent such further activity. The defendant in
any such action shall be responsible for the reasonable costs of such action,
to include, but not limited to, the city's court costs and attorney fees. Such
sums shall be made a part of any judgment entered and shall be enforceable as
part of the final judgment. (Ord. 1115-A, 8-19-1986)
10-15.1-12: EXISTING HOME OCCUPATIONS:
Any person engaged in a home occupation at the time of passage of this chapter
shall have a period of sixty (60) days from said date to apply for a home
occupation permit subject to the following:
   (A)   The applicant must provide adequate proof that he or she has been
engaged in a home occupation prior to the date this chapter was passed.
   (B)   The applicant must clearly state the home occupation and premises
involved.
   (C)   In the event an applicant is unable to comply with any or all of the
provisions of section 10-15.1-5 of this chapter, then such applicant shall in
his or her application clearly set forth which provisions he or she cannot
comply with and the reasons therefor.
The planning and zoning commission, determining whether or not to recommend the
waiver of any or all of the provisions of section 10-15.1-5 of this chapter,
shall use the following criteria:
      1.   The hardship upon the applicant if a waiver is not granted.
      2.   The history of the applicant's business and whether it has had any
detrimental effect on the residential character of the neighborhood.
      3.   Whether the granting of the waiver will have a detrimental effect
upon the residential character of the neighborhood.
   (D)   Any applicant who obtains a home occupation permit under these
provisions and who subsequently conducts same in violation of any of the terms
and conditions of this chapter or in violation of any waivers granted hereunder
shall be subject to all of the penalty and revocation procedures of this
chapter.
   (E)   The application to be made hereunder shall be made to the planning and
zoning commission and shall not require the payment of any fee if made within
the aforesaid sixty (60) day period.
   (F)   Any person who has previously obtained a special use permit pursuant
to the provisions of prior law shall not be required to obtain a home
occupation permit and may continue to engage in such home occupation subject to
the provisions of the prior law and such conditions as may have been imposed
upon the granting of such special use permit. (Ord. 1115-A, 8-19-1986)
10-15.1-13: CHILDCARE PROVISIONS:
   (A)   A person providing childcare for gain on a regular basis for unrelated
persons shall not be considered engaged in a home occupation provided said
person provides such care for no more than three (3) persons at a time.
   (B)   A person providing childcare for gain on a regular basis for unrelated
persons and further provided that such care is for four (4) through seven (7)
persons at a time shall be required to obtain a home occupation permit. Said
permit shall be subject to all other provisions of this chapter except that the
provision in subsection 10-15.1-5(A) of this chapter shall not apply.
   (C)   A person who desires to provide childcare for gain for unrelated
persons and for eight (8) or more persons at a time shall apply for a special
use permit as provided for in other provisions of this code and shall not be
eligible for a home occupation permit.
   (D)   For purposes of this section all terms that are used herein which are
defined in the child care act of 1969 shall have the same meaning as defined in
said act. Any permit(s) required by the child care act of 1969 shall be
acquired before the issuance of any permit pursuant to this chapter. (Ord.
1115-A, 8-19-1986)
10-15.1-14: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase
in this chapter, or any part thereof, or application thereof to any person,
firm, corporation, public agency, or circumstance, is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this chapter or any part thereof. It is hereby
declared to be the legislative intent of the board of trustees that this
chapter would have been adopted had such unconstitutional or invalid provision,
clause, sentence, paragraph, section, or part thereof not then been included.
(Ord. 1115-A, 8-19-1986)
CHAPTER 15.2
BUILDING, SITE, AND OPERATIONAL PLANS AND DESIGN GUIDELINES
SECTION:
10-15.2-1: Authority
10-15.2-2: Purpose
10-15.2-3: Intent
10-15.2-4: Applicability
10-15.2-5: Exemptions
10-15.2-6: Review Process
10-15.2-7: BSO Plan Submittal Requirements
10-15.2-8: Deviations And Modifications
10-15.2-9: Conflicting Provisions
10-15.2-10: Site Design Standards
10-15.2-11: Architectural Guidelines
10-15.2-12: Signage
10-15.2-13: Compliance
10-15.2-14: Modification Of An Approved BSO Plan
10-15.2-1: AUTHORITY:
This chapter is established pursuant to the authority conferred by 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11 through 13-1 of the Illinois municipal code. (Ord. 1831,
4-19-2005)
10-15.2-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety, and
welfare by aiding, to the maximum extent practicable, the joint planning and
zoning commission in the planning, design, and redesign of the built
environment of the city.
The provisions of this chapter are designed to ensure that all proposed land
use and development activity complies with the requirements of this chapter.
Specifically, this chapter requires that the initiation of all development
activity (including building permits, zoning certificates, occupancy permits
for a change of use of an existing lot or structure where there is contemplated
a site plan revision, clear cutting, grading or filling) require the approval
of building, site and operational plans (herein referred to as BSO plans) by
the city staff before the building, occupancy, and zoning permits can be
issued. (Ord. 3078, 9-16-2014)
10-15.2-3: INTENT:
The intent of this chapter is to enhance and unify the city's visual character
while avoiding monotony and repetition. These standards will also assist in
fostering sound, functional, attractive and quality development according to
the city's goals, objectives, and policies for its physical growth and change,
as expressed in this chapter. (Ord. 1831, 4-19-2005)
10-15.2-4: APPLICABILITY:
Unless exempt under section 10-15.2-5, "Exemptions", of this chapter, the
following types of developments in the city of Canton shall be subject to the
provisions of this chapter:
   (A)   Development of residential land uses consisting of three (3) or more
attached dwelling units per building, hereinafter defined as "multi-family
residences".
   (B)   Development of all projects in which a principal use is a commercial,
industrial, or institutional use.
   (C)   Any new accessory use to one of the principal uses listed in
subsection (A) or (B) of this section, including, but not limited to, signage,
lighting, accessory buildings over three hundred (300) square feet in floor
area, telecommunications facilities, and exterior building alterations.
   (D)   Any addition to an existing use listed in subsection (A) or (B) of
this section which existed as of April 19, 2005, that results in a total
expansion of at least twenty five percent (25%) in:
      1.   Building floor area,
      2.   Outdoor storage area, or
      3.   Parking lot area over the area.
   (E)   Where developments under subsection (C) or (D) of this section are
proposed, the project, building, and site shall comply with the provisions of
this chapter to the extent practical, given existing site and building
conditions. (Ord. 1831, 4-19-2005)
10-15.2-5: EXEMPTIONS:
All single-family detached and two-family residences shall be exempted from the
provisions of this chapter. Additionally, this chapter shall not apply to any
building or land use that is listed as a permitted use within the conservation
and agriculture districts in the city of Canton zoning code. (Ord. 1831, 4-19-
2005)
10-15.2-6: REVIEW PROCESS:
   (A)   Initiation Of Request For BSO Plan Approval: Procedures for approval
of a BSO plan shall be initiated by the owner(s) of the subject property, or
their legally authorized representative(s).
   (B)   Preapplication Meeting: The petitioner is encouraged, but not
required, to first meet with the zoning administrator and other applicable city
staff to discuss preliminary concepts and plans for the development. Guidance
will be provided to the petitioner on technical requirements and procedures,
and a timetable for project review may be discussed.
   (C)   Application Requirements: Petitioner shall submit a complete BSO plan
application as outlined in section 10-15.2-7, "BSO Plan Submittal
Requirements", of this chapter, for staff review, accompanied by all fees and
deposits which from time to time may be adopted by the city council and in
effect at the time of submittal.
   (D)   Project Commencement: No building permit shall be issued and no
development project under the jurisdiction of this chapter shall commence
construction until the building inspector has approved the BSO plan.
   (E)   Appeals: Final actions of staff review under this chapter shall be
permitted to be appealed as administrative interpretations to the joint
planning and zoning commission. Actions of the full joint planning and zoning
commission shall be permitted to be appealed to the city council. (Ord. 3078,
9-16-2014)
10-15.2-7: BSO PLAN SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
All building, site, and operational plan applications for review shall contain
or include the plans listed in this section, and such other information as
deemed necessary for consideration or as waived by the joint planning and
zoning commission, zoning administrator, or the city council. All plans shall
be drawn to a recognized scale, and include a north arrow, date of preparation,
and contact information. (Ord. 3078, 9-16-2014)
   (A)   Written Description: A narrative which outlines the following:
      1.   Full name and contact information of the petitioner and/or agent,
and property owner, if different;
      2.   Full name and contact information of petitioner's engineers,
surveyors, architects, and other design professionals used in BSO plan
preparation;
      3.   Existing zoning district(s) and proposed zoning district(s) if
different;
      4.   Current land uses present on the subject property;
      5.   Proposed land uses for the subject property;
      6.   Land use designation(s) as depicted on the adopted comprehensive
plan;
      7.   Description of existing environmental features existing on the
property;
      8.   Projected number of residents, employees, and/or daily customers;
      9.   Proposed amount of dwelling units, floor area, open space area, and
landscape surface area, expressed in square feet and acreage to the nearest
one-hundredth of an acre;
      10.   Resulting site density, floor area ratio as calculated using the
criteria established in this title, and green space;
      11.   Operational considerations relating to hours of operation,
projected normal and peak water usage, sanitary sewer or septic loadings;
      12.   Traffic generation;
      13.   Operational considerations relating to potential nuisance creation
pertaining to the appropriate design of street access, traffic visibility,
parking, loading, exterior storage, exterior lighting, vibration, noise, air
pollution, odor, electromagnetic radiation, glare and heat, fire and explosion,
toxic or noxious materials, waste materials, drainage, and hazardous materials;
      14.   Material safety data sheets (MSDS) for all materials anticipated to
be used or stored on site;
      15.   Exterior building and fencing materials;
      16.   Possible future expansion and related implications for subsections
(A)1 through (A)15 of this section; and (Ord. 1831, 4-19-2005)
      17.   Any other information pertinent to adequate understanding by the
joint planning and zoning commission or city staff of the intended use and its
relation to nearby properties. (Ord. 1831, 4-19-2005; amd. Ord. 3078, 9-16-
2014)
   (B)   Site Plan: Illustrating, where applicable:
      1.   Lot area and current zoning of the site;
      2.   All existing and proposed lot lines, labeling dimensions, required
minimum setbacks for buildings and other structures;
      3.   Wetlands, shoreland zoning areas, and floodplains;
      4.   Slopes of greater than twelve percent (12%);
      5.   Existing and proposed buildings, indicating gross floor area and
capacity;
      6.   Other structures, such as accessory structures, fences, etc.;
      7.   Parking lots, vehicle and pedestrian circulation and driveway areas,
loading areas, and proposed ingress and egress to the site;
      8.   Calculations for determining the number of off street parking spaces
as required by the Fulton County zoning code;
      9.   Outdoor storage areas, dumpsters, and proposed screening;
      10.   Adjacent streets and land uses, including all buildings within
fifty feet (50') of the site's boundaries.
   (C)   Tree Survey Plan: As outlined in subsection 10-15.2-10(A)2 of this
chapter.
   (D)   Landscape Plan: All existing plantings and all proposed new landscape
plantings for the site, indicating their locations, quantities, species, size
at time of planting, and size at maturity.
   (E)   Grading, Erosion Control, And Stormwater Plans: As required to meet
all applicable city, county, and state requirements, and including existing and
proposed surface elevations of the lot. (Ord. 1831, 4-19-2005)
   (F)   Building Elevations: Depicting and describing the dimensions, colors,
and materials proposed for all exterior building sides and roofs, along with
building mounted lighting, signs, and mechanical units. The joint planning and
zoning commission may also require building material samples. (Ord. 1831, 4-19-
2005; amd. Ord. 3078, 9-16-2014)
   (G)   Sign Plan: Including the location, height, dimensions, color,
materials, lighting and sign copy area of all proposed exterior signage.
   (H)   Exterior Lighting Plan: Applicants shall submit a unified lighting
plan with final plan applications for all commercial developments subject to
these lighting standards. Illustrating the location, height, type, design,
orientation, anchorage, and wattage of all proposed outdoor lighting, and
including a photometric plan for projects proposed to have more than three (3)
outdoor lighting fixtures. A photometric plan typically prepared by a lighting
professional and shows spot illumination levels at regularly spaced intervals
on the lot and at all lot lines, along with average proposed illumination
levels on the lot as a whole to show compliance with the lighting standards is
required. The calculations shall be measured at grade for lighting levels
within the development site. A cut sheet of proposed fixtures, including a
candlepower distribution curve, shall also be submitted. All development
lighting proposals shall comply with the criteria of the Illuminating
Engineering Society (IES) recommendations for outdoor lighting. (Ord. 1831, 4-
19-2005)
10-15.2-8: DEVIATIONS AND MODIFICATIONS:
The joint planning and zoning commission or city council may waive or modify
any design standard contained in this chapter to encourage the implementation
of alternative or innovative practices that implement the intent of the
modified standard(s) and provide equivalent public benefits without significant
adverse impacts on surrounding development. The joint planning and zoning
commission or city council may grant any such modifications, if approved by a
simple majority of all members in attendance.
In granting a modification, the joint planning and zoning commission or city
council may require conditions that will substantially secure the objectives of
the modified standard and that will substantially mitigate any potential
adverse impact on the environment or on adjacent properties, including, but not
limited to, additional landscaping or buffering. (Ord. 3078, 9-16-2014)
10-15.2-9: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
If the provisions of this chapter are inconsistent with one another, or if they
conflict with provisions found in other adopted codes, ordinances, or
regulations of the city of Canton or Fulton County, the more restrictive
provision will control unless otherwise expressly provided. (Ord. 1831, 4-19-
2005)
10-15.2-10: SITE DESIGN STANDARDS:
The following design standards shall be applied in the preparation of plans as
specified in section 10-15.2-7, "BSO Plan Submittal Requirements", of this
chapter, and shall be used by the city staff and the joint planning and zoning
commission to evaluate such plans. (Ord. 3078, 9-16-2014)
   (A)   Site Preparation Requirements:
      1.   Engineering:
         (a)   Grading: Modifications to preexisting landforms, terrain, and
vegetation shall be minimized. Site grading shall reflect the natural contours
of the land and the contours of adjacent properties. Abrupt or unnatural
appearing grading design shall not be permitted. Created slopes shall be no
steeper than three vertical feet for every one horizontal foot (3:1).
         (b)   Retaining Walls: Where a retaining wall is necessary, it shall
be designed to not exceed eight feet (8') in total height, shall be set back
from lot lines, and shall be constructed with stone or masonry. Terracing shall
be considered as an alternative to the use of tall or prominent retaining
walls, particularly in highly visible areas on hillsides. Terraces within
staggered retaining walls shall be at least four feet (4') in width and
landscaped.
         (c)   Drainage: Development shall be planned and constructed so that
all surface drainage meets the standards of applicable city, county, and state
erosion control and stormwater management regulations, and does not adversely
affect neighboring properties. Stormwater management facilities, such as basins
and conveyance routes, shall be located, designed, and landscaped to be an
integral and attractive part of the site, with an emphasis on curvilinear
shapes and natural edge vegetation. (Ord. 1831, 4-19-2005)
      2.   Tree Preservation:
         (a)   The site plan shall be designed to preserve a majority of
existing high quality, mature, healthy, nonplantation trees and woodlands.
"Mature trees" are defined as trees with a diameter at breast height (dbh) of
over twelve inches (12"), and "woodlands" are defined as nonplantation,
continuous wooded areas where at least fifty percent (50%) of the trees meet
this dbh standard. Such trees and woodlands shall be included in the site plan
submittal under subsection 10-15.2-7(B) of this chapter. The joint planning and
zoning commission may allow for credit against the landscaping requirements in
subsection 10-15.2-10(B)3 of this chapter for preserved mature trees and
woodlands. (Ord. 1831, 4-19-2005; amd. Ord. 3078, 9-16-2014)
         (b)   Trees identified for preservation on the approved site plan
shall be protected during construction with barrier fencing installed near the
drip line. If a tree or woodland designated for preservation is, in fact,
removed or substantially damaged during site clearing, grading, or
construction, the property owner shall replace the removed or damaged tree with
a new tree of similar species or with a species native to Fulton County, and
with a minimum dbh of 2.5 inches.
   (B)   Site Layout/Development Pattern:
      1.   Building Orientation/Placement:
         (a)   Orientation: The proposed building orientation should respect
the orientation of surrounding buildings and the orientation of surrounding
streets. Building facades shall be oriented parallel to the primary abutting
street. Buildings shall be oriented so that entrances are clearly identifiable
and directly accessible from the street and parking areas.
         (b)   Placement: Building and structures shall be sited to ensure that
site circulation promotes contiguous pedestrian and vehicle circulation
patterns and that parking areas provide safe and efficient access to buildings.
         (c)   Surroundings: Buildings shall relate appropriately to
surrounding developments and streets and create a cohesive visual identity and
attractive street scene.
         (d)   Setbacks; Active Walls: Deep building setbacks behind large
expanses of parking areas or vacant land shall be avoided. For multi-tenant
buildings, the "active" wall shall be oriented toward the primary abutting
street. The "active" wall shall be the side of the building containing the
majority of storefronts, customer entrances, and windows.
         (e)   Multiple Building Development Layouts: Linear, "strip
commercial" development patterns shall be avoided. Buildings and development
shall be arranged and grouped so that their orientation complements adjacent,
existing development and frames the corner of an adjacent street intersection,
pedestrian and/or vehicle accessway within the development site; and parking
areas, public spaces, or other site amenities.
         (f)   Traditional Neighborhood Development: This is intended to
promote the development and redevelopment of land through compact, mixed use
neighborhoods where residential, commercial and civic buildings are within
close proximity to each other; with interconnected circulation and open space
systems; and with careful attention to the design, layout, and relationships
between different land uses.
      2.   Site Access, Circulation, And Parking Requirements:
         (a)   Access And Circulation: All developments shall provide safe,
efficient, and convenient vehicular and pedestrian access and circulation
patterns within and between buildings, both within the site and to adjacent
sites. All elements of the site design shall accommodate access requirements of
emergency vehicles and services.
         (b)   Primary Entrances: The number and location of vehicle entrances
shall be consistent with the existing or anticipated design of adjacent
streets. The specific location of primary vehicle entrances are subject to the
approval of the Illinois department of transportation, Fulton County highway
department, and/or the city of Canton and will be largely dependent on: the
location of existing or planned median breaks; separation requirements between
the entrance and major intersections; separation requirements between adjacent
entrances (or minor intersections); the need to provide shared access to
adjacent parcels of land; the need to align with previously approved or
constructed access points on the opposite side of the street; and the minimum
number of entrances needed to move traffic onto and off the site safely and
efficiently.
         (c)   Internal Circulation: Internal vehicle circulation patterns
shall provide a clear and direct path to the principal customer entrance of the
primary building, to outlot sites, and to on site and adjacent parking areas.
         (d)   On Site Delivery Circulation And Loading: Developments shall be
required to provide loading and delivery facilities separate from customer
parking and pedestrian areas.
         (e)   Cross Access To Adjacent Properties: To the maximum extent
feasible, connections between development sites shall be provided by providing
access points continuous to the adjacent development. The city may require
access easements to ensure that all development sites and adjacent parcels are
afforded adequate access in perpetuity.
         (f)   Pedestrian/Bicycle Facilities: A system of walkways shall
provide direct access and connections to and between building entrances,
parking lots, and sidewalks and paths in public rights of way or adjacent
properties. Where walkways cross vehicular routes, striping or other
appropriate markings shall be provided to improve visibility and safety.
Convenient bicycle parking lots and facilities shall be provided, such as a
bicycle rack close to the main customer and/or employee entrance.
         (g)   Outdoor Storage Of Materials And Products: Site plan design
shall consider areas to store vehicles, manufactured goods and raw materials to
ensure minimal impact on neighboring uses and the public. Outdoor storage shall
be prohibited in required front, side, and rear yards. Permanent outdoor
storage shall be screened by landscaping or materials compatible with the
building's architecture as outlined in subsection (B)3, "Landscaping And
Screening", of this section.
         (h)   Off Street Parking Requirements: All developments shall comply
with chapter 14 of this title.
         (i)   Off Street Parking Layout And Design:
            (1)   Siting Requirements: A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the
off street surface parking spaces provided for all uses contained in the
development's primary building shall be located other than between the front
facade of the primary building and the primary abutting street (e.g., to the
rear or side of the principal building(s)).
            (2)   Layout And Design: The parking field in which the main
activities of parking and travel are conducted shall have a landscape island
with a minimum size of two hundred (200) square feet (10 feet by 20 feet) at
the minimum rate of one island for every ten (10) parking spaces. Landscaping
is addressed in subsection (B)3 of this section.
      3.   Landscaping And Screening:
         (a)   Entryways: Development entryways shall be planted with
ornamental plant material, such as ornamental trees, flowering shrubs and
perennials, and ground covers.
         (b)   Street Trees: Street trees shall be installed along the public
right of way for all developments. Street trees shall be illustrated on the
landscape plan and shall be required in addition to any proposed on site
landscaping. Street trees shall be planted at forty foot (40') intervals.
         (c)   Parking Lot: Parking lot landscaping shall be utilized to
minimize the expansive appearance of parking lots and provide shaded parking
areas. The primary landscaping materials used in, and at the perimeter of,
parking lots shall be trees, which provide shade or are capable of providing
shade at maturity.
The perimeter of the parking area shall provide for a landscaped area in which
trees and shrubs will be planted to screen parking areas from view and to allow
snow storage capacity. Perimeter plantings shall be at the rate of one tree
and/or grouping of three (3) or more shrubs for every forty (40) linear feet.
         (d)   Building Foundation Landscaping: Building foundations shall be
planted with ornamental plant material, such as ornamental trees, flowering
shrubs and perennials, and ground covers. Planting shall be massed and scaled
as appropriate for the building.
         (e)   General Yard Areas: The development site should include
additional general planting materials to provide visual appeal to the site.
Groupings of shrubs with ornamental trees should be used.
         (f)   Plant Materials: The use of native plant species is strongly
encouraged. Effective use of earth berms, existing topography, and preexisting,
high quality vegetation is also encouraged as a component of the landscaping
plan.
         (g)   Planting Size Specifications: Deciduous trees shall be 1.5 inch
to 2.5 inch minimum dbh. Coniferous trees shall be a minimum height of six feet
(6'). Shrubs, hedges, and similar plantings shall be a minimum of twenty four
inches (24") in height or the two (2) gallon variety. All planting materials
shall be guaranteed for a period of one year from the date of planting. The
installation of seed or sod shall be required for all yard areas.
         (h)   Service Area Screening: To the maximum extent feasible, areas
for outdoor storage, truck parking, trash collection or compaction, loading, or
other such service areas shall not be visible from abutting streets or
properties. Screening materials shall be the same as, or of equal quality to,
the materials used for the principal building and landscaping.
         (i)   Dumpster Enclosures: Trash enclosures shall include adequate,
accessible and convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable
materials. Trash enclosures shall be constructed of sturdy, durable, opaque
materials (with trash receptacles screened from view) which are designed to be
compatible with the project architecture, and shall not be located in a street
yard.
         (j)   Mechanical/Utility Screening: Mechanical/utility screening shall
be an integral part of the building structure and architecture and not give the
appearance of being "tacked on" to the exterior surfaces. All mechanical
equipment and utilities shall be screened.
         (k)   Outdoor Storage, Sales, And Display Areas: Nonenclosed areas for
the storage and sales shall be permanently defined and screened with
landscaping, walls and/or fences. Materials, colors, and design of screening
walls and/or fences, and of any covering for such area, shall be compatible
with those used as predominant materials and colors on the primary building(s).
The height of stored or displayed inventory shall not exceed the height of the
screening wall or fence. In addition, all fences/walls shall comply with the
standards set forth in subsection (B)3(l), "Fencing And Walls", of this
section.
         (l)   Fencing And Walls: All fencing should be designed as an
integrated part of the site, and shall comply with section
10-15-27 of this title. Retaining walls shall comply with the standards
outlined in subsection (A)1(b) of this section.
      4.   Exterior Lighting: All development lighting proposals shall comply
with the criteria of the Illuminating Engineering Society (IES) recommendations
for outdoor lighting.
         (a)   General Standards:
            (1)   Locations: No exterior light fixture may be located within
three feet (3') of a property line. (Ord. 1831, 4-19-2005)
            (2)   Luminaires: All luminaires/lamps shall be high pressure
sodium vapor type. For applications where "true color" renditions are required,
the joint planning and zoning commission may approve the use of metal halide
lamps for illumination. (Ord. 1831, 4-19-2005; amd. Ord. 3078, 9-16-2014)
            (3)   Fixtures: All off street lighting over one hundred fifty
(150) watts shall be ninety degree (90°) downcast, cutoff fixtures. Drop lens
fixtures are prohibited.
            (4)   Fixture Height: The total height of all fixtures for
nonresidential developments shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') as measured
from grade to top of the fixture, including base. Residential lighting fixtures
shall not exceed fifteen feet (15') in height as measured from grade to top of
the fixture, including base.
            (5)   Base: The base for all lighting fixtures shall be no greater
than six inches (6") as measured from grade. Lighting fixtures should be
located inside landscape islands or behind curb lines for protection.
            (6)   Maximum Lighting Levels Or Intensity: Lighting "hot spots"
shall be avoided as indicated on the photometric plan. The average illumination
levels within parking lots for residential districts shall not exceed 1.0 foot-
candle, and 2.5 foot-candles for nonresidential districts.
            (7)   Lighting Level At Property Line: A maximum of 0.5 foot-candle
of light trespass at the property line is permitted.
            (8)   Glare: Lighting shall be positioned so as not to cause glare
on adjacent properties and streets.
         (b)   Building Mounted Lighting: Building mounted lighting may be used
to highlight architectural features or primary customer or building entrances.
General floodlighting or the neon outlining of building facades is not
permitted.
         (c)   Canopy Lighting:
            (1)   The maximum average maintained foot-candles under a canopy
shall be twenty (20) foot-candles. Areas outside the canopy shall be regulated
by the standards in this subsection (B)4.
            (2)   All canopy fixtures shall be recessed, incorporating a lens
cover that is either recessed or flush with the bottom surface (ceiling) of the
canopy. (Ord. 1831, 4-19-2005)
10-15.2-11: ARCHITECTURAL GUIDELINES:
   (A)   General:
      1.   Architectural Style: Style is not restricted; evaluation of the
appearance of a project shall be based on professional quality of its design,
relationship to surroundings and the community.
      2.   Corporate Identity: Corporate identity may be apparent yet reserved
in its display.
      3.   Four-Sided Architecture: Continuing an architectural theme on all
exposed exterior surfaces through the use of the same building materials shall
be required.
   (B)   Building Scale And Facade Treatments:
      1.   Building Scale: Height and scale of new development should be
compatible with that of surrounding development. New development height should
transition from the height of adjacent development to the maximum height of the
proposed structure. Building scale shall be reduced through the proper use of
window patterns, structural bays, roof overhangs, siding, awnings, moldings,
fixtures, and other details.
      2.   Building Facades: Building facades should be articulated by using
color, arrangement or change in materials to emphasize the facade elements. The
planes of the exterior walls may be varied in height, depth or direction.
Design elements and detailing shall be continued completely around the
structure. Such design elements shall include window treatments, awnings, trim
detailing, and exterior wall materials.
      3.   Building Materials:
         (a)   Multi-Family Residential, Commercial, And Planned Business:
            (1)   Materials shall have good architectural character (i.e.,
strength, durability and quality) and shall be selected for harmony of the
building with adjacent buildings and the surrounding community. Buildings shall
have the same materials, or materials that are architecturally harmonious, used
for all building walls and other exterior building components wholly or partly
visible from public streets.
            (2)   Brick, architectural panels, precast concrete, decorative
(architectural) masonry block shall be utilized for the exterior treatment
composed of all buildings.
            (3)   Natural materials (i.e., cedar siding, stonework) are
preferred materials for the exterior treatment of structures.
            (4)   Metal or steel external siding shall not be permitted as a
construction material. The use of metal for roofing material shall be strongly
discouraged.
            (5)   Exterior insulation and finish system (EIFS) or dryvit are
permitted building materials and shall be approved by the joint planning and
zoning commission based upon context and overall site design.
         (b)   Planned Industrial:
            (1)   Materials: Materials shall have good durability and quality
and shall be selected for compatibility with adjacent buildings and the
surrounding developments.
            (2)   Facade: The facade of any building facing a public right of
way shall be faced with brick, brick veneer, architectural panels, precast
concrete, decorative (architectural) masonry block, stone, glass, or similar
materials. Metal siding shall not be utilized for any building elevation
abutting a public right of way.
            (3)   Elevations: Building elevations along a public right of way
shall wrap around a minimum of twenty feet (20') or to a natural dividing point
approved by the joint planning and zoning commission. Elevations facing side or
rear yards shall be finished with materials complementary to the street
elevations. Side and rear elevations that do not incorporate a significant
proportion of the building material outlined above shall incorporate enhanced
landscape and screening measures. Appropriateness and effectiveness shall be
subject to joint planning and zoning commission approval.
The use of staggered facades, articulated entryways, canopies, awnings, bays,
doors, windows, and variations in rooflines are strongly encouraged. Entries to
industrial structures should portray a quality office appearance while being
architecturally tied into the overall mass and building composition. (Ord.
3078, 9-16-2014)
            (4)   Building Colors: Building colors shall contribute to the
desired character and image of the city, and with the applicable standards
expressed in the city of Canton comprehensive plan. Modifications to
standardized prototype and corporate franchise designs may be required.
               A.   Colors utilized in the project design shall be
nonfluorescent, with bright or brilliant colors avoided. Earth tones such as
gray, green, brown, burgundy, and tan are encouraged. (Ord. 1831, 4-19-2005)
               B.   All proposed color schemes shall be reviewed by the joint
planning and zoning commission on their individual merit. (Ord. 1831, 4-19-
2005; amd. Ord. 3078, 9-16-2014)
            (5)   Service And Loading Areas: Loading docks, truck parking,
outdoor storage, trash collection, trash compaction, and other service
functions shall be incorporated into the overall design of the building and
landscaping so that the visual and acoustic impacts of these functions are
fully contained and out of view from adjacent properties and public streets.
               A.   Loading facilities shall be located at the rear or side of
the development, and shall not be located in a required street yard setback.
Loading facilities shall not be located within fifty feet (50') of lands zoned
or used for residential purposes.
               B.   Loading facilities shall be provided access to a public
street and shall not interfere with a public right of way. In no instance shall
loading areas rely on backing movements into a public right of way. (Ord. 1831,
4-19-2005)
   C. Screening for loading areas shall be incorporated in the required
landscape plan. A combination of elements, including berms, walls, and
plantings should be utilized to provide effective screening of loading areas.
For double frontage lots, especially those abutting arterial and collector
roadways, enhanced landscape and screening measures shall be incorporated into
the site and landscape plans. Appropriateness and effectiveness shall be
subject to joint planning and zoning commission approval. (Ord. 1831, 4-19-
2005; amd. Ord. 3078, 9-16-2014)
            (6)   Multiple Buildings On A Development Site: Multiple buildings
on the same site shall be designed to create a cohesive visual relationship
between the buildings. (Ord. 1831, 4-19-2005)
            (7)   Construction Phasing: When there is no alternative but to
leave portions of a phased project in an unfinished state over a period longer
than one year (e.g., expansion wall on industrial building), a mitigation plan
shall be submitted and approved by the joint planning and zoning commission to
ensure acceptable site conditions will be maintained. (Ord. 1831, 4-19-2005;
amd. Ord. 3078, 9-16-2014)
10-15.2-12: SIGNAGE:
Proposed signage for all developments shall comply with section
10-15-24 of this title. (Ord. 1831, 4-19-2005)
10-15.2-13: COMPLIANCE:
Compliance in perpetuity shall be required. Any BSO plan granted through the
authority of this section shall be perpetually binding upon the development to
the extent that: all buildings and structures shall be maintained in a
tasteful, safe and appropriate manner; all landscaping shall be periodically
groomed and/or replaced when necessary; all drive, parking and pedestrian areas
shall be kept in a safe and passable condition; and all natural areas and
environmental areas identified for protection shall be maintained in a manner
which preserves their aesthetic and natural function. All repairs and
maintenance shall be executed in a timely manner. (Ord. 1831, 4-19-2005)
10-15.2-14: MODIFICATION OF AN APPROVED BSO PLAN:
Where modification to an approved BSO plan is requested, the zoning
administrator or his designee is authorized, upon review of the proposal, to
make a determination that the modification is either a nonsubstantial change or
a substantial change to the approved BSO plan. Where it is determined that the
modification is nonsubstantial, the economic development director or his
designee may approve the modification. Where it is determined that the
modification is a substantial change to the approved BSO plan, said plan shall
be revised and reviewed by the joint planning and zoning commission pursuant to
the procedures of sections 10-15.2-4 and 10-15.2-6 of this chapter, so as to
clearly and completely depict any and all proposed modifications to the
previously approved BSO plan, prior to the initiation of said modifications.
(Ord. 3078, 9-16-2014)
CHAPTER 15.3
SOLAR ENERGY CODE
SECTION:
10-15.3-1: Purpose
10-15.3-2: Definitions
10-15.3-3: Ground Mount Solar Energy Systems
10-15.3-4: Roof Mount Solar Energy Systems
10-15.3-5: Restrictions On Solar Energy Systems Limited
10-15.3-6: Historic Buildings
10-15.3-7: Building Integrated Solar Energy Systems
10-15.3-8: Community Solar Gardens
10-15.3-9: Commercial/Large Scale Solar Farm
10-15.3-10: Standards For Solar Energy Systems Requiring A Special Use Permit
10-15.3-11: Compliance
10-15.3-12: Liability Insurance
10-15.3-13: Abandoned And/Or Inoperable Solar Energy Systems
10-15.3-14: Maintenance
10-15.3-15: Administration And Enforcement
10-15.3-16: Reinspection Fee
10-15.3-17: Fees
10-15.3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the construction, installation,
and operation of solar energy systems in the city in a manner that promotes
economic development and ensures the protection of health, safety, and welfare
while also avoiding adverse impacts on adjoining property or on the
environment. It is the intent of this chapter to encourage the development of
solar energy systems that reduce reliance on foreign and out-of-state energy
resources, bolster local economic development and job creation. This chapter is
not intended to abridge safety, health or environmental requirements contained
in other applicable codes, standards, or ordinances. (Ord. 4415, 8-6-2024)
10-15.3-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
   ACCESSORY: As applied to a building, structure, or use, one which is on the
same lot with, incidental to and subordinate to the main or principal structure
or use and which is used for purposes customarily incidental to the main or
principal structure, or the main or principal use.
   BUILDING INTEGRATED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A solar energy system that
integrates photovoltaic modules into the building structure as the roof or
facade and which does not alter the relief of the roof.
   COMMERCIAL/LARGE SCALE SOLAR FARM: A utility scale commercial facility that
converts sunlight to electricity, whether by photovoltaics, concentrating solar
thermal devices, or various experimental technologies for onsite or offsite use
with the primary purpose of selling wholesale or retail generated electricity.
   COMMUNITY SOLAR GARDEN: A community solar-electric (photovoltaic) array, of
no more than five (5) acres in size, that provides retail electric power (or
financial proxy for retail power) to multiple households or businesses residing
in or located off-site from the location of the solar energy system.
   GROUND MOUNT SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A solar energy system that is directly
installed onto the ground and is not attached or affixed to an existing
structure.
   PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM: A solar energy system that produces electricity by the
use of semiconductor devices, called photovoltaic cells, that generate
electricity whenever light strikes them.
   QUALIFIED SOLAR INSTALLER: A trained and qualified electrical professional
who has the skills and knowledge related to the construction and operation of
solar electrical equipment and installations and has received safety training
on the hazards involved.
   ROOF MOUNT SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A solar energy system in which solar panels
are mounted on top of a building roof as either a flush mounted system or as
modules fixed to frames which can be tilted toward the south at an optimal
angle.
   SOLAR COLLECTOR: A device, structure or part of a device or structure for
which the primary purpose is to transform solar radiant energy into thermal,
mechanical, chemical or electrical energy.
   SOLAR ENERGY: Radiant energy received from the sun that can be collected in
the form of heat or light by a solar collector.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM (SES): The components and subsystems required to convert
solar energy into electric or thermal energy suitable for use. The area of the
system includes all the land inside the perimeter of the system, which extends
to any fencing. The term applies, but is not limited to, photovoltaic systems,
solar thermal systems and solar hot water systems.
   SOLAR THERMAL SYSTEMS: Solar thermal systems that directly heat water or
other liquid using sunlight. The heated liquid is used for such purposes as
space heating and cooling, domestic hot water and heating pool water. (Ord.
4415, 8-6-2024)
10-15.3-3: GROUND MOUNT SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS:
   A.   Special Use Permit Required: Ground mount solar energy systems are
designed to serve only the occupants of the parcel on which they are located.
Ground mount solar energy systems are installed onto the ground and shall
require a special use permit. Such systems are accessory structures allowed
only on zoning lots with a principal structure.
   B.   Petition: A petition for a ground mount solar energy system special use
permit shall be filed in accordance with section 10-15.3-10 herein and shall
demonstrate compliance with all applicable provisions of the city code and the
following requirements:
      1.   Height: Ground mount solar energy systems shall not exceed ten (10)
feet above the grade of the real property when the system is oriented at
maximum design tilt.
      2.   Setback: Ground mount solar energy systems must meet all applicable
setback requirements for an accessory structure within the applicable zoning
district.
      3.   Allowance: Subject to the requirements set forth herein, ground
mount solar energy systems are allowed on all real property regardless of the
real property's zoning classification.
      4.   Placement: Ground mount solar energy systems are only allowed to be
placed in the rear yard of the real property. The system must not be located
within any known dedicated easement on the real property.
      5.   Lot Coverage: The total coverage of the ground mount solar energy
system shall not exceed half the building footprint of the principal structure,
as applicable. Ground mount solar energy systems shall be exempt from
impervious surface standards/calculations if the soil under the solar collector
is maintained in vegetation and not compacted. For purposes of this section,
foundations, gravel, or compacted soils are considered impervious.
      6.   Reflection Angles: Reflection angles for solar collectors shall be
oriented such that they do not project glare onto adjacent properties.
      7.   Visibility: Solar energy systems shall be located in a manner to
reasonably minimize view blockage for surrounding properties and shading of
property to the north while still providing adequate solar access for solar
collectors. They shall be designed to blend into the architecture of the
building or be screened from routine view from public rights-of-way provided
that the screening shall not affect the operation of the system.
      8.   Approved Solar Components: Electric solar energy system components
shall have a UL listing or approved equivalent and solar hot water systems
shall have an SRCC rating.
      9.   Utility Notification: All grid-intertie solar energy systems shall
comply with the interconnection requirements of the electric utility. Off-grid
systems are exempt from this requirement. (Ord. 4415, 8-6-2024)
10-15.3-4: ROOF MOUNT SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS:
   A.   Permit Required: Roof mount solar energy systems are designed to serve
only the occupants of the parcel on which they are located. Roof mount solar
energy systems are placed on the roof of a principal structure or an accessory
structure and shall not require a special use permit but shall require a roof
mount solar energy system permit from the zoning administrator.
   B.   Allowance: Roof mount solar energy systems may be placed on primary and
accessory structures, after approval by the zoning administrator.
   C.   Application: Application for such a permit shall be made on a form
prescribed by the zoning administrator demonstrating compliance with all
applicable provisions of the city code and the following requirements:
      1.   Height For System On Principal Structure: Roof mount solar energy
systems placed on a principal structure shall not exceed the height of the
principal structure on the zoning lot where the system is located.
      2.   Height For System On Accessory Structure: Roof mount solar energy
systems placed on an accessory structure shall not exceed the height of the
accessory structure on the zoning lot where the system is located.
      3.   Mounting On Pitched Roofs: Roof mount solar energy systems on
pitched roofs shall not be permitted to tilt or rotate at a slope greater or
less than the roof to which it is attached. Such roof mount solar energy
systems cannot extend more than eight inches (8") from the roof surface to
which it is attached. The roof shall be considered a part of a building
completely covering and permanently attached to such building and can be flat
or pitched. Any roof that has a pitch of more than one and a half (1.5) inches
in twelve (12) inches shall be considered a separate roof side.
      4.   Mounting On Flat Roofs: Roof mount solar energy systems on flat
roofs on residential or non-residential structures shall not extend more than
two feet (2') vertically or extend above the building parapet, whichever is
less.
      5.   Setback: The solar collector surface and mounting devices for roof
mount solar energy systems shall not extend beyond the exterior perimeter of
the building on which the system is mounted or built. Exterior piping for solar
systems generating heated water may extend beyond the perimeter of the building
on a side yard exposure. Any roof mount solar energy systems proposed to be
placed on the roof of an accessory structure that do not meet the side or rear
setbacks in place at the time of installation must have a variance approved by
the Joint Planning and Zoning Commission.
      6.   Color: Roof mount solar energy systems shall match, as closely as
possible, the color of the roof to which it is attached.
      7.   Safety: Roof mount solar energy systems, excluding building
integrated solar energy systems, shall allow for adequate roof access for
firefighting purposes to the south facing or flat roof upon which the panels
are mounted.
      8.   Reflection Angles: Reflection angles for solar collectors shall be
oriented such that they do not project glare onto adjacent properties.
      9.   Visibility: Solar energy systems shall be located in a manner to
reasonably minimize view blockage for surrounding properties and shading of
property to the north while still providing adequate solar access for solar
collectors. They shall be designed to blend into the architecture of the
building or be screened from routine view from public rights-of-way provided
that the screening shall not affect the operation of the system.
      10.   Approved Solar Components: Electric solar energy system components
shall have a UL listing or approved equivalent and solar hot water systems
shall have an SRCC rating.
      11.   Utility Notification: All grid-intertie solar energy systems shall
comply with the interconnection requirements of the electric utility. Off-grid
systems are exempt from this requirement.
   D.   City Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the zoning
administrator within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does
not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules,
and regulations, the zoning administrator shall reject such application in
writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the zoning administrator is satisfied
that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter and
applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the zoning
administrator shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all
instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the
satisfaction of the zoning administrator that the construction proposed under
the application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this
chapter. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the zoning
administrator may refuse to issue a roof mount solar energy system permit when
the requirements of this chapter are not met or if an applicant submits an
incomplete application.
   E.   Approval: An owner or operator of a roof mount solar energy system that
is granted a permit under this section shall continue to comply with all of the
above standards, as well as any other requirements set forth in this section or
the city code. (Ord. 4415, 8-6-2024)
10-15.3-5: RESTRICTIONS ON SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS LIMITED:
Consistent with 765 ILCS 165, no homeowner's agreements, covenants, common
interest community or other contracts between multiple property owners within a
subdivision shall prohibit or restrict homeowners from installing solar energy
systems. (Ord. 4415, 8-6-2024)
10-15.3-6: HISTORIC BUILDINGS:
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, solar energy systems on
designated historic landmarks or within designated historic districts must
receive approval of the Historic Preservation Commission, consistent with the
standards for solar energy systems on historically designated buildings
published by the U.S. Department of Interior. (Ord. 4415, 8-6-2024)
10-15.3-7: BUILDING INTEGRATED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS:
Building integrated solar energy systems shall be permitted in all zoning
districts in the city without a special use permit but shall meet the
requirements of all applicable provisions of the city code, including the
currently adopted International Building Code. (Ord. 4415, 8-6-2024)
10-15.3-8: COMMUNITY SOLAR GARDENS:
   A.   Special Use Permit Required: Community solar gardens are allowed with a
special use permit in all zoning districts.
   B.   Petition: A petition for a community solar garden special use permit
shall be filed in accordance with section 10-15.3-10 herein and shall
demonstrate compliance with all applicable provisions of the city code and the
following requirements:
      1.   Community solar gardens may be located on rooftops.
      2.   An interconnection agreement must be completed with the electric
utility in whose service the territory the system is located.
      3.   Dimensional Standards: All solar garden related structures in newly
platted and existing subdivisions shall comply with the principal structure
setback, height, and coverage limitations for the district in which the system
is located.
      4.   Other Standards:
         a.   Ground mount systems shall comply with all required standards for
structures in the zoning district in which the system is located.
         b.   All solar gardens shall comply with the currently adopted
International Building Code.
         c.   All solar gardens shall comply with all other state requirements.
(Ord. 4415, 8-6-2024)
10-15.3-9: COMMERCIAL/LARGE SCALE SOLAR FARM:
   A.   Special Use Permit Required: Commercial/large scale solar farms may be
allowed with a special use permit in any zoning district; however, such
commercial/large scale solar farms shall not adversely impact adjacent
properties.
   B.   Petition: A petition for a commercial/large scale solar farm special
use permit shall be filed in accordance with section 10-15.3-10 herein and
shall demonstrate compliance with all applicable provisions of the city code
and the following requirements:
      1.   A site plan with existing conditions showing the following:
         a.   Existing property lines and property lines extending one hundred
(100) feet from the exterior boundaries including the names of adjacent
property owners and the current use of those properties.
         b.   All routes that will be used for the construction and maintenance
purposes shall be identified on the site plan. All routes for either egress or
ingress shall be shown.
         c.   Location and size of any abandoned wells, sewage treatment
systems.
         d.   Existing buildings and impervious surfaces.
         e.   A contour map showing topography at two (2) foot intervals. A
contour map of surrounding properties may also be required.
         f.   Existing vegetation (list type and percent of coverage: i.e.
cropland/plowed fields, grassland, wooded areas, etc.)
         g.   Any delineated wetland boundaries.
         h.   A copy of the current FEMA FIRM maps that shows the subject
property including the one hundred (100) year floor elevation and any regulated
flood protection elevation, if available.
         i.   Surface water drainage patterns.
         j.   The location of any subsurface drainage tiles.
         k.   Location and spacing of the solar collector.
         l.   Location of underground and overhead electric lines connecting
the solar farm to a building, substation or other electric load.
         m.   New electrical equipment other than at the existing building or
substations that is to be the connection point for the solar farm.
      2.   A site plan with proposed conditions showing the following:
         a.   Location and spacing of the solar panels.
         b.   Location of access roads.
         c.   Location of underground or overhead electric lines connecting the
solar farm to a building, substation, or other electric load.
         d.   New electrical equipment other than at the existing building or
substation that is to be the connection point for the solar farm.
      3.   Fencing And Weed/Grass Control:
         a.   An acceptable weed/grass control plan for property inside and
outside the fenced area for the entire property shall be submitted. The
applicant and any successor shall during the operation of the solar farm adhere
to the weed/grass control plan.
         b.   Perimeter fencing shall be installed around the boundary of the
solar farm having a maximum height of eight (8) feet. The fence shall contain
appropriate warning signage that is posted such that it is clearly visible on
the site.
         c.   The applicant shall maintain the fence in good condition.
      4.   Manufacturer's Specifications: The manufacturer's specifications and
recommended installation methods for all major equipment, including solar
panels/collectors, mounting systems, and foundations for poles and racks.
      5.   Connection And Interconnection:
         a.   A description of the method of connecting the solar array to a
building or substation.
         b.   Utility interconnection details and a copy of written
notification to the utility company requesting the proposed interconnection.
      6.   Setbacks: A minimum of fifty (50) feet must be maintained from all
property lines. Solar panels shall be kept at least five hundred (500) feet
from a residence that is not part of the parcel on which the facility is
located.
      7.   Fire Protection: A fire protection plan for the construction and the
operation of the facility, and emergency access to the site. Along with the
fire protection plan, any developer of a commercial/large scale solar farms
shall submit a plan to the Canton Fire Department informing the department of
the procedure for shutting down and disconnecting the solar energy system in
the event of an emergency or otherwise.
      8.   Endangered Species And Wetlands: Solar farm developers shall be
required to initiate a natural resource review consultation with the Illinois
Department of Natural Resources (IDNR) through the department's online EcoCat
Program or any successor program. Areas reviewed through this process will be
endangered species and wetlands. The cost of the EcoCat consultation shall be
borne by the developer.
      9.   Road Use Agreements: All routes on city streets that will be used
for the construction and maintenance purposes shall be identified on the site
plan. All routes for either egress or ingress need to be shown. The routing
shall be approved subject to the approval of the City Engineer. The solar farm
developer shall complete and provide a preconstruction baseline survey to
determine existing road conditions for assessing potential future damage due to
development related traffic. The development shall provide a road repair plan
to ameliorate any and all damage, installation, or replacement of roads that
might be required by the developer. The developer shall provide a letter of
credit or surety bond in an amount and form approved by the zoning
administrator when warranted.
      10.   Stormwater And NPDES: Solar farms are subject to the city's
stormwater management, erosion, and sediment control provisions and NPDES
permit requirements.
      11.   Decommissioning Of The Solar Farm:
         a.   The developer shall provide a decommissioning plan for the
anticipated service life of the facility or in the event the facility is
abandoned or has reached its life expectancy. If the solar farm is out of
service or not producing electrical energy for a period of twelve (12) months,
it will be deemed nonoperational and decommissioning and removal of that
facility shall commence according to the decommissioning plan as provided and
approved. A cost estimate for the decommissioning of the facility shall be
prepared by a professional engineer or contractor who has expertise in the
removal of the solar farm. The decommissioning cost estimate shall explicitly
detail the cost before considering any projected salvage value of the out of
service solar farm. A restoration plan shall also be provided for the site with
the application. The decommissioning plan shall include the following:
         b.   Removal of the following within six (6) months after the farm
became nonoperational:
            (1)   All solar collectors and components, above ground
improvements and outside storage.
            (2)   Foundations, pads and underground electrical wires and
reclaim site to a depth of four (4) feet below the surface of the ground.
            (3)   Hazardous material from the property and dispose in
accordance with federal and state law.
         c.   The decommissioning plan shall also include an agreement between
the applicant and the city that:
            (1)   The financial resources for decommissioning shall be secured
by a Surety Bond, or cash deposited in an escrow account with an escrow agent
acceptable to the zoning administrator.
            (2)   The agreement shall establish conditions in which the funds
will be disbursed.
            (3)   The city shall have access to said security for the purpose
of completing decommissioning if decommissioning is not completed by the owner
of the project within six (6) months of the end of the project life or facility
abandonment.
            (4)   The city shall have the right to enter the site, pursuant to
reasonable notice to effect or complete decommissioning.
            (5)   The city shall have the right to seek injunctive relief to
effect or complete decommissioning, and to seek reimbursement from the owner
for decommissioning costs in excess of the amount deposited in escrow and to
file a lien against any real estate owned by applicant or applicant's
successor, or in which they have an interest, for the amount of the excess, and
to take all steps allowed by law to enforce said lien. (Ord. 4415, 8-6-2024)
10-15.3-10: STANDARDS FOR SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS REQUIRING A SPECIAL USE PERMIT:
   A.   Special Use Permit Required: Ground mount solar energy systems,
community solar gardens, and commercial/large scale solar farms require a
special use permit. No special use permit will be allowed unless a public
hearing is held, the applicable petition is reviewed by the Joint Planning and
Zoning Commission for its findings and recommendations, and it is then
authorized by the city council.
   B.   Petition: A petition for a solar energy system special use permit shall
be filed with the city clerk and Planning and Zoning Department and processed
in the same manner as that is required for other special uses as set forth in
section 10-17-7 of this city code. Said petition shall be of such form,
accompanied by such information, as shall be established from time to time by
the Joint Planning and Zoning Commission. An initial form of the petition may
be prepared by the city attorney in consultation with the Zoning Administrator
until same is amended by the Joint Planning and Zoning Commission.
   C.   Standards: The Joint Planning and Zoning Commission shall not recommend
a particular solar energy system special use permit to the city council for
approval unless the following requirements have been met:
      1.   The solar energy system will be designated, located, and proposed to
be operated so that the public health, safety and welfare will be protected;
      2.   The solar energy system shall not cause appreciable injury to the
value of other property in the neighborhood in which it is located;
      3.   The solar energy system will not subvert or defeat the primary
purpose of the zoning ordinance, or of the zoning district or area for which it
is proposed, when its effect is considered in conjunction with the cumulative
effort of the number of various special uses of all types already located in
the adjacent area and in the city as a whole;
      4.   The solar energy system complies with all applicable state and local
fire standards;
      5.   The solar energy system's design has been inspected and approved by
the zoning administrator;
      6.   The solar energy system meets the applicable requirements set forth
in this chapter established for each particular solar energy system;
      7.   The petition for the solar energy system special use permit is
complete; and
      8.   The solar energy system complies with all other requirements of the
city code and applicable state and federal laws and regulations.
   D.   Conditions Established By Joint Planning And Zoning Commission: The
Joint Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend such conditions and
restrictions upon the construction, location, and operation, or a special use,
as may be deemed necessary to promote the general objectives of this chapter
and to minimize injury to the value of property in the neighborhood.
   E.   City Council Authority: Upon recommendation by the Joint Planning and
Zoning Commission, the city council may refer a solar energy system special use
petition back to the commission for additional review, or, by motion, may
approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove, a petition for a solar energy
system special use permit utilizing the same standards set forth above.
Regardless of the Joint Planning and Zoning Commission's findings on any or all
of the foregoing standards, the city council may deny a solar energy system
special use permit upon an express finding that such denial is in the public
interest.
   F.   Approval: An owner or operator of a solar energy system that is granted
a special use permit under this section shall continue to comply with all of
the above standards, as well as any other requirements set forth in this
section or the city code. (Ord. 4415, 8-6-2024)
10-15.3-11: COMPLIANCE:
All solar energy systems shall require a permit from the zoning administrator
or a special use permit, as applicable, and shall comply with any other
applicable provisions of the city code, state law, or federal law. All Solar
energy systems shall be installed by a trained and qualified solar installer
whom is working under the supervision of a licensed electrical contractor (if
different from the qualified solar installer).
Furthermore, all solar energy systems shall meet approval of any currently
adopted International Building Code, National Electric Code, and Illinois
Plumbing Code. (Ord. 4415, 8-6-2024)
10-15.3-12: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
The owner/operator of the commercial/large scale solar farm shall maintain a
current general liability policy covering bodily injury and property damage and
name the city as an additional insured with limits of at least one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and five million dollars ($5,000,000.00)
in the aggregate with a deductible of no more than five thousand dollars
($5,000.00). (Ord. 4415, 8-6-2024)
10-15.3-13: ABANDONED AND/OR INOPERABLE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS:
If at any point a solar energy system becomes abandoned and/or ceases to
perform its originally intended function (i.e. becomes inoperable) for more
than twelve (12) consecutive months, the property owner or operator of the
system, after notice from the zoning administrator, shall remove the solar
collector, mount, and any other equipment associated with the solar energy
system within ninety (90) days upon receipt of the notice from the zoning
administrator. (Ord. 4415, 8-6-2024)
10-15.3-14: MAINTENANCE:
Upon approval and construction of a solar energy system, such system shall be
maintained in good, working condition. (Ord. 4415, 8-6-2024)
10-15.3-15: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
The zoning administrator shall enforce the provisions of this chapter through
inspections on such schedule as he or she deems appropriate. The zoning
administrator has the authority to enter upon the premises where a solar energy
system is located at any time by coordinating a reasonable time with the
operator/owner of the system.
Any person, firm, cooperation, or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, refuses to comply with, or resists enforcement of any provisions of
this chapter shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation
occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
In addition to the foregoing penalty provisions, the proper authorities of the
city may institute any appropriate action or proceedings, including the
obtaining of an injunction to prevent such further activity. The defendant in
any such action shall be responsible for the reasonable costs of such action,
to include, but not limited to, the city's court costs and attorney fees. Such
sums shall be made a part of any judgment entered and shall be enforceable as
part of the final judgment. (Ord. 4415, 8-6-2024)
10-15.3-16: REINSPECTION FEE:
A two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) reinspection fee shall be assessed against
any person, firm, cooperation, or corporation for each inspection conducted by
the zoning administrator to address a violation previously identified. (Ord.
4415, 8-6-2024)
10-15.3-17: FEES:
The non-refundable fees for processing the applications/petitions for special
use permits for solar energy systems shall be as follows:
 
0-4 kilowatts (kW-dc)         $75.00
5-10 kilowatts (kW-dc)        $150.00
11-50 kilowatts (kW-dc)       $300.00
51-100 kilowatts (kW-dc)      $500.00
101-500 kilowatts (kW-dc)     $1,000.00
501-1,000 kilowatts (kW-dc)   $3,000.00
1,001-2,000 kilowatts (kW-dc) $5,000.00
 
(Ord. 4415, 8-6-2024)
CHAPTER 16
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND LAND USES
SECTION:
10-16-1: Existing Uses
10-16-2: Change
10-16-3: Nonconforming Use Of Land; Continuation Of Use
10-16-4: Extension Prohibited
10-16-5: Moving
10-16-6: Alterations
10-16-7: Restoration
10-16-8: Discontinuance Or Abandonment
10-16-9: Nonconforming Uses, Record Of
10-16-10: Certificate Of Occupancy
10-16-11: Change Of Tenancy Or Ownership
10-16-12: Change Of Zoning District Boundaries
10-16-13: Existing Special Use Permits
10-16-1: EXISTING USES:
Any lawful use of the land or building existing at the date of passage hereof,
except those discussed in this chapter, and located in a district in which it
would not be permitted as a new use under the regulations of this title, is
hereby declared to be a "nonconforming use" and not in violation of this title
at the date of adoption hereof; provided, however, that a nonconforming use
shall be subject to, and the owners shall comply with, the following
regulations. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-16-2: CHANGE:
A nonconforming use in a building or structure may be changed to another
nonconforming use of the same or greater restriction provided no structural
changes are made to the building. Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed
to a conforming use, or to a use permitted in a district of greater
restriction, it shall not thereafter be changed to a nonconforming use. For
this purpose, the AG-1 district shall be considered the district of greatest
restriction, each district following thereafter in the text of this chapter
shall be considered of successively lesser restriction. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-16-3: NONCONFORMING USE OF LAND; CONTINUATION OF USE:
The nonconforming use of land, where no building structure is involved, which
exists when this chapter becomes effective, may be allowed to continue provided
that:
   (A)   No such nonconforming use of land shall in any way be expanded or
extended either on the same or adjoining property.
   (B)   If such nonconforming use of land or any portion thereof is
discontinued or changed, any future use of such land shall be in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-16-4: EXTENSION PROHIBITED:
A nonconforming use may not be expanded or extended throughout other portions
of the building. If such nonconforming use or portion thereof is discontinued
or changed to a conforming use, any future use of such building or portion
thereof, shall be in conformity to the regulations of the district in which
such building is located. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-16-5: MOVING:
No nonconforming use of a building may be moved to any other part of a parcel
of land upon which nonconforming use was conducted at the time of the adoption
of this chapter. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-16-6: ALTERATIONS:
No nonconforming building shall be enlarged or structurally altered or repaired
except to make it a conforming building or except to comply with requirements
of health and safety laws or ordinances; provided further, that the aggregate
cost of such work from time to time shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the
assessed valuation of such building or structure. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-16-7: RESTORATION:
Any nonconforming building which has been destroyed or damaged by fire,
explosion, act of God, or by public enemy to the extent of fifty percent (50%)
or more of its fair market value at the time such damage occurred, shall
thereafter be made to conform with the provisions of this chapter. Where more
than fifty percent (50%) of the fair market value of the building remains after
such damage, the nonconforming building may be restored, provided that such
restoration shall be subject to the approval of the city council. Said
restoration shall be commenced within one year of the date of such partial
destruction and shall be diligently carried on to completion. (Ord. 567, 11-
1976)
10-16-8: DISCONTINUANCE OR ABANDONMENT:
Any nonconforming use of land or building, which has become vacant or remains
unoccupied owing to discontinuance or abandonment for a period of six (6)
months shall thereafter conform to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 567,
11-1976)
10-16-9: NONCONFORMING USES, RECORD OF:
Within twelve (12) months after the adoption of this chapter, or any amendments
hereto, the zoning administrator shall prepare a record of all nonconforming
uses and occupations of lands, buildings, and structures, including tents and
mobile homes, existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter or
amendments hereto which have come to his attention. Such list shall be
available at all times in the office of the city council. It shall be the duty
of the owner of property on which nonconforming uses exist to register same
with the zoning administrator within the above stated time period. (Ord. 567,
11-1976)
10-16-10: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
   (A)   At any time after adoption of this chapter or amendments hereto,
should the zoning administrator become aware of nonconforming use, the owner of
a nonconforming use shall be notified by the zoning administrator of the
provisions of this section, and that his property constitutes a nonconforming
use. Within thirty (30) days after receipt of said notice, the owner shall
apply for and be issued a certificate of occupancy for the nonconforming use.
The application of such certificate shall designate the location, nature, and
extent of the nonconforming use and such other details as may be required. If
the owner of nonconforming use fails to apply for a certificate of occupancy
within thirty (30) days after receipt of the foregoing notice, the use shall be
deemed to be and is hereby declared to be in violation of this chapter. The
zoning administrator and the city attorney shall take appropriate action to
enjoin such violation.
   (B)   If the zoning administrator shall find, upon reviewing the application
for a certificate of occupancy, that the existing use is illegal or in
violation of any other ordinance or law or, if he finds that the building for
which the certificate is requested has been constructed or altered for the
existing use or any other use without full compliance with the building code or
the zoning ordinance in effect at the time of construction or alteration, he
shall not issue the certificate of occupancy but shall declare such use to be
in violation of this title. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-16-11: CHANGE OF TENANCY OR OWNERSHIP:
There may be a change in tenancy or ownership, or management of an existing
nonconforming use, provided all regulations applicable to nonconforming uses
are observed. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-16-12: CHANGE OF ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to transfer an
area from one district to another district of a different classification, the
foregoing provisions shall also apply to any nonconforming uses existing
therein. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-16-13: EXISTING SPECIAL USE PERMITS:
In those instances where "special use permits" have been issued prior to the
adoption of this title, the special use shall terminate pursuant to the terms
of the grant of said use unless the subject use is a permitted or a special use
under this title. Uses may be continued if they are permitted under the
provisions of this title. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
CHAPTER 17
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-17-1: Organization
10-17-2: Zoning Administrator
10-17-3: Joint Planning And Zoning Commission
10-17-4: Appeals
10-17-5: Variations
10-17-6: Reserved
10-17-7: Special Uses
10-17-8: Amendments
10-17-9: Permits
10-17-10: Certificates Of Occupancy
10-17-11: Final Inspection
10-17-12: Fees
10-17-13: Enterprise Zone
10-17-14: Rezones
10-17-15: Short-Term Rentals
10-17-1: ORGANIZATION:
The administration of this title is hereby vested in:
   (A)   Zoning administrator;
   (B)   Joint planning and zoning commission; and
   (C)   City council. (Ord. 3041, 12-3-2013)
10-17-2: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
The zoning administrator shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the
consent of the council on the first Tuesday in May of each year, or as soon
thereafter as may be, and shall hold his office for the term of one year, and
until his successor is duly appointed and qualified.
The duties of the zoning administrator shall be to enforce this chapter and his
authority shall include:
   (A)   Performing the functions of building official under the various
uniform codes as the same may be from time to time adopted by the city;
further, the zoning administrator shall act as the zoning enforcement officer
and shall cause the various zoning laws to be faithfully enforced. As the
building official and as the zoning enforcement officer, he shall act as a
staff advisor to the joint planning and zoning commission. He shall give
written opinions and reports when requested to do so by the chairman of the
joint planning and zoning commission. He shall cause written variances to issue
in conformity with the decisions of the joint planning and zoning commission
for appeals.
   (B)   Determining conformance of applications for building permits with
regulations of this chapter.
   (C)   Issuing all zoning certificates, following approval as required in
this chapter, and making and maintaining records thereof.
   (D)   Issuing building permits.
   (E)   Issuing all certificates of occupancy, and making and maintaining
records thereof.
   (F)   Issuing permits for temporary parking and use of trailers.
   (G)   Conducting inspections of uses of land and structures in accordance
with due process of law to determine compliance with the terms of this chapter.
   (H)   Maintaining permanent and current records of the administration and
enforcement of this chapter, including, but not limited to, applications,
processing and decisions for all amendments, variations and appeals, and
charting and designating each amendment and special use on the zoning district
map.
   (I)   Providing and maintaining a public information bureau relative to all
matters pertaining to this chapter.
   (J)   Receiving, filing and forwarding to the joint planning and zoning
commission all applications for variations, appeals or other matters on which
the joint planning and zoning commission is required to act under this chapter.
   (K)   Forwarding to the city clerk all applications initially filed with the
building inspector for amendments and other matters under this chapter upon
which the joint planning and zoning commission is required to act.
   (L)   Providing such clerical and technical assistance as may be required by
the joint planning and zoning commission in the exercise of its duties.
   (M)   Attending all meetings of the joint planning and zoning commission.
   (N)   Determining the confirmation of application of building contractors,
and cause the same to be faithfully enforced.
   (O)   It shall be the duty of zoning administrator to make monthly, written
reports to the city treasurer and city clerk of all monies received by his
office arising from any official act and to immediately pay over to the city
treasurer, all monies so received by him.
He shall likewise make a monthly written report at the first meeting of the
council in each month of the monies so received by him and of all his acts and
doings for the preceding month.
   (P)   The office hours of the zoning administrator shall be from eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. until twelve o'clock (12:00) noon and from one o'clock (1:
00) P.M. until five o'clock (5:00) P.M. from Monday through Friday. (Ord. 3041,
12-3-2013)
10-17-3: JOINT PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION:
   (A)   Organization:
      1.   A joint planning and zoning commission is hereby created. It shall
at all times be under the jurisdiction of the city council of the city of
Canton.
      2.   The joint planning and zoning commission shall consist of fifteen
(15) members, who shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city
council, on the basis of their particular fitness and competency for their
duties on said commission; members to serve respectively for: one for one year,
two (2) for two (2) years, two (2) for three (3) years, two (2) for four (4)
years, two (2) for five (5) years, one for six (6) years, one for seven (7)
years, and one for eight (8) years; the successor for each member so appointed
to serve for a term of five (5) years. In addition to the twelve (12) lay
members, the mayor shall appoint three (3) members of the city council to serve
concurrent with their terms of office on the council. All members of the
commission shall serve without pay. A period of five (5) years' appointment
and/or service terms shall be staggered in such a manner so as to provide for
the appointment or reappointment of three (3) members each year after the year
the commission is initially established. Vacancies on the joint planning and
zoning commission shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member whose
place has become vacant, by appointment by the mayor and subject to
confirmation by the city council.
      3.   Any member who misses three (3) or more consecutive meetings without
cause (as determined by the chairman) may be removed from his/her term.
   (B)   Powers Of The Joint Planning And Zoning Commission:
      1.   Generally: The joint planning and zoning commission shall have the
general powers provided by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes section 5/11-12-5 as
said section is amended from time to time.
      2.   Plats Of Subdivision: Plats of subdivision shall be submitted to the
joint planning and zoning commission for preliminary approval. The requirements
and provisions set forth in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes section 5/11-12-8, as
amended from time to time shall apply to the city's review.
      3.   Hearings; Special Uses: In conformance with the requirements herein
set forth the joint planning and zoning commission shall review, hold public
hearings, and report to the city council its recommendations concerning special
uses. Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes section 5/11-13-1.1 as amended
from time to time, special uses shall be permitted only upon evidence that such
use meets the standards set forth herein. Prior notice of public hearing shall
be given pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes sections 5/11-13-6 and 5/11-
13-7 as amended from time to time.
      4.   Annexation: Requests for annexation or annexation and rezoning, as
the case may be, shall be brought before the joint planning and zoning
commission in the manner prescribed by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes and local
ordinances. The petition for annexation (and rezoning) shall be filed with the
city clerk by the petitioner with clear and legible copies of such petition,
together with all attachments and exhibits thereto appertaining, to be
simultaneously delivered by the petitioner to the city engineer, city attorney,
and the recording secretary of the joint planning and zoning commission. Any
notice by publication required by law shall be given by the city clerk after
the text and format of such notice has been approved in writing by the city
attorney and the chairman of the joint planning and zoning commission. At the
time the petition is filed with the city clerk, the petitioner shall also
submit to the city clerk a minimum of two (2) duplicate original plats of the
territory sought to be annexed (and rezoned). As a minimum, each such plat
shall clearly show on its face the following:
         (a)   The existing corporation line and the proposed new corporation
line.
         (b)   The dimensions of the property as described in the legal
description.
         (c)   A north arrow and scale of the plat.
         (d)   The complete recital of the legal description.
         (e)   Each such plat shall be entitled as an annexation plat and shall
provide a space on its face to show the ordinance number providing for such
annexation and, further, shall provide a space on its face to show the date the
ordinance was passed by the city council.
         (f)   Each such plat shall be certified in writing on its face as
being accurate by either a registered professional engineer or a registered
land surveyor; in either case, the person making such certification shall affix
his seal to the face of each of the plats.
         (g)   The plat as submitted shall then be approved or disapproved by
the city engineer before final action is taken by the joint planning and zoning
commission.
The city engineer is authorized (but not required) to accomplish any plat
required by this section. The city, in all such cases, shall charge and be paid
a reasonable fee by the petitioner for the city engineer's professional
services. Such fee shall be computed by application of an hourly rate
determined by reference to the hourly rate customarily charged by registered
professional engineers in the city for such services multiplied by the hours of
time spent by the city engineer rounded to the nearest one-tenth (1/10) of an
hour. The city engineer may delegate such task to any competent draftsman
employed by the city and, in such case, shall determine the charge by reference
to the hourly rate customarily charged by competent draftsmen in the city for
such services plus ten percent (10%) multiplied by the hours of time spent by
such draftsman rounded to the nearest one-tenth (1/10) of an hour; in all such
cases, the draftsman shall be under the direct supervision and control of the
city engineer. The charges herein provided for must be fully paid before the
plat shall be approved or released by the city engineer.
      5.   Hear And Decide Appeals By Enforcing Officer: Hear and decide
appeals from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the
enforcing officer.
      6.   Hear And Decide Matters By Joint Planning And Zoning Commission:
Hear and decide all matters referred to it or upon which it is required to pass
under this chapter. The joint planning and zoning commission may reverse or
affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify or amend the order, requirement,
decision or determination appealed from to the extent and in the manner that
the joint planning and zoning commission may decide to be fitting and proper in
the premises, and to that end the joint planning and zoning commission shall
also have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. When a
property owner shows that a strict application of the terms of this chapter
relating to the use, construction or alteration of buildings or structures, or
to the use of land, imposes upon him practical difficulties or particular
hardship, then the joint planning and zoning commission may make such
variations of the strict application of terms of this chapter as are in harmony
with its general purpose and intent when the joint planning and zoning
commission is satisfied, under the evidence heard before it, that a granting of
such variation will not merely serve as a convenience to the applicant but is
necessary to alleviate some demonstrable hardship.
However, nothing herein contained shall be construed to give or grant the joint
planning and zoning commission the power or authority to alter or change the
zoning ordinance or the district map; such power and authority being reserved
for the city council. In order to partially defray the expenses of the public
hearing involving joint planning and zoning commission matters, the applicant
shall pay the sum of thirty five dollars ($35.00) to the city treasurer at the
time of the filing of the appeal.
All final administrative decisions of the joint planning and zoning commission
rendered under the terms of this chapter shall be subject to judicial review
pursuant to the provisions of the administrative review act, approved May 8,
1945, and all amendments and modifications thereof, and the rules adopted
pursuant thereto.
   (C)   Meetings, Notice, Records, And Reports: All meetings of the joint
planning and zoning commission shall be held at the call of the chairman and at
such other times as the commission may determine. All meetings of the joint
planning and zoning commission shall be open to the public. The chairman, or in
his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths or compel the attendance
of witnesses. No hearing shall be conducted without a quorum of the joint
planning and zoning commission being present, which shall consist of eight (8)
members. The concurring vote of eight (8) members shall be necessary to decide
or make recommendations in favor of an appellant or applicant in any matter
upon which the board is required to pass. The board shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if absent
or failing to vote, indicating that fact, and shall also keep records of its
hearings, examinations, and other official actions. A transcript of testimony
presented at all public hearings on all matters heard by the joint planning and
zoning commission shall be included in the joint planning and zoning commission
report. Any absent member who certifies that he has read the transcript of the
proceedings before the joint planning and zoning commission may vote upon any
question before the joint planning and zoning commission.
If, due to absence, a favorable recommendation or decision has not been either
made by four (4) or more favorable votes or precluded by eight (8) or more
unfavorable votes, additional members shall read the transcript and vote until
there are eight (8) concurring votes. Findings of fact shall be made for each
appeal or application for a time extension, or variation, specifying the
reasons for granting or denying, or recommending the granting or denying of,
such appeal or application. The terms of the relief granted or recommended
shall be specifically set forth in a conclusion or statement separate from the
findings of fact.
Every rule or regulation, and every order, requirement, decision or
determination of the joint planning and zoning commission shall be filed
promptly with the secretary of the joint planning and zoning commission and
shall be a public record. The joint planning and zoning commission shall adopt
its own rules of procedure not in conflict with the statutes.
Notice shall be given of the time and place of every public hearing not more
than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing, by
publishing a notice thereof at least once in one or more newspapers published
in or having a general circulation within the city. At the hearing, any party
may appear in person, or by agent or by attorney.
Applicants for zoning variations shall have the following rights, in addition
to any others they may possess by law, at any hearing before the joint planning
and zoning commission:
      1.   To have subpoenas issued for persons to appear at hearings and for
examination of documents by the person requesting the subpoenas either before
or at the hearing, subject to the limitations contained herein. The board shall
issue subpoenas as requested by the applicants and eligible property owners.
Subpoenas shall only be enforceable against persons or for documents which have
substantial evidentiary connection with:
         (a)   The subject property, and
         (b)   Facts which would support or negate the requisite legal
standards for granting the application or appeal. All matters relating to
subpoenas concerning a particular case, including all enforcement and motions
to quash, shall be heard in a single action. Service of such subpoenas shall be
made in the same manner as summons in a civil action.
      2.   To cross examine all witnesses testifying; and
      3.   To present witnesses on their behalf.
Eligible property owners, as set forth above, who wish to object shall, upon
request, be granted one continuance for the purpose of presenting evidence to
rebut testimony given by the applicant. The date of such continued hearings
shall be within the discretion of the joint planning and zoning commission.
   (D)   Final Actions Of The Joint Planning And Zoning Commission:
      1.   Actions by the joint planning and zoning commission from rulings of
enforcing officers, appeals for a time extension, and applications for
variations from the provisions of this chapter, shall constitute a final
action.
      2.   The findings of the joint planning and zoning commission from
rulings of enforcing officers, appeals for time extensions, and applications
for variations, shall be in writing and shall be arrived at in each specific
case after a public hearing. A report of said findings, with the terms of
relief granted specifically set forth in a conclusion or separate statement,
shall be transmitted to the appellant or applicant, with copies to the city
council, within a reasonable time.
      3.   A variation approved by the joint planning and zoning commission
shall not be valid after a period of one year, unless during this period such
variation shall be established or unless any required building, development or
erection permit for an approved variation is obtained within this period, after
which construction shall proceed to completion within a reasonable time. Said
one year period may be extended in writing for good cause by the joint planning
and zoning commission for up to an additional one year, if no other zoning
changes affecting the property have been made or are formally pending before
the council or said period may be extended by the joint planning and zoning
commission for such time as it shall determine, for good cause shown. (Ord.
3041, 12-3-2013)
10-17-4: APPEALS:
   (A)   Authority: The joint planning and zoning commission shall hear and
decide appeals from an administrative order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the zoning administrator.
   (B)   Initiation:
      1.   An appeal to the joint planning and zoning commission may be made by
any person aggrieved or by any officer or department of the municipality. The
appeal shall be taken within forty five (45) days of the action complained of,
by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the joint
planning and zoning commission a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds
thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to
the joint planning and zoning commission all the papers constituting the record
upon which the appeal action is taken.
      2.   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to
the joint planning and zoning commission after the notice of appeal has been
filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would,
in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In this event the
proceedings shall not be stayed other than by an order of the joint planning
and zoning commission or a court of record on application of and on notice to
the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause being shown.
   (C)   Processing:
      1.   An appeal shall be filed with the city clerk. The city clerk shall
forward the appeal to the joint planning and zoning commission for processing
in accordance with the Illinois statutes.
      2.   The joint planning and zoning commission shall fix a reasonable time
for the hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof to parties and shall
decide the appeal within reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may
appear in person, or by agent, or by attorney. The joint planning and zoning
commission may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order,
requirement, decision or determination, as in its opinion ought to be made in
the premises and to that end has all the powers of the official from whom the
appeal is taken. (Ord. 3041, 12-3-2013)
10-17-5: VARIATIONS:
   (A)   Authority: The joint planning and zoning commission shall rule on
requested variances in the approved zoning ordinance only after proper notice
and public hearing on the request. The notice of hearing shall contain the
address and location of the property for which the variation is sought along
with a brief discussion of the nature of the request. After appropriate
requests and proper notice as shall be required by the Illinois statutes, the
joint planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing upon all
applications for variations and shall grant or deny a variation only where it
shall have been made a finding of fact specifying the reason or reasons
therefor. Such findings shall be based upon the standards set forth in
subsection (D) of this section. No variation shall be granted by the joint
planning and zoning commission without such findings of fact.
   (B)   Initiation: An application for a variation may be made by a
governmental office or department, or by any person, firm or corporation having
a freehold interest, a possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession, a
contractual interest which may become a freehold interest, or any exclusive
possessory interest applicable to the land or land and improvements described
in the application for a variation.
   (C)   Processing: An application for a variation shall be filed with the
city clerk who shall forward one copy of such application to the joint planning
and zoning commission for processing and one copy to the city council for
informational purposes.
   (D)   Standards:
      1.   The joint planning and zoning commission shall not recommend a
variation of the provisions of this chapter as authorized in this chapter
unless it shall have made findings of fact based upon the evidence presented to
it on the following specific issues that:
         (a)   The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if
permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the regulations
governing the district in which it is located.
         (b)   The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances affecting
the tract in question and not a problem which is personal in nature to the
owner.
         (c)   The variation, if granted, will not alter the essential
character of the locality.
      2.   For the purpose of supplementing the above standards, the joint
planning and zoning commission, in making the determination whether there are
practical difficulties, hardships, or unique circumstances, shall also take
into consideration the extent to which the following facts, favorable to the
applicant, have been established by the evidence that:
         (a)   The particular surroundings shape, or topographical conditions
of the specific property involved would bring a particular hardship upon the
owner as distinguished from a mere inconvenience if the strict letter of the
regulation were to be carried out.
         (b)   The condition upon which the petition for variation is based
would not be applicable generally to the other property within the same zoning
classification.
         (c)   The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the
neighborhood in which the property is located.
         (d)   The proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of
light and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the danger of
fire, or otherwise endanger the public safety or substantially diminish or
impair property values within the neighborhood.
         (e)   The purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a
desire to make more money out of the property.
         (f)   The alleged difficulty or hardship has not been created by any
person presently having an interest in the property.
      3.   The joint planning and zoning commission may require such conditions
and restrictions upon the premises benefited by a variation as may be necessary
to comply with the standards set forth in this chapter to reduce or minimize
the injurious effect of such variation upon other property in the neighborhood,
and to implement the general purpose and intent of this chapter.
   (E)   Unauthorized Variations: The variation procedure shall in no case be
used to accomplish a result which could otherwise be achieved by a rezoning of
the property involved, such as, but not limited to, establishment or expansion
of a use not permitted in a residential district; authorizing the construction
of residences in other than residential districts; nor authorizing other than
single-family detached residences in the R-1 and R-2 districts. (Ord. 3041, 12-
3-2013)
10-17-6: RESERVED:
(Ord. 3041, 12-3-2013)
10-17-7: SPECIAL USES:
   (A)   Purposes: This chapter is based upon the division of the city into
districts, within any one of which the use of land and buildings, and the bulk
and location of buildings or structures as related to the land are essentially
uniform. It is recognized, however, that there are buildings and uses which,
because of their unique characteristics cannot be properly classified in any
particular district without consideration, in each case, of the impact of those
buildings and uses upon neighboring property or consideration of the public
need for the particular buildings or uses at the proposed location. Such
special uses fall into the following categories:
      1.   Buildings and uses entirely private in character but of such a
nature that their construction and operation may give rise to unique problems
with respect to their impact upon neighboring property or public facilities;
      2.   Uses traditionally affected with a public interest or uses operated
by a publicly regulated utility; and
      3.   Planned unit developments.
   (B)   Application: Applications for special use permits shall be filed with
the zoning administrator and processed in the same manner as that required for
amendments and discussed in section
10-17-8 of this chapter, and shall be of such form, accompanied by such
information as shall be established from time to time by the planning
commission.
   (C)   Standards: The joint planning and zoning commission shall not
recommend a special use unless it is deemed necessary of the public interest or
convenience at the location or, if private in character;
      1.   It is so designated, located, and proposed to be operated that the
public health, safety and welfare will be protected; and
      2.   It will not cause appreciable injury to the value of other property
in the neighborhood in which it is located; and
      3.   It will not subvert or defeat the primary purpose of the zoning
ordinance, or of the zoning district or area for which it is proposed, when its
effect is considered in conjunction with the cumulative effort of the number of
various special uses of all types already located in the adjacent area and in
the city as a whole; and
      4.   It is one of the special uses listed in chapters 3 through 13 of
this title. In the event the special use is a planned development, the
provisions of chapter 13 of this title shall also be applied.
   (D)   Conditions: The joint planning and zoning commission may recommend,
and the city council may provide, such conditions and restrictions upon the
construction, location, and operation, of a special use, including, but not
limited to, provisions for off street parking and loading, signs, and accessory
uses, as may be deemed necessary to promote the general objectives of this
chapter and to minimize injury to the value of property in the neighborhood.
(Ord. 3041, 12-3-2013)
10-17-8: AMENDMENTS:
   (A)   Authority: This chapter may be amended from time to time by ordinance
in accordance with applicable Illinois statutes. No vote shall be taken upon
the adoption of a proposed amendment by the city council until after a public
hearing before the joint planning and zoning commission and a report of its
findings and recommendations has been submitted to the city council.
   (B)   Initiation Of Amendment: Amendments may be proposed by the city
council, joint planning and zoning commission or by the petition of any person,
firm or corporation having a freehold interest, a possessory interest entitled
to exclusive possession, a contractual interest which may become a freehold
interest or any exclusive possessory interest which is specifically enforceable
on the land which is described in the proposal for an amendment.
   (C)   Processing:
      1.   A proposal or petition for an amendment shall be filed with the city
clerk and thereafter entered into the records of the first meeting thereafter
of the city council.
      2.   A copy of such proposal or petition shall be forwarded by the city
clerk to the joint planning and zoning commission with a request to hold a
public hearing and submit to the city council a report of its findings and
recommendations. Such public hearings shall be held upon notice by the joint
planning and zoning commission.
   (D)   Decisions: The city council, upon request of the joint planning and
zoning commission, and without further public hearing, may vote upon the
adoption of any proposed amendment in accordance with applicable Illinois
statutes, or may refer it back to the joint planning and zoning commission for
further consideration. In case of a written protest against any proposed
amendment of the regulations or districts, signed and acknowledged by the
owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage immediately adjoining or across
an alley therefrom, or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage
directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered, is filed with the clerk
of the municipality, the amendment shall not be passed except by a favorable
vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the aldermen or trustees of the municipality then
holding office.
   (E)   Zoning Map: No change shall be made in this zoning ordinance nor shall
any zoning variation be granted within six (6) months after the date upon which
the official zoning map is adopted by the city council, unless such change in
the zoning ordinance or such variation is approved by a two-thirds (2/3) vote
of the corporate authorities. (Ord. 3041, 12-3-2013)
10-17-9: PERMITS:
   (A)   Permits Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to commence
excavation or construction of any building structure or accessory structure or
moving of an existing building without first obtaining a zoning compliance
certificate and building permit from the zoning administrator. No zoning
compliance certificate and building certificate shall be issued for the
construction, alteration, or remodeling of any building or structure until an
application has been submitted in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and the building code. All applications for zoning compliance
certificates must include the following exhibits:
      1.   The actual shape, location and dimensions of the lot.
      2.   Dimensional drawings indicating the shape, size, and location of all
buildings or other structures to be erected, altered, or moved, and of any
buildings or other structures already on the lot.
      3.   The existing and intended use of the lot and of all such structures
upon it, including, in the residential area, the number of dwelling units the
building is intended to accommodate.
      4.   Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may
be essential for determining whether the provisions of this chapter will be
observed.
      5.   The legal description of the property, the name and address of the
owner, the applicant and the contractors.
If the proposed excavation, construction, alteration or moving, or use of land,
as set forth in the application are in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter, the zoning administrator shall issue a zoning compliance certificate.
If any application for such certificate is not approved, the zoning
administrator shall state in writing on the application, the cause for such
disapproval. Issuance of a permit shall in no case be construed as waiving any
provisions of this chapter. Any certificate issued in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter shall be considered void.
Under no circumstances is the zoning administrator permitted to make changes in
this chapter, nor to vary the terms of this chapter in carrying out his duties
as zoning administrator.
"Alteration" or "remodeling" of an existing building or structure shall include
any changes in structural members, stairways, basic construction, type, kind or
class of occupancy, light or ventilation, means of egress and ingress or any
other changes affecting or regulated by the building code or this chapter,
except for minor repairs or changes not involving any of the aforesaid
provisions.
Each certificate shall be posted in plain sight on the premises for which it is
issued until completion of construction or occupancy.
The particular requirements for obtaining the necessary building permit are
established by the building code as adopted from time to time by the city
council. Such building permit is to be obtained in addition to the
aforementioned zoning compliance certificate.
   (B)   Permits For New Use Of Land: A zoning compliance certificate shall
also be obtained for the new use of land, whether presently vacant or a change
in land use classification is proposed.
   (C)   Permits For New Use Of Buildings Or Structures: A zoning compliance
certificate shall also be obtained for any change in use of an existing
building or structure to a different class or type.
   (D)   Records Of Certificates: A record of all zoning compliance
certificates shall be kept in the office of the zoning administrator, and
copies of such zoning compliance certificates shall be furnished upon request
to a person or persons having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the property
involved. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-17-10: CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY:
It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of any land, or structure for
which a compliance certificate or building permit is required, and to use or
permit to be used any building or structure hereafter altered, extended,
erected, repaired, or moved, until the zoning administrator shall have issued a
certificate of occupancy stating that the proposed development complies with
the provisions of this chapter.
   (A)   Certificate Of Occupancy: The certificate of occupancy as required for
new construction or renovations to existing buildings and structures by this
chapter shall also constitute certificates of occupancy as required by the
building code. All certificates of occupancy shall be applied for coinciding
with the application for a building permit.
   (B)   Certificates For Existing Buildings: Certificates of occupancy shall
be issued for existing buildings, structures, or parts thereof, or existing
uses of land if after inspection it is found that such buildings, structures,
or parts thereof, or such uses of land, comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (C)   Temporary Certificates: Temporary certificates of occupancy may be
issued for a part of a building or structure prior to the occupation of the
entire building or structure, provided that such temporary certificate of
occupancy shall not remain in force more than six (6) months from date of
issuance, nor more than fifteen (15) days after the building or structure is
fully completed and ready for occupancy and, provided further, that such
portions of the building or structure are in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter.
   (D)   Certificates Of Occupancy Applications: Certificates of occupancy for
the use of vacant land shall be applied for before any such land shall be
occupied or used.
   (E)   Records Of Certificates: A record of all certificates of occupancy
shall be kept in the office of the zoning administrator, and copies of such
certificates of occupancy shall be furnished upon request to a person or
persons having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the property involved.
   (F)   Certificates For Accessory Buildings To Dwellings: Accessory buildings
or structures to dwelling shall not require a separate certificate of
occupancy, but rather may be included in the certificate of occupancy for the
principal dwelling, building, or structure on the same lot when such accessory
buildings or structures are completed at the same time as the principal use.
   (G)   Application For Certificates: Certificates of occupancy shall be
applied for in writing to the zoning administrator on forms provided by the
zoning administrator, and shall be issued within ten (10) days after the
receipt of such application, if it is found that the building or structure or
part thereof, or the use of land complies with the provisions of this chapter.
If such certificate is refused for cause, the applicant therefor shall be
notified of such refusal and the cause thereof within the aforesaid ten (10)
day period. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-17-11: FINAL INSPECTION:
The recipient of any zoning compliance certificate or building permit for the
construction, erection, alteration, repair or moving of any building, structure
or part thereof, shall notify the zoning administrator immediately upon the
completion of the work authorized by such permit for a final inspection. (Ord.
567, 11-1976)
10-17-12: FEES:
To defray the expenses for inspection of plans or property, fees for inspection
and the issuance of certificates or permits or copies thereof required or
issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be collected by the zoning
administrator at the time of application.
The amount of such fees shall be established from time to time by the city
council and shall cover the cost of inspection and supervision resulting from
the enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-17-13: ENTERPRISE ZONE:
   (A)   The city hereby initiates and designates, subject to the approval of
the department of commerce and community affairs, and supports, the intent of
the county to initiate and designate as an enterprise zone, the area described
in appendix A of ordinance 959. The city finds that the designated enterprise
zone area is a contiguous area, comprises not less than one-half (1/2) square
mile and not more than ten (10) square miles in total area, exclusive of lakes
and waterways, is a depressed area, satisfies any additional criteria
established by regulation of the department of commerce and community affairs,
and is entirely located within the county and partially located within the city
as is reasonably necessary for the establishment of such zone, thereby in all
respects meeting the qualifications of section 4 of the Illinois enterprise
zone act 1 . (Ord. 959, 12-27-1982; amd. Ord. 1156, 8-5-1987; Ord. 1209, 9-6-
1988; Ord. 1812, 9-7-2004)
   (B)   The city hereby provides for those tax incentives or reimbursement for
taxes set forth in appendix C, amended tax incentives, of ordinance 989. (Ord.
989, 9-6-1983)
   (C)   The enterprise zone shall be in effect for twenty (20) calendar years
and shall terminate at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on December 31 of the
final calendar year unless altered by proper legal procedure set forth in the
act.
   (D)   The city will serve as the lead agency in the application process and
will be responsible for the overall administration of the enterprise zone
program. The mayor of the city shall serve as the zone administrator.
   (E)   There shall be created an enterprise zone advisory committee whose
function it shall be to recommend guidelines and criteria for the
administration of the zone program, to oversee the administration of the
program and to serve the zone administrator in an advisory capacity. The
enterprise zone committee shall consist of the individuals holding the offices
or positions set forth in appendix B of ordinance 959.
   (F)   The city may designate one or more organizations provided for in the
enterprise zone act as designated zone organizations. Both the county and city
may, by ordinance, delegate functions within the enterprise zone to the
designated zone organizations, if any.
   (G)   The mayor of the city shall execute such documents as may be necessary
for making the required application and said mayor shall be authorized to
provide such additional information as may be required by the department of
commerce and community affairs. (Ord. 959, 12-27-1982)
 
Notes
1 1. 20 ILCS 655/1 et seq.
10-17-14: REZONES:
   (A)   Upon the filing of a petition for zoning change or relief under the
ordinances of the city of Canton, the city building officer will cause to be
posted on the property visible to those passing by, a notice stating that a
change is being sought, the time and place of the hearing on the petition and
that the petition may be viewed at the office of the city clerk.
   (B)   Said notice shall be at least eighteen inches by twenty four inches
(18" x 24") and shall be posted not less than ten (10) days prior to the
hearing on the front line of the property nearest to the sidewalk or terrace as
the case may be so that it faces the street. (Ord. 1857, 2-21-2006)
10-17-15: SHORT-TERM RENTALS:
   (A)   Purpose: Short-term rentals, as that term is defined herein, are
relatively new and part of a developing market, which is ever evolving and
marketed predominantly through e-commerce. Such short-term rentals offer
economic advantages and benefits to the City and to property owners in the City
who seek to operate such short-term rentals. In order to fulfil said benefit
and alleviate any potential adverse impacts in the City, the City has
determined that it is reasonable and necessary to regulate short-term rentals
in the interest of public health, safety, and the welfare of the City's
residents.
   (B)   Definitions: As used in this Section, unless a different meaning
clearly appears from the context, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed as follows:
 
                   A person or persons staying in a short-term rental overnight
GUEST:             and having a permanent residence at an address other than
                   the address of the short-term rental temporarily occupied.
                   A room or group of rooms within a structure, building, or
                   dwelling that is kept, used, maintained as or advertised or
GUESTROOM:         held out to the public to be a short-term rental, as defined
                   herein, where sleeping or room accommodations are furnished
                   for payment.
HOTEL/MOTEL TAX:   The tax as imposed by Title 3, Chapter 23, "Hotel/Motel
                   Tax," of the Canton Municipal Code.
                   The owner of the short-term rental or the owner's agent who
OPERATOR:          operates the short-term rental by renting out guestrooms to
                   guests, as provided herein.
                   Any natural person, partnership, corporation, or association
OWNER:             that is the legal, record owner of the property where the
                   short-term rental is operated thereon.
                   A structure, building, or dwelling, including, but not
                   limited to, an apartment, house, cottage, condominium,
                   duplex, or other furnished accommodation where no more than
                   five (5) guestrooms are rented to public guests for no more
                   than twenty-nine (29) consecutive days. The City's Joint
                   Planning and Zoning Commission (the "Commission") may
SHORT-TERM RENTAL: recommend allowing more than five (5) guestrooms upon
                   majority vote of the Commission. All such accommodations are
                   to be reserved in advance, via any method, including e-
                   commerce. Short-term rentals shall include the rental of a
                   single guestroom and even the rental of the entire
                   structure, building, or dwelling to such reserved public
                   guests.
 
   (C)   Conditional Use Permit Required.
      1.   No person, partnership, corporation, or association, either as owner
or operator, or in any other capacity, shall operate or allow to be operated a
short-term rental without having first obtained a conditional use permit to do
so for each location. If a location has more than one (1) unit at that location
(e.g. more than one apartment or condominium), then only one conditional permit
for that location is required. The use of any property as a short-term rental
without a conditional use permit is expressly prohibited.
      2.   Conditional use permits shall be issued for a period of one (1) year
from the date of issuance, unless revoked sooner. The permit is non-
transferable and non-assignable.
      3.   No conditional use permit shall be issued or renewed annually for a
short-term rental that is delinquent in its payment of the hotel/motel tax due
to the State of Illinois or the City as provided for in Title 3, Chapter 23,
"Hotel/Motel Tax," of the Canton Municipal Code.
      4.   If a conditional use permit was issued for the prior year, the
approval for a renewed permit shall be obtained from the Director of Commercial
Planning & Zoning, or his/her designee, provided that the previously issued
permit was not revoked or suspended and the rental is current on the hotel/
motel tax and all necessary fees. Every renewal application shall satisfy all
requirements set forth in this Section 10-17-15.
      5.   No conditional use permit shall be initially issued unless a public
hearing is held, the Application is reviewed by the Joint Planning and Zoning
Commission for its findings and recommendations, and it is then authorized by
the City Council.
      6.   The City requires a nonrefundable one-hundred-dollar ($100.00)
processing fee to be paid at the time of application for the conditional use
permit. Said processing fee will also apply to all renewal applications.
   (D)   Districts Short-Term Rentals Are Permitted: The operation of a short-
term rental in the City is permitted in any and all Districts that allow one-
family residential dwellings, two-family residential dwellings, multiple
dwellings, bed and breakfasts, hotels, and/or motor hotels.
   (E)   Application: Applications for short-term rental conditional use
permits shall be filed with the City Clerk and Planning and Zoning Department
and processed in the same manner as that is required for special uses as set
forth in Sections
10-17-7(B) of this Chapter. Said applications shall be of such form,
accompanied by such information, as shall be established from time to time by
the Joint Planning and Zoning Commission. An initial form of the application
may be prepared by the City Attorney until same is amended by the Joint
Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (F)   Standards: The Joint Planning and Zoning Commission shall not
recommend a short-term rental conditional use permit to the City Council for
approval unless the following requirements have been met:
      1.   The owner and/or operator has obtained a necessary special use
permit, if the property where the short-term rental is proposed to be operated
at would fall within a "Special Use Exception" within such particular District;
      2.   The short-term rental will be operated in a manner so that the
public health, safety and welfare will be protected;
      3.   The short-term rental shall not cause appreciable injury to the
value of other property in the neighborhood in which it is located;
      4.   The short-term rental complies with all building standards
applicable to a "dwelling," as that term is defined, in the Building Codes set
forth in Section
4-1-1 of the Canton Municipal Code;
      5.   The short-term rental complies with all applicable state and local
fire standards;
      6.   The short-term rental has been inspected by the Director of
Commercial Zoning and Planning or his/her designee;
      7.   The operator of the short-term rental provides the City with an
insurance certificate indicating that the Owner, Operator, and the property are
covered by commercial liability insurance with limits of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence, for bodily injury and property
damage arising from and after the issuance of the conditional use permit;
         a.   The insurance policy shall be issued by an insurer duly
authorized to provide insurance policies within the State of Illinois.
Furthermore, any such insurance policy must include a provision requiring at
least thirty (30) day advance notice to the City prior to a cancellation or
lapse of the policy. Any such policy shall remain in full force and effect for
the duration of the conditional use.
      8.   The short-term rental complies with all hotel/motel tax
requirements, including but not limited to all reporting requirements, of the
Illinois Department of Revenue and the City for the operation of a short-term
rental; and
      9.   The short-term rental complies with all other requirements of the
City Municipal Code and applicable State and Federal laws and regulations.
Upon recommendation by the Joint Planning and Zoning Commission, the City
Council may refer the application back to the Commission for additional review,
or, by motion, may approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove, an
application for a conditional use permit utilizing the same standards set forth
above.
Regardless of the Joint Planning and Zoning Commission's findings on any or all
of the foregoing standards, the City Council may deny a conditional use permit
upon an express finding that such denial is in the public interest.
An operator that is granted a conditional use permit under this Section shall
continue to comply with all of the above standards, as well as any other
requirements set forth in this Section or the Canton Municipal Code, throughout
the term of any permit granted hereunder.
   (G)   Posting of Conditional Use Permit: Every operator shall post, in a
conspicuous place within the short-term rental, the conditional use permit
along with the name and telephone number of the operator or his/her/its
authorized agent.
   (H)   Applicability of Hotel/Motel Tax: All short-term rentals are subject
to the Hotel/Motel Tax as set forth in in Title 3, Chapter 23, "Hotel/Motel
Tax," of the Canton Municipal Code. All short-term rentals are required comply
with the same requirements set forth in said Title 3, Chapter 23 as "hotels,"
including the Collection and Payment of Tax set forth in Section
3-23-5 of the Canton Municipal Code and are further subject to all penalties
set forth in such Title 3, Chapter 23 of the Canton Municipal Code for failure
to comply with those requirements.
   (I)   Inspections: The City reserves the right to inspect any short-term
rentals or request documentation from an owner or operator of a short-term
rental for purposes of determining compliance or continued with any of the
standards or requirements of this Section or the Canton Municipal Code.
   (J)    Minimum/Maximum Stay:
      1.   No guest may stay in an authorized short-term rental for less than
twenty-four (24) hours.
      2.   No guest may stay in an authorized short-term rental for more than
twenty-nine (29) consecutive days.
   (K)   Penalty; Violations; Revocation or Suspension of Conditional Use
Permit:
      1.   Violations of this Section shall be governed by Title 1, Chapter 27,
"General Penalty," of the Canton Municipal Code and the fee schedule that is
adopted by the City Council from time to time, if applicable.
      2.   Any conditional use permit may be revoked or suspended by the Mayor
if the Mayor finds:
         a.   That the operator has violated and/or fails to comply with any of
the provisions of this Section regulating short-term rentals;
         b.   The operator knowingly furnished false or misleading information
or withheld relevant information on any application for a permit required by
this Section or knowingly caused or suffered another to furnish or withhold
such information on his, her, or its behalf;
         c.   The operator fails to pay any applicable State or City tax or
fee; or
         d.   The owner, operator, or their guests, violate any local, state or
federal law relating to the property and/or the occupation and/or operation
thereof. Any illegal conduct being conducted on the premises may be considered
grounds for suspension or revocation of a conditional use permit granted
hereunder.
The Mayor, or his or her authorized designees, before revoking or suspending
any permit for a period of more than fourteen (14) days, shall give the
operator at least ten (10) days' written notice of the charges against him,
her, or it and the opportunity for a public hearing before the Joint Planning
and Zoning Commission and the Mayor, at which time the operator may present
evidence bearing upon the question. In such cases, the charges shall be
specific and in writing. The Joint Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a
recommendation to the Mayor regarding the revocation and/or suspension;
however, the Mayor is not bound to accept such recommendation in his final
determination.
      3.   In addition to the foregoing provisions, the proper authorities of
the City may institute any appropriate action or proceedings, including the
obtaining of an injunction to prevent a violation of this section. The
defendant in any such action shall be responsible for the reasonable costs of
such action, which shall include, but not limited to, the City's court costs
and attorney fees. Such sums shall be made a part of any judgment entered and
shall be enforceable as part of the final judgment. (Ord. 4288, 4-19-2022)
CHAPTER 18
INTERPRETATION; PENALTIES, VALIDITY AND CODIFICATION
SECTION:
10-18-1: Interpretation
10-18-2: Penalty
10-18-3: Enforcement
10-18-4: Validity
10-18-5: Codification
10-18-1: INTERPRETATION:
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this title shall be
held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public
health, morals, safety, and general welfare. It is not intended for this title
to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with private
agreement, or with restrictive covenants running with the land. Where this
title imposes a greater restriction upon provisions of law, ordinance, contract
or deed, the provisions of this title shall control. Wherever the requirements
of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully
adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances, the most restrictive, or that
imposing the higher standards shall govern. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-18-2: PENALTY:
   (A)   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to
comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this
title shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than fifty
dollars ($50.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building,
structure or land is used in violation of this title, the proper authorities of
the city council, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate
action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, maintenance, or use;
to restrain, correct, or abate such violation; to prevent the occupancy of said
building, structure, or land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business,
or use in or about such premises. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-18-3: ENFORCEMENT:
Notwithstanding any provision herein, the enforcement of said provisions may be
in any manner cognizant with the law. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-18-4: VALIDITY:
Should any article, section, clause or provision of this chapter be declared by
court to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of this chapter as
a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid.
(Ord. 567, 11-1976)
10-18-5: CODIFICATION:
As of the date of council adoption, this ordinance shall be made a part of the
codified Canton municipal code as title 10 thereof. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
CHAPTER 19
CONFLICTING PROVISIONS REPEALED
SECTION:
10-19-1: Enactment
10-19-1: ENACTMENT:
The enactment and adoption of this title shall have the effect of repealing any
prior zoning ordinance of this city. (Ord. 567, 11-1976)
CHAPTER 20
DEVELOPMENT IN FLOODPLAIN AREAS
SECTION:
10-20-1: Purpose
10-20-2: Definitions
10-20-3: Base Flood Elevation
10-20-4: Duties Of The Public Works Director
10-20-5: Development Permit
10-20-6: Preventing Increased Flood Heights And Resulting Damages
10-20-7: Protecting Buildings
10-20-8: Subdivision Requirements
10-20-9: Public Health And Other Standards
10-20-10: Carrying Capacity And Notification
10-20-11: Variances
10-20-12: Disclaimer Of Liability
10-20-13: Penalty
10-20-14: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
10-20-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this city of
Canton by the Illinois municipal code 1  in order to accomplish the following
purposes:
   (A)   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
   (B)   Protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood
damage;
   (C)   To promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens from the hazards of flooding;
   (D)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to
public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
   (E)   Maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas;
   (F)   Make federally subsidized flood insurance available; and
   (G)   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and storm water impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development. (Ord. 2018, 11-2-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, 5/11-31-2.
10-20-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood.
The base flood elevation at any location is as defined in section
10-20-3 of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
crest of the base flood.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BUILDING: A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage tank,
that is principally aboveground, including manufactured homes, prefabricated
buildings and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes recreational
vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than one hundred
eighty (180) days per year.
CRITICAL FACILITY: Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of
the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can
put special populations at risk.
Examples of critical facilities where flood protection should be required
include: emergency services facilities (such as fire and police stations),
schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care facilities, major roads
and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone switching stations or electrical
transformers), and hazardous material storage facilities (chemicals,
petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances).
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate including, but not necessarily
limited to:
   (A)   Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a
building, or any structural alteration to a building;
   (B)   Substantial improvement of an existing building;
   (C)   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year;
   (D)   Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges, culverts or
similar projects;
   (E)   Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls or fences;
   (F)   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or
other alterations of the ground surface;
   (G)   Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid storage
tanks, and channel modifications or any other activity that might change the
direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
"Development" does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities, resurfacing roads, or gardening, plowing, and similar practices
that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations
adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA: Federal emergency management agency.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation,
or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: A map prepared by the federal emergency management
agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a
community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict
floodways and show base flood elevations.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood plus one foot
(1') of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
FLOODPLAIN AND SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): These two (2) terms are
synonymous. Those lands within the jurisdiction of the city of Canton, the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city of Canton, or that may be annexed
into the city of Canton, that are subject to inundation by the base flood. The
floodplains of the city of Canton are generally identified as such on panel
numbers 210, 220 and 225 of the countywide flood insurance rate map of Fulton
County prepared by the federal emergency management agency and dated February
4, 2011. Floodplain also includes those areas of known flooding as identified
by the community. The floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Fulton
County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city of Canton
or that may be annexed into the city of Canton are generally identified as such
on the flood insurance rate map prepared for Fulton County by the federal
emergency management agency and dated February 4, 2011.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate, property and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by the federal emergency management
agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation.
FLOODWAY: That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the base
flood. The floodways for each of the floodplains of the city of Canton shall be
according to the best data available from federal, state, or other sources.
FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed
development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable
effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   (A)   Listed individually in the national register of historic places or
preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the national register.
   (B)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily determined
by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
   (C)   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by the
Illinois historic preservation agency.
   (D)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has
been certified by the Illinois historic preservation agency.
IDNR/OWR: Illinois department of natural resources/office of water resources.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor. Provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of section
10-20-7 of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, that is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more lots for rent or sale.
NFIP: National flood insurance program.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the start of construction commenced on
or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements of such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is:
   (A)   Built on a single chassis;
   (B)   Four hundred (400) square feet or less in size;
   (C)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds twenty
five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
SFHA: See definition of Floodplain And Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date the
building permit was issued. This, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other
improvement, was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The
actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation
of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of
excavation or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a
substantial improvement, actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: See definition of Building.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cumulative percentage of damage subsequent to the adoption of this chapter
equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred regardless of actual repair work performed.
Volunteer labor and materials must be included in this determination. The term
includes "repetitive loss buildings" (see definition of Repetitive Loss).
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: (A) Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
improvement of a structure taking place subsequent to the adoption of this
chapter in which the cumulative percentage of improvements:
      1.   Equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the improvement or repair is started, or
      2.   Increases the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%).
"Substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure. This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss or
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work done.
   (B)   The term does not include:
      1.   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
      2.   Any alteration of a structure listed on the national register of
historic places or the Illinois register of historic places.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the required federal, state, and/or local permits
and elevation certification is presumed to be in violation until such time as
the documentation is provided. (Ord. 2018, 11-2-2010)
10-20-3: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
This chapter's protection standard is the base flood. The best available base
flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available
data, the party shall finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace
the existing data with better data and submit it to the FEMA and IDNR/OWR for
approval prior to any development of the site.
   (A)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of Copperas Creek,
Illinois River, Spoon River, Tributary to Swegle Creek shall be as delineated
on the 100-year flood profiles in the countywide flood insurance study of
Fulton County prepared by the federal emergency management agency and dated
February 4, 2011.
   (B)   The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains
delineated as an "A zone" on the countywide flood insurance rate map of Fulton
County shall be according to the best data available from federal, state or
other sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be
financed by the applicant to determine base flood elevations.
   (C)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of
unincorporated Fulton County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction
of the city of Canton, or that may be annexed into the city of Canton, shall be
as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood insurance study of
Fulton County prepared by the federal emergency management agency and dated
February 4, 2011. (Ord. 2018, 11-2-2010)
10-20-4: DUTIES OF THE PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR:
The public works director or his/her designee shall be responsible for the
general administration of this chapter and ensure that all development
activities within the floodplains under the jurisdiction of the city of Canton
meet the requirements of this chapter. Specifically, the public works director
or his/her designee shall:
   (A)   Process development permits in accordance with section
10-20-5 of this chapter;
   (B)   Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no
delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of section
10-20-6 of this chapter;
   (C)   Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings
subject to section
10-20-7 of this chapter are met and maintain a record of the "as built"
elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) or floodproof certificate;
   (D)   Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of
section
10-20-8 of this chapter;
   (E)   Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the public
health standards of section
10-20-9 of this chapter;
   (F)   If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of section
10-20-11 of this chapter are met and maintain documentation of any variances
granted;
   (G)   Inspect all development projects and take any and all penalty actions
outlined in section
10-20-13 of this chapter as are necessary to ensure compliance with this
chapter;
   (H)   Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other
required local, state, and federal permits;
   (I)   Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse;
   (J)   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about
permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
   (K)   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this chapter;
   (L)   Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps,
copies of state and federal permits, and documentation of compliance for
development activities subject to this chapter;
   (M)   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter and
make substantial damage determinations for structures within the floodplain;
and
   (N)   Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR
and/or submitting information to FEMA within six (6) months whenever a
modification of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in
a change to the floodplain map. (Ord. 2018, 11-2-2010)
10-20-5: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law shall
commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a
development permit from the public works director and his/her designee. The
public works director and his/her designee shall not issue a development permit
if the proposed development does not meet the requirements of this chapter.
   (A)   The application for development permit shall be accompanied by:
      1.   Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line
dimensions;
      2.   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling;
      3.   The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings;
      4.   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section
10-20-7 of this chapter; and
      5.   Cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer
or architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this requirement.
   (B)   Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the public
works director or his/her designee shall compare the elevation of the site to
the base flood elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown by
the base flood elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown by
survey data to be higher than the current base flood elevation and which has
not been filled after the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map is
not in the floodplain and therefore not subject to the requirements of this
chapter. Conversely, any development located on land shown to be below the base
flood elevation and hydraulically connected, but not shown on the current flood
insurance rate map, is subject to the provisions of this chapter.
The public works director or his/her designee shall maintain documentation of
the existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that
this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood
insurance rate map identification.
The public works director or his/her designee shall be responsible for
obtaining from the applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local
permits, approvals or permit not required letters that may be required for this
type of activity. The public works director or his/her designee shall not issue
a permit unless all other federal, state, and local permits have been obtained.
(Ord. 2018, 11-2-2010)
10-20-6: PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING DAMAGES:
Within any floodway identified on the countywide flood insurance rate map, and
within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the
following standards shall apply:
   (A)   Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, no development
shall be allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated
development will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or threat to
public health and safety. The following specific development activities shall
be considered as meeting this requirement:
      1.   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the
following conditions of the Illinois department of natural resources, office of
water resources statewide permit number 2:
         (a)   The crossing will not result in an increase in water surface
profile elevation in excess of 1.0 foot, and
         (b)   The crossing will not result in an increase in water surface
profile elevation in excess of one-half foot (0.5') at a point one thousand
feet (1,000') upstream of the proposed structure.
         (c)   There are no buildings in the area impacted by the increases in
water surface profile.
         (d)   The proposed bridge or culvert crossing will not involve
straightening, enlarging, or relocating the existing channel.
         (e)   The design must be certified by a licensed professional engineer
in the state of Illinois and the designs must meet the conditions of an IDNR/
OWR permit.
         (f)   The design must be certified by a second licensed professional
engineer.
      2.   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the following conditions of IDNR/
OWR statewide permit number 3:
         (a)   The permit is only applicable when deadmen, pier cells, or other
similar anchorage devices have been permitted by the U.S. army corps of
engineers.
      3.   Aerial utility crossings meeting the following conditions of IDNR/
OWR statewide permit number 4:
         (a)   The utility line must be constructed above the existing 100-year
flood elevation or attached to an existing bridge.
         (b)   A utility line attached to an existing bridge shall be
constructed above the low cord elevation of the bridge.
         (c)   No supporting towers or poles shall be located in a river, lake
or stream.
         (d)   Supporting towers including foundation and poles shall be
designed and located so as to not cause an obstruction of flood flows by
trapping debris.
         (e)   All disturbed areas shall be returned to preconstruction grades
and revegetated.
         (f)   All Illinois commerce commission, national electrical safety
code, and federal requirements must be met.
      4.   Minor boat docks meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 5:
         (a)   The boat dock must not extend more than fifty feet (50') into a
waterway and no more than one-fourth (1/4) of the width of the waterway and
shall not extend beyond the navigational limited established by the IDNR and
corps of engineers.
         (b)   The width of the boat dock shall not be more than ten feet
(10').
         (c)   For L-shaped or T-shaped docks, the length of that portion
parallel to the shoreline must not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
landowner's shoreline frontage nor fifty feet (50').
         (d)   Docks must be aligned so as not to cross the projection of
property lines into the waterway or come within ten feet (10') of the projected
property line.
         (e)   Dock posts must be marked by reflective devices.
         (f)   The boat dock must be securely anchored to prevent detachment
during times of high wind or water.
         (g)   Metal drums or containers may not be used as buoyancy units
unless they are filled with flotation foam. Containers which previously stored
pesticides, herbicides, or any other toxic chemicals are not permissible.
         (h)   This permit does not authorize any other related construction
activity such as shore protection or fill.
         (i)   Nonfloating boat docks must be constructed in a manner which
will minimize obstruction to flow.
         (j)   At any future date, the permittee must agree to make necessary
modifications to the dock as determined by the IDNR or corps of engineers.
      5.   Minor, nonobstructive activities meeting the following conditions of
IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 6:
         (a)   The following activities (not involving fill or positive change
in grade) are covered by this permit:
            (1)   The construction of underground utility lines, wells, or
septic tanks not crossing a lake or stream.
            (2)   The construction of light poles, signposts, and similar
structures.
            (3)   The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields
(excluding fences), patios, and similar structures.
            (4)   The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open
structures such as playground equipment, pavilions, and carports.
            (5)   The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding
seventy (70) square feet in size, nor ten (10) square feet in any dimension.
Only one such building on a property is authorized by this statewide permit.
            (6)   The raising of existing buildings, provided no changes are
made to the outside dimensions of the building and the placement of fill is not
involved.
      6.   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 7:
         (a)   Any outfall structure, including any head wall or end section,
shall not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank
slope or adjacent bank protection.
         (b)   The velocity of the discharge shall not exceed the scour
velocity of the channel soil, unless channel erosion would be prevented by the
use of riprap or other design measures.
         (c)   Outlets from drainage ditches shall not be opened to a stream
until the ditch is vegetated or otherwise stabilized to minimize stream
sedimentation.
         (d)   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be restored to their original
contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
      7.   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 8:
         (a)   In all cases, the crossing shall be placed beneath the bed of
the river, lake or stream and, unless the crossing is encased in concrete or
entrenched in bedrock, a minimum of three feet (3') of cover shall be provided.
The river, lake or stream bed shall be returned to its original condition.
         (b)   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including stream banks, shall be restored to their original
contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
         (c)   Any utility crossing carrying material which may cause water
pollution, as defined by the environmental protection act 1 , shall be provided
with shutoff valves on each side of the body of water to be crossed.
         (d)   If blasting is to be utilized in the construction of the
crossing, the permittee shall notify the IDNR/OWR at least ten (10) days prior
to the blasting date to allow monitoring of any related fish kills.
      8.   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 9:
         (a)   Only the following materials may be utilized in urban areas:
stone and concrete riprap, steel sheet piling, cellular blocks, fabric formed
concrete, gabion baskets, rock and wire mattresses, sand/cement filled bags,
geotechnical fabric materials, natural vegetation and treated timber. Urban
areas are defined as: areas of the state where residential, commercial, or
industrial development currently exists or, based on land use plans or
controls, is expected to occur within ten (10) years. (The department should be
consulted if there is a question of whether or not an area is considered
urban.)
         (b)   In addition to the materials listed in subsection (A)8(a) of
this section, other materials (e.g., tire revetments) may be utilized in rural
areas provided all other conditions of this permit are met.
         (c)   The following materials shall not be used in any case: auto
bodies, garbage or debris, scrap lumber, metal refuse, roofing materials,
asphalt or other bituminous materials, or any material which would cause water
pollution as defined by the environmental protection act 2 .
         (d)   The affected length of shoreline, stream bank, or channel to be
protected shall not exceed, either singularly or cumulatively, one thousand
feet (1,000').
         (e)   All material utilized shall be properly sized or anchored to
resist anticipated forces of current and wave action.
         (f)   Materials shall be placed in a way which would not cause erosion
or the accumulation of debris on properties adjacent to or opposite the
project.
         (g)   Materials shall not be placed higher than the existing top of
the bank.
         (h)   Materials shall be placed so that the modified bank full width
and cross sectional area of the channel will conform to or be no more
restrictive than that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the
site.
For projects involving continuous placement of riprap along the bank, toe of
the bank or other similar applications, in no case shall the cross sectional
area of the natural channel be reduced by more than ten percent (10%) nor the
volume of material placed exceed two (2) cubic yards per linear foot of the
stream bank or shoreline. The bank may be graded to obtain a flatter slope and
to lessen the quantity of material required.
         (i)   If broken concrete is used, all protruding materials such as
reinforcing rods shall be cut flush with the surface of the concrete and
removed from the construction area.
         (j)   Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
         (k)   In the case of sea walls and gabion structures on lakes, the
structure shall be constructed at or landward of the water line as determined
by the normal pool elevation, unless:
            (1)   It is constructed in alignment with an existing sea wall(s)
or gabion structure(s), and
            (2)   The volume of material placed, including the structure, would
not exceed two (2) cubic yards per linear foot.
         (l)   Excess material excavated during the construction of the bank or
shoreline protection shall be placed in accordance with local, state, and
federal laws and rules, shall not be placed in a floodway.
      9.   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 10:
         (a)   The accessory structure or building addition must comply with
the requirements of the local floodplain ordinance.
         (b)   The principal structure to which the project is being added must
have been in existence on the effective date of this permit (July 25, 1988).
         (c)   The accessory structure or addition must not exceed five hundred
(500) square feet in size and must not deflect floodwaters onto another
property, and
         (d)   Must not involve the placement of any fill material.
         (e)   No construction shall be undertaken in, or within fifty feet
(50') of the bank of the stream channel.
         (f)   The accessory structure or addition must be properly anchored to
prevent its movement during flood conditions.
         (g)   Only one accessory structure or addition to an existing
structure shall be authorized by this permit; plans for any subsequent addition
must be submitted to IDNR/OWR for review.
         (h)   Disturbances of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed floodway areas
shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
      10.   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 11:
         (a)   The affected length of the stream shall not either singularly or
cumulatively exceed one thousand feet (1,000').
         (b)   The project shall not include the construction of any new
channel; all work must be confined to the existing channel or to reestablishing
flows in the natural stream channel, and
         (c)   The cross sectional area of the dredged channel shall conform to
that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the site.
         (d)   Dredged or spoil material shall not be disposed of in a wetland
and shall be either:
            (1)   Removed from the floodway;
            (2)   Used to stabilize an existing bank provided no materials
would be placed higher than the existing top of bank and provided the cross
sectional area of the natural channel would not be reduced by more than ten
percent (10%), nor the volume of material placed exceed two (2) cubic yards per
linear foot of stream bank;
            (3)   Used to fill an existing washed out or scoured floodplain
area such that the average natural floodplain elevation is not increased;
            (4)   Used to stabilize an existing levee provided the height of
the levee would not be increased nor its alignment changed;
            (5)   Placed in a disposal site previously approved by the
department in accordance with the conditions of the approval; or
            (6)   Used for beach nourishment, provided the material meets all
applicable water quality standards.
         (e)   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be seeded or otherwise
stabilized upon completion of construction.
      11.   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening
meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 12:
         (a)   A licensed professional engineer shall determine and document
that the existing structure has not been the cause of demonstrable flood
damage. Such documentation shall include, at a minimum, confirmation that:
            (1)   No buildings or structures have been impacted by the
backwater induced by the existing structure, and
            (2)   There is no record of complaints of flood damages associated
with the existing structure.
         (b)   A licensed professional engineer shall determine that the new
structure will provide the same or greater effective waterway opening as the
existing structure. For bridge widening projects the existing piers and the
proposed pier extensions must be in line with the direction of the approaching
flow upstream of the bridge.
         (c)   The project shall not include any appreciable raising of the
approach roads. (This condition does not apply if all points on the approaches
exist at an elevation equal to or higher than the 100-year frequency flood
headwater elevation as determined by a FEMA flood insurance study completed or
approved by IDNR/OWR.)
         (d)   The project shall not involve the straightening, enlargement or
relocation of the existing channel of the river or stream except as permitted
by the department's statewide permit number 9 (minor shoreline, channel and
stream bank protection activities) or statewide permit number 11 (minor
maintenance dredging activities).
         (e)   The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by
this permit necessary to document compliance with the above conditions.
      12.   Temporary construction activities meeting the following conditions
of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 13:
         (a)   No temporary construction activity shall be commenced until the
individual permittee determines that the permanent structure (if any) for which
the work is being performed has received all required federal, state and local
authorizations.
         (b)   The term "temporary" shall mean not more than one construction
season. All temporary construction materials must be removed from the stream
and floodway within one year of their placement and the area returned to the
conditions existing prior to the beginning of construction. Any desired
subsequent or repetitive material placement shall not occur without the review
and approval of the IDNR/OWR.
         (c)   The temporary project shall be constructed such that it will not
cause erosion or damage due to increases in water surface profiles to adjacent
properties. For locations where there are structures in the upstream
floodplain, the temporary project shall be constructed such that all water
surface profile increases, due to the temporary project, are contained within
the channel banks.
         (d)   This permit does not authorize the placement or construction of
any solid embankment or wall such as a dam, roadway, levee, or dike across any
channel or floodway.
         (e)   No temporary structure shall be placed within any river or
stream channel until a licensed professional engineer determines and documents
that the temporary structure will meet the requirements of special condition
number 3 of this statewide permit. Such documentation shall include, at a
minimum, confirmation that no buildings or structures will be impacted by the
backwater induced by the temporary structure.
         (f)   The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by
this permit necessary to document compliance with the above condition.
         (g)   Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of the removal of the temporary
construction.
         (h)   Materials used for the project shall not cause water pollution
as defined by the environmental protection act 3 .
      13.   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway permit
requirements.
   (B)   Other development activities not listed in subsection (A) of this
section may be permitted only if:
      1.   Permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required), or
      2.   Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and
approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation. (Ord. 2018, 11-2-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 415 ILCS 5.
2 2. 415 ILCS 5.
3 1. 415 ILCS 5.
10-20-7: PROTECTING BUILDINGS:
   (A)   In addition to the damage prevention requirements of section
10-20-6 of this chapter, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be
protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. This building
protection requirement applies to the following situations:
      1.   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or seventy (70) square feet.
      2.   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than twenty percent
(20%) or equal or exceed the market value by fifty percent (50%). Alteration
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. If
substantially improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the
flood protection standards of this section.
      3.   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. If
substantially damaged the entire structure must meet the flood protection
standards of this section.
      4.   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. (The building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage.)
      5.   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
      6.   Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in section
10-20-2 of this chapter.
   (B)   Residential or nonresidential buildings can meet the building
protection requirements by one of the following methods:
      1.   The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance
with the following:
         (a)   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation.
         (b)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
(6") before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the
foundation before sloping below the flood protection elevation.
         (c)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure.
         (d)   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporated
debris or refuse material, and
         (e)   Shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or
onto neighboring properties and when necessary stormwater management techniques
such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
      2.   The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with the
following:
         (a)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles,
walls, crawl space, or other foundation that is permanently open to
floodwaters.
         (b)   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at
or above the flood protection elevation.
         (c)   If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection
elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs must either be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or by having a minimum of one permanent opening on each
wall no more than one foot (1') above grade with a minimum of two (2) openings.
The openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one square inch
for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base
flood elevation, and
         (d)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored,
designed, and certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such
as current, waves, ice, and floating debris.
            (1)   All structural components below the flood protection
elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage.
            (2)   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation provided they are waterproofed.
            (3)   The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used
solely for parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as
habitable space, or
            (4)   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply
with these requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
architect.
      3.   The building may be constructed with a crawl space located below the
flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
         (b)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall
have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed
area. The openings shall be no more than one foot (1') above grade.
         (c)   The interior grade of the crawl space below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent
exterior grade.
         (d)   The interior height of the crawl space measured from the
interior grade of the crawl to the top of the foundations wall must not exceed
four feet (4') at any point.
         (e)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawl space within a reasonable
period of time after a flood event.
         (f)   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage, and
         (g)   Utility systems within the crawl space must be elevated above
the flood protection elevation.
   (C)   Nonresidential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu
of elevation) provided a licensed professional engineer or architect certifies
that:
      1.   Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant
utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the
base flood.
      2.   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate of
rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the
impact from debris and ice.
      3.   Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building design
and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity.
      4.   Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection.
   (D)   Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on
site shall be:
      1.   Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance
with subsection (B) of this section, and
      2.   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being
tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois mobile
home tie down act issued pursuant to 77 Illinois administrative code section
870.
   (E)   Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year shall meet the elevation requirements of
subsection (D) of this section unless the following conditions are met:
      1.   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light duty
truck.
      2.   The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times.
      3.   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as
decks and porches.
      4.   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping, travel,
or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling.
      5.   The vehicle's largest horizontal projections must be no larger than
four hundred (400) square feet.
      6.   The vehicle's wheels must remain on axles and inflated.
      7.   Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be
safe for movement of the floodplain.
      8.   Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be
quick disconnect and above the 100-year flood elevation.
      9.   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle or
park model, and
      10.   Must either:
         (a)   Entirely be supported by jacks, or
         (b)   Have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching
the ground and be supported by block in a manner that will allow the block to
be easily removed by use of the hitch jack.
   (F)   Garages, sheds or other minor accessory structures constructed
ancillary to an existing residential use may be permitted provided the
following conditions are met:
      1.   The garage or shed must be nonhabitable.
      2.   The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles and
tools and cannot be modified later into another use.
      3.   The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have
the appropriate state and/or federal permits.
      4.   The garage or shed must be on a single-family lot and be accessory
to an existing principal structure on the same lot.
      5.   Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damage.
      6.   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
must be elevated above the flood protection elevation.
      7.   The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each
wall not more than one foot (1') above grade with one square inch of opening
for every one square foot of floor area.
      8.   The garage or shed must be less than ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) in market value or replacement cost whichever is greater or less
than five hundred (500) square feet.
      9.   The structure shall be anchored to resist flotation and overturning.
      10.   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation.
      11.   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications. (Ord. 2018, 11-2-2010)
10-20-8: SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS:
The city council shall take into account hazards, to the extent that they are
known, in all official actions related to land management use and development.
   (A)   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements,
planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protections
standards of sections
10-20-6 and
10-20-7 of this chapter. Any proposal for such development shall include the
following data:
      1.   The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain, where
the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant
shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation;
      2.   The boundary of the floodway when applicable; and
      3.   A signed statement by a licensed professional engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the plat act 1 .
Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid
out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and channels.
Wherever possible the floodplains shall be included within parks or other
public grounds. (Ord. 2018, 11-2-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 205/2.
10-20-9: PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS:
   (A)   Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In
addition to the requirements of sections
10-20-6 and
10-20-7 of this chapter the following standards apply:
      1.   No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless
such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and
certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed
according to the requirements of section
10-20-7 of this chapter.
      2.   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      3.   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
      4.   New and replacement on site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other aboveground openings
located below the flood protection elevation shall be watertight.
      5.   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet (3') above
the level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation whichever is greater.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes
elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to
all critical facilities.
   (B)   All other activities defined as "development" shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages. (Ord. 2018, 11-2-
2010)
10-20-10: CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION:
For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance
(including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be
maintained.
In addition, the city of Canton shall notify adjacent communities in writing
thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or
relocation of the watercourse. (Ord. 2018, 11-2-2010)
10-20-11: VARIANCES:
Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to the joint planning and zoning
commission for a variance. The joint planning and zoning commission shall
review the applicant's request for a variance and shall submit its
recommendation to the city council. The city council may attach such conditions
to granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the intent of this
chapter. (Ord. 2018, 11-2-2010; amd. Ord. 3041, 12-3-2013)
   (A)   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that
all of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain.
      2.   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted.
      3.   The relief requested is the minimum necessary.
      4.   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety or
creation of a nuisance.
      5.   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities.
      6.   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP, and
      7.   All other state and federal permits have been obtained. (Ord. 2018,
11-2-2010)
   (B)   The joint planning and zoning commission shall notify an applicant in
writing that a variance from the requirements of the building protection
standards of section
10-20-7 of this chapter that would lessen the degree of protection to a
building will: (Ord. 2018, 11-2-2010; amd. Ord. 3041, 12-3-2013)
      1.   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty
five dollars ($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage;
      2.   Increase the risk to life and property; and
      3.   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and
that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   (C)   Variances to the building protection requirements of section
10-20-7 of this chapter which are requested in connection with reconstruction,
repair, or alteration of a historic site or historic structure as defined in
"historic structures", may be granted using criteria more permissive than the
requirements of sections
10-20-6 and
10-20-7 of this chapter subject to the conditions that:
      1.   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
      2.   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being
removed as a certified historic structure. (Ord. 2018, 11-2-2010)
10-20-12: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free
from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part of
the city of Canton or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that
results from proper reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
made lawfully thereunder. (Ord. 2018, 11-2-2010)
10-20-13: PENALTY:
Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to
comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a
violation of this chapter. Upon due investigation, the city attorney may
determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exists. The
city attorney shall notify the owner in writing of such violation.
   (A)   If such owner fails after ten (10) days' notice to correct the
violation:
      1.   The city of Canton shall make application to the circuit court for
an injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order
as the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.
      2.   Any person who violates this chapter shall upon conviction thereof
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense.
      3.   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues, and
      4.   The city of Canton shall record a notice of violation on the title
of the property.
   (B)   The city attorney shall inform the owner that any such violation is
considered a wilful act to increase flood damages and therefore may cause
coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
The city attorney is authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension of
the subject development. The stop work order shall be in writing, indicate the
reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary, to resolve
the circumstances requiring the stop work order. The stop work order
constitutes a suspension of the permit. (Ord. 2018, 11-2-2010)
No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a
hearing is held by the joint planning and zoning commission. Written notice of
such hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall state: (Ord. 2018, 11-
2-2010; amd. Ord. 3041, 12-3-2013)
      1.   The grounds for the complaint, reasons for suspension or revocation,
and
      2.   The time and place of the hearing. (Ord. 2018, 11-2-2010)
At such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to present evidence
on their behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the joint planning and
zoning commission shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or
revoked. (Ord. 2018, 11-2-2010; amd. Ord. 3041, 12-3-2013)
   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent the city attorney from taking such other
lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord. 2018, 11-2-
2010)
10-20-14: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the city council
to fulfill the requirements of the national flood insurance program including:
ordinance 948, adopted September 21, 1982, and amended by ordinance 983,
adopted July 19, 1983. However, this chapter does not repeal the original
resolution or ordinance adopted to achieve eligibility in the program. Nor does
this chapter repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or
deed restrictions. Where this chapter and other ordinance easements, covenants
or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 2018, 11-2-2010)
TITLE 11
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
JURISDICTION; PURPOSE
SECTION:
11-1-1: Short Title
11-1-2: Jurisdiction
11-1-3: Purpose
11-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the SUBDIVISION
REGULATIONS OF THE CITY OF CANTON. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979)
11-1-2: JURISDICTION:
The rules and regulations governing plats and subdivisions of land contained
herein shall apply within the corporate limits of the city, and as may be
extended by annexation or otherwise; and outside the corporate limits of the
city when agreed upon between the city and other government units concerned,
and in the absence of such agreement as may be according to law. (Ord. 726, 7-
17-1979)
11-1-3: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of these regulations to establish minimum requirements for
the subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the city, and within
such part of the adjacent unincorporated area as may be within the subdivision
jurisdiction of the city, in order to protect, safeguard and promote the public
health, safety, convenience and welfare of the community. In addition to
establishing minimum requirements for the subdivision of land, these
regulations attempt to assist land developers and public officials in
processing subdivisions by:
   (A)   Facilitating the orderly growth and development of the city by
providing suitable residential commercial and industrial sites consistent with
the comprehensive plan 1 .
   (B)   Securing adequate traffic circulation through coordinated street
systems with relation to major thoroughfares, adjoining subdivisions and public
facilities.
   (C)   Achieving individual property lots of maximum utility and livability.
   (D)   Ensuring adequate provisions of water, drainage and sanitary sewer
facilities and other health requirements.
   (E)   Securing adequate provisions for recreational areas, school sites and
other public facilities.
   (F)   Facilitating the resubdivision of large tracts into smaller parcels of
land.
These regulations are also formulated to aid in the enforcement of the
development standards as authorized in the building code, zoning title and the
comprehensive plan of the city. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979)
 
Notes
1 1. See section 11-2-4 of this title.
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-2-1: Words And Terms Defined
11-2-1: WORDS AND TERMS DEFINED:
ALLEY OR SERVICE DRIVE: A passage or way affording a secondary means of
vehicular access to abutting properties which is not intended for general
traffic circulations.
CITY: The city of Canton, Illinois.
CITY ENGINEER: The city engineer of the city means the director of public
works.
COLLECTOR STREETS: All secondary thoroughfares shown on the major street plan
or shown as collector streets on the revised major street plan. A collector
street serves to collect and distribute medium volume traffic between major and
local streets or abutting property and to serve secondary traffic generators.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The official comprehensive plan of the city and environs,
being the official plan of the municipality, as adopted and amended by the city
council.
COUNTY ENGINEER: The Fulton County superintendent of highways.
LOCAL STREET: A street which primarily serves to provide access to abutting
property and connect with collector and/or major streets, discouraging all
through traffic.
MAJOR STREET PLAN: The plan for highways, primary and secondary thoroughfares
and parkways for the city and environs, shown on the official comprehensive
plan.
MAJOR STREETS: All state and U.S. designated trunk lines connecting the city
with other cities and certain connections between designated trunk lines and
freeway interchanges and other heavily traveled streets as shown on the major
street plan as primary thoroughfares or shown as major streets on the revised
major street plan.
PARK AND PLAYGROUND PLAN: The plan for parks, playgrounds or other open public
grounds in the city and environs, shown on the official comprehensive plan.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: The development of a parcel of land having a
previously approved overall plan according to the rules and regulations
stipulated in the planned unit development regulations of the city 1 , as
adopted or amended, which provides for more precise controls while allowing
greater design flexibility than can be permitted in these subdivision
regulations and the zoning regulations as presently written.
PLAT: A map of a subdivision.
Final Plat: A map of all or part of a subdivision prepared and certified by a
registered Illinois land surveyor in accordance with the requirements of the
applicable provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended, and
chapter 4 of this title and suitable for recordation by the county recorder of
deeds.
Preliminary Plat: A preliminary map showing the proposed layout of a
subdivision in sufficient detail to allow review by the platting authority and
other interested agencies and meeting the requirements of chapter 4 of this
title.
PLATTING AUTHORITY: The joint planning and zoning commission of the city.
SUBDIVISION: The division of any parcel of land into two (2) or more parcels,
sites or lots, any one of which is less than five (5) acres as defined in 765
Illinois Compiled Statutes 205/1.
UTILITIES: Underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission
or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems
which are erected, operated and maintained by public utilities or municipal or
other government agencies. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1970; amd. Ord. 1427, 4-17-1994;
Ord. 3041, 12-3-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 10, chapter 13 of this code.
CHAPTER 3
PROCEDURE
SECTION:
11-3-1: No Contract Of Sale, Preliminary Plat
11-3-2: Penalties
11-3-3: Processing Of Plats
11-3-4: Consultation
11-3-5: Compliance With Design Principles Required
11-3-6: Preliminary Plat Application
11-3-7: Review
11-3-8: Plats Within City
11-3-9: Plats Outside City
11-3-10: Preliminary Plat
11-3-11: Permits For Construction
11-3-12: Variations
11-3-13: Extension Of Preliminary Plat Approval
11-3-14: Construction And Inspection
11-3-15: Final Plat
11-3-16: Number Of Copies, Certificate Of Title, Etc.
11-3-17: Checking, Final Plat
11-3-18: Final Approval, Acceptance Of Plat
11-3-19: Filing Fees
11-3-1: NO CONTRACT OF SALE, PRELIMINARY PLAT:
No person, proposing to make or have made a subdivision within the territorial
limits of this city shall enter into any contract for the sale of, or shall
offer to sell said subdivision or any part thereof, or shall proceed with any
construction work on the proposed subdivision, including grading, until he or
it has obtained the approval of the preliminary plat of the proposed
subdivision. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979)
11-3-2: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with the
provisions of these regulations, or who sells or offers for sale or lease any
lot or block of land hereby regulated before all the requirements of these
regulations have been complied with, shall be fined not less than twenty five
dollars ($25.00) and not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each
offense, and each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979)
11-3-3: PROCESSING OF PLATS:
Every plat, whether preliminary or final, submitted in accordance with these
regulations, shall be processed by the city engineering department of the city,
reviewed by the joint planning and zoning commission and transmitted to the
city council with recommendations from the city engineering department and
joint planning and zoning commission. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979; amd. Ord. 3041, 12-
3-2013)
11-3-4: CONSULTATION:
Before preparing and submitting the preliminary plat, it is strongly
recommended that the subdivider, his engineer, or his surveyor consult with the
plat officer while the plat is in sketch form, to ascertain the location of
proposed highways, primary or secondary thoroughfares, parkways, parks,
playgrounds and other planned developments. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979)
11-3-5: COMPLIANCE WITH DESIGN PRINCIPLES REQUIRED:
In planning and developing a subdivision, the subdivider or his agent shall
comply with general principles of design and minimum requirements for the
layout of subdivisions as set forth in chapter 9 of this title, and with the
rules and regulations concerning required improvements set forth in these
regulations, and in every case shall follow the procedure contained in this
chapter. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979)
11-3-6: PRELIMINARY PLAT APPLICATION:
The subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision
which shall contain all the contiguous land owned or under option by the
subdivider and shall conform with the requirements of chapter 4 of this title,
and shall file with the plat officer an application in writing for the approval
of said plat accompanied by fifteen (15) black line or photostatic copies, and
one reproducible copy, at least three (3) weeks prior to the next regular
meeting of the joint planning and zoning commission, at which time approval of
said preliminary plat is requested. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979; amd. Ord. 3041, 12-3-
2013)
11-3-7: REVIEW:
Upon the receipt of the application for preliminary plat approval, the plat
officer shall check the graphic and written data for completeness and
conformance to these regulations. If complete, the plat shall be accepted for
processing and the plat officer shall distribute two (2) copies of the plat to
the city engineer, one copy to the superintendent of each affected school
district, one copy to the park district, one copy to the Canton police
department, one copy to the Canton fire department and any affected fire
district and two (2) copies to each of the local utility companies.
The city engineer shall be requested to examine and check the plat for general
engineering and conformance to required public improvements. The superintendent
of schools shall be consulted regarding the potential effects of the proposed
subdivision upon the school system and whether or not there is need for a new
school site within or in the vicinity of the proposed plat. The various utility
companies shall indicate the availability of any proposed utility easements.
All agencies contacted shall be requested within seven (7) days of receipt of
the preliminary plat, to return one print of said plat to the plat officer with
their comments or recommendations for change noted thereon. (Ord. 726, 7-17-
1979)
11-3-8: PLATS WITHIN CITY:
In the case of plats within the city, the city engineer shall review all
engineering details and make recommendations to the joint planning and zoning
commission concerning the improvements proposed to be installed. (Ord. 726, 7-
17-1979; amd. Ord. 3041, 12-3-2013)
11-3-9: PLATS OUTSIDE CITY:
In the case of plats outside the corporate limits of the city, the plat officer
shall distribute in addition to the requirements of section
11-3-7 of this chapter, two (2) copies to the county engineer and one copy to
the county health department. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979)
11-3-10: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
Upon receipt of the comments and recommendations covered in the preceding
sections, the joint planning and zoning commission will recommend approval,
disapproval or approval subject to certain specified changes or conditions that
will be required. Following action by the joint planning and zoning commission,
the preliminary plat, along with the recommendation of the joint planning and
zoning commission, will be transmitted to the city council for official action.
Approval or conditional approval of the preliminary plat by the city council
shall not qualify a plat for recording but is to be considered only as an
approval of the general layout of the streets, lots, sewers, drains and street
cross sections as shown or as amended. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979; amd. Ord. 3041,
12-3-2013)
Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the city council, the city clerk shall
note on the preliminary plat the date of approval and list any stipulations
made as a condition of approval. One copy of the approved plat shall be
distributed to each of the following persons: the subdivider; the city
engineer; the plat officer; and, in the case of plats outside the corporate
limits of the city, the county engineer. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979)
11-3-11: PERMITS FOR CONSTRUCTION:
Upon receipt of approval of the preliminary plat, which is effective for one
year unless extended by the platting authority, the subdivider may proceed with
construction of the required improvements as specified in chapter 5 of this
title providing that he first:
   (A)   Obtain the necessary permits from all appropriate authorities and
present evidence thereof to the city engineer or the county superintendent of
highways, as the case may be;
   (B)   Submit an estimate of the cost of all work and materials specified,
prepared by a registered professional engineer and approved by the city
engineer or the county superintendent of highways, as the case may be;
   (C)   1. Pay estimated inspection costs, obtain construction permits from
the city engineer and proceed with construction of improvements; or (Ord. 726,
7-17-1979)
      2.   Submit a subdivider's bond issued by a surety company licensed to do
business in the state of Illinois which is acceptable to the city engineer and
the joint planning and zoning commission. The bond shall be approved as to form
by the city engineer and the city attorney. In order to ensure completion of
said improvements to the satisfaction of said officials, the amount of the bond
shall be equal to the full amount of the estimate furnished by the subdivider
and approved by the city engineer. The bond shall be in force for a period of
not less than twenty four (24) months from the date of issuance of said bond or
until released by the city engineer; or (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979; amd. Ord. 3041,
12-3-2013)
      3.   In lieu of subsection (C)2 of this section, post with the city
treasurer cash or negotiable securities sufficient to cover the full cost of
said improvements as estimated by the city engineer to assure the satisfactory
performance of said improvements and in accordance with these regulations; or
      4.   In lieu of subsection (C)2 or (C)3 of this section, the developer
may submit to the city engineer an escrow agreement and when approved by him as
to the amount, and approved by the city attorney as to form, it will be
submitted to the city council for approval. Approval by the city council and
deposit in escrow of agreed upon amount shall be deemed satisfactory
performance of this requirement. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979)
11-3-12: VARIATIONS:
Variations from construction details as approved on the preliminary plat
without specific approval of the city council acting upon the recommendation of
the joint planning and zoning commission will be cause to reject and disapprove
the final plat when submitted. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979; amd. Ord. 3041, 12-3-2013)
11-3-13: EXTENSION OF PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL:
Approval of a final plat by the city council shall be deemed to automatically
extend approval of the preliminary plat of which it is a part for a period of
two (2) years from the date of approval of said final plat. (Ord. 726, 7-17-
1979)
11-3-14: CONSTRUCTION AND INSPECTION:
All required land improvements to be installed under these rules shall be
inspected at the subdivider's expense. A competent registered professional
engineer as agent for the city shall provide inspection on the job during the
progress of all construction. When work is completed, the engineer shall
certify in writing to the city engineer or the county superintendent of
highways, as the case may be, that all work complies in all respects with the
approved plans and these regulations. Cost of providing said inspections shall
be estimated by the city engineer and cash in the amount of said estimated cost
of inspections shall be deposited with the city prior to approval of
construction plans. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979)
11-3-15: FINAL PLAT:
Upon completion of all improvements or the posting of cash, negotiable
securities or a surety bond as required by these regulations, the subdivider
shall file with the platting authority the final or record plat of the
subdivision for final approval, as set forth in the following sections. The
final or record plat of any portion of a larger subdivision, the preliminary
plat of which has been tentatively approved by the platting authority, may be
submitted for approval. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979)
11-3-16: NUMBER OF COPIES, CERTIFICATE OF TITLE, ETC.:
The subdivider shall file with the platting authority the original tracing and
seven (7) black line or blueprints or photostatic copies of the final or record
plat which shall conform in every respect with the requirements specified in
chapter 6 of this title. The final plat shall have imprinted thereon a
certificate of title of ownership of all lands included in the plat indicating
that the title is clear. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979)
11-3-17: CHECKING, FINAL PLAT:
A copy of the final plat thus filed will be transmitted to the city engineer
for checking. If found satisfactory, the plat will be returned to the platting
authority within fifteen (15) days together with a certificate showing:
   (A)   That the technical details of the plat itself have been checked and
found satisfactory;
   (B)   That evidence has been submitted indicating that necessary permits
have been obtained from such agencies as the state of Illinois; and
   (C)   That all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed and
certified by a registered engineer or that sufficient bond, cash or securities
have been deposited with the city to cover the cost of same. (Ord. 726, 7-17-
1979)
11-3-18: FINAL APPROVAL, ACCEPTANCE OF PLAT:
After the final plat, together with the foregoing certificate, has been
received by the platting authority (and provided that the final plat is found
to conform to the preliminary plat as tentatively approved, with the required
modifications, if any), the platting authority shall approve the plat and
submit the same to the city council for acceptance. Acceptance of the plat by
the city council shall be deemed to constitute acceptance by the public of the
dedication of any street or other proposed public way or space shown on said
plat. In the case of a subdivision outside the corporate limits of the city,
said plat shall be referred to the county supervisors for such action as may be
necessary to accept the plat. Upon approval, the plat may be recorded in
accordance with the applicable provisions of law. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979)
11-3-19: FILING FEES:
For the processing and filing of plats as provided herein there shall be filing
fees which shall be as follows:
   (A)   Preliminary plat: Fifty dollars ($50.00) per plat.
   (B)   Final plat: Ten dollars ($10.00) per plat, plus two dollars ($2.00)
per lot. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979)
CHAPTER 4
THE PRELIMINARY PLAT
SECTION:
11-4-1: Application
11-4-2: Timing
11-4-3: Vicinity Sketch
11-4-4: Scale, Horizontal
11-4-5: Existing And Proposed Features To Be Shown
11-4-1: APPLICATION:
The application for approval of a preliminary plat shall be submitted to the
platting authority on forms provided by the city engineering department of the
city, copies of which are available at its offices. The application shall be
accompanied by fifteen (15) black line copies and one reproducible copy of the
proposed preliminary plat prepared by a registered Illinois engineer or land
surveyor. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979)
11-4-2: TIMING:
Application for approval of a preliminary plat shall be submitted to the city
engineering department office in the city along with the required fee and all
necessary supporting data at least three (3) weeks prior to the next regular
meeting of the joint planning and zoning commission, at which time approval of
said preliminary plat is requested. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979; amd. Ord. 3041, 12-3-
2013)
11-4-3: VICINITY SKETCH:
A vicinity sketch at a readable scale shall be drawn on or shall accompany the
preliminary plat. This sketch shall show all existing subdivisions and the
street and tract lines of acreage parcels of land within two hundred feet
(200') of the plat boundaries together with the name of the record owners of
all such unplatted parcels contiguous to the proposed subdivision. It shall
also show the streets and alleys in neighboring subdivisions or unplatted
property within seven hundred fifty feet (750') of the plat boundaries. (Ord.
726, 7-17-1979)
11-4-4: SCALE, HORIZONTAL:
The horizontal scale of the preliminary plat shall be one hundred feet (100')
or less to the inch. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979)
11-4-5: EXISTING AND PROPOSED FEATURES TO BE SHOWN:
The preliminary plat shall clearly show the following features and information:
   (A)   Name: The proposed name of the subdivision which shall not duplicate
the name of any other subdivision in Fulton County.
   (B)   Owners Of Record: The names and addresses of the owners of record, the
subdivider and the registered Illinois engineer or land surveyor.
   (C)   Abutting Owners: The names of adjacent subdivisions and the names of
the record owners of abutting parcels of unplatted land.
   (D)   Boundary Lines: The boundary lines, accurate in scale, of the tract to
be subdivided.
   (E)   Streets, Other Features: The location, widths and names of all
existing or platted streets or other public ways within the tract, and other
important features such as existing permanent buildings, watercourses, railroad
lines, corporation lines, township lines, etc.
   (F)   Existing Utilities: Existing sewers, water mains, culverts and other
underground structures within the tract and immediately adjacent thereto with
pipe sizes and grades indicated.
   (G)   Topography: Contours for the tract to be subdivided with intervals of
two feet (2') referenced to city datum, as required by the platting authority.
   (H)   Existing Trees: The topographic map of the preliminary plat shall
indicate all existing trees to be preserved.
   (I)   Proposed Design: The layout, classification, names and widths of
proposed streets, alleys and easements; the location and approximate sizes of
culverts, storm drains and other drainage structures; the layout, sizes, and
location of sanitary sewers; a typical street cross section; and the layout and
approximate dimensions of proposed lots. Proposed street names shall not
duplicate any existing street names within the area of jurisdiction of these
regulations except extensions of existing streets. A discontinuous section of a
street shall be named the same as the street of which it is likely to become an
extension. Lots shall be numbered consecutively throughout the preliminary
plat.
   (J)   Zoning: Zoning boundary lines, if any, proposed uses of property and
proposed setback lines.
   (K)   Public Uses: All parcels of land intended to be dedicated or
temporarily reserved for public use, or to be reserved in the deeds for the
common use of property owners in the subdivision, with the purpose, condition
or limitations on such reservations indicated.
   (L)   Legend: North point, scale, date, title.
   (M)   Improvements: Preliminary layout plans of improvements required under
chapter 5 of this title shall be furnished with the preliminary plat as part of
the required documents to be submitted with the application for approval.
   (N)   Street Cross Section: A typical street cross section shall be shown on
every classification of street in the proposed subdivision showing roadway
construction, curbs, sidewalks, water, sewer and storm drains. (Ord. 726, 7-17-
1979)
CHAPTER 5
IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
11-5-1: General
11-5-2: Streets
11-5-3: Curbs
11-5-4: Street Signs
11-5-5: Sidewalks
11-5-6: Street Trees
11-5-7: Water
11-5-8: Storm Drains
11-5-9: Sanitary Sewers
11-5-10: Utilities
11-5-11: Street Lighting
11-5-12: Monuments
11-5-13: Construction Plans
11-5-14: Construction Permits
11-5-15: Timing
11-5-16: Approval
11-5-17: Oversize Improvements
11-5-1: GENERAL:
   (A)   All of the improvements under these regulations shall be constructed
prior to the filing with the platting authority of the final plat for final
approval, in accordance with the specifications and under the supervision of
the various officials having jurisdiction; or
   (B)   In lieu of constructing the improvements referred to in subsection (A)
of this section, the subdivider shall furnish cash, negotiable securities, or a
performance bond running to the city sufficient to cover the subdivider's cost
as estimated by the city engineer, of any or all of the improvements required
to be installed thereby securing the actual construction and installation of
such improvements immediately after final approval of the final plat or at a
time set according to the requirements of the platting authority.
   (C)   A maintenance bond running to the city in the amount of twenty percent
(20%) of the cost of the improvements, shall be required for five (5) years
after completion of construction.
   (D)   Upon completion of the improvements required by this chapter and as a
condition for final approval, the subdivider shall cause all right, title and
interest to said improvements to be conveyed to the city at no cost to the
city. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979)
11-5-2: STREETS:
Streets shall be graded to full width and roadways constructed thirty feet
(30') wide (face of curb to face of curb) in the case of local streets in R-
1 and R-2 (single-family residential) districts, thirty six feet (36') wide in
the case of collector streets. Major street roadway width shall be determined
by the city in conjunction with the state of Illinois department of
transportation standards. All local and collector streets shall be constructed
according to specifications of the state of Illinois with a wearing surface of
not less than one inch (1") of type CL B bituminous asphalt binder. The base
shall be of grade 8 or 9 crushed stone or gravel the depth of which shall be
determined by soil tests in accordance with state of Illinois standards. In
lieu of flexible pavement, an equal concrete pavement constructed according to
the specifications of the state of Illinois for road and bridge construction
may be used. Alleys shall be constructed to full width with the same pavement
specified for roadways. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979)
11-5-3: CURBS:
Curbs shall be of class A concrete with a minimum of eight inch (8") thickness
at the low point of the gutter and eighteen inches (18") wide from the leading
edge to the back of the curb with type M-4.12 as specified by the state of
Illinois and constructed the full length of every street on both sides. (Ord.
726, 7-17-1979)
11-5-4: STREET SIGNS:
The subdivider shall deposit with the city treasurer the cost of installing
standardized white and green street name signs. The city shall install and
maintain said signs. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979)
11-5-5: SIDEWALKS:
Sidewalks shall be constructed on every collector street and shall be
constructed of class A concrete four inches (4") thick and four feet (4') wide
in residential areas. Elsewhere, widths and location, if required, shall be as
specified by the platting authority. Where there is unsuitable soil or loose
fill, the city engineer may specify that a suitable compacted base be installed
under the sidewalk. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979)
11-5-6: STREET TREES:
Street trees, if installed, shall be installed in accordance with applicable
city ordinance 1 . (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 8, chapter 5 of this code.
11-5-7: WATER:
Where there is a city water main within five hundred feet (500'), which is
physically and otherwise accessible and when not inconsistent with established
policy of the city, every subdivision shall be provided with a complete water
distribution system connected to said water main adequate to serve the area
being platted and including a connection for each lot and appropriately spaced
fire hydrants in accordance with the requirements of applicable city ordinances
and the Illinois environmental protection agency. In other cases, a complete
water distribution system shall be installed, meeting the requirements of
applicable city ordinances 1 , the Fulton County health department and the
Illinois environmental protection agency.
Individual water supply may be permitted in the case of lots of fifteen
thousand (15,000) square feet or more in area, if it meets the requirements of
the Fulton County health department and, in the opinion of the health
department, such supply will be adequate when considering the method of sewage
disposal to be employed as set forth in section
11-5-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 8, chapter 10 of this code for water system regulations.
11-5-8: STORM DRAINS:
Every subdivision shall be provided with a stormwater or surface drainage
system adequate to serve the area being platted and in conformance with a
master storm drainage plan of the watershed of which it is a part. In
subdivisions where the development is proposed to be greater than two (2)
dwelling units per acre, the subdivider shall be required to install catch
basins, culverts and laterals leading to an outfall into the main channel or
trunk line drain for the basin of which the subdivision is a part. Improvement
of the main trunk line storm drain or channel of that basin may be required by
the city council on the recommendation of the joint planning and zoning
commission. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979; amd. Ord. 3041, 12-3-2013)
Whenever a subdivision is situated on land that does not provide surface
drainage directly into a stream or creek having a year round flow of water,
then any part of any subdivision not so drained shall be determined to be a
part of a natural drainage basin which basin shall extend from the point of
outfall into a flowing creek or stream to the dividing line of such basin and
adjoining basins also having an outfall into a flowing stream or creek. The
amount of acreage in the proposed subdivision falling within such a basin shall
be compared with the total acreage of said basin to determine the equitable
percentage of cost of improving the total trunk line storm drain system for
that basin.
Whenever a preliminary plat or final plat is submitted for approval following
the effective date hereof, the city engineer shall:
   (A)   Determine the total acreage of any basin of which the subdivision is a
part.
   (B)   Estimate the total cost of installing a trunk line system to serve
that basin or basins by means of the following alternatives:
      1.   Completely enclosed and buried precast concrete tile;
      2.   Paving of sides and bottom of drainage channel;
      3.   Stabilizing bottom and sides of channel with riprap or other
suitable material. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979)
   (C)   Recommend to the joint planning and zoning commission one or more of
the alternatives listed for improving the channel. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979; amd.
Ord. 3041, 12-3-2013)
   (D)   Determine the fair share of the costs of the trunk line or channel
improvement to be charged against the subdivision on the basis of percentage of
acreage of the total basin.
   (E)   Ascertain that cash, bond or securities shall have been deposited with
the city treasurer into a special trunk line improvement account for that
drainage basin prior to approval of the final plat. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979)
11-5-9: SANITARY SEWERS:
Where a public sanitary sewer main is within five hundred feet (500') and
otherwise accessible, in the opinion of the platting authority, and when not
inconsistent with established policy of the city, the subdivision shall be
provided with a complete sanitary sewer system connected with such sewer main,
including a service connection for each lot. Where a public sanitary main is
not reasonably accessible, in the opinion of the platting authority, proper
provisions shall be made for the disposal of sanitary waste by one of the
following methods:
   (A)   In the case of a subdivision in which the average size of the lots is
less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, the subdivision shall be
provided with a complete sewer system, including a service connection for each
lot, and a community sewage treatment plant or disposal facilities of a type
meeting the approval of the Fulton County health department, Illinois
environmental protection agency and the city engineer. Upon acceptance by the
city of any such treatment plant and sewerage system; said system shall become
the property of the city. The city shall thereafter operate and maintain the
system and charge the users thereof according to established policies of the
city.
   (B)   In the base of a subdivision in which the average size of the lots is
twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or more in area, and where the officials
having jurisdiction deem it appropriate based on soil and other conditions as
determined by percolation and other tests, private restrictive covenants shall
be filed with the final or record plat and incorporated in each deed calling
for the installation on each lot of an individual sewage disposal system
meeting the requirements of the various officials having jurisdiction,
including, but not limited to, the Fulton County health department, Illinois
environmental protection agency and the Fulton County soil conservation
service. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979)
11-5-10: UTILITIES:
Wherever practicable, poles or underground conduits for electric, gas or
telephone lines shall be located in easements along the rear or side lot lines,
with the right of the utilities and services concerned to install, lay,
construct, renew, operate and maintain conduits, cables, pipes, poles and
wires, overhead and underground, with all necessary braces, guys, anchors and
other normal equipment or appurtenances for the purpose of providing the
subdivision with adequate sewer, water, gas, electric or telephone service. No
permanent buildings shall be placed on an easement for utilities. Evidence
shall be furnished the platting authority that easements, and any easement
provisions to be incorporated on the plat or in the deeds, meet the
requirements of the individual companies and services concerned. (Ord. 726, 7-
17-1979)
11-5-11: STREET LIGHTING:
   (A)   A street lighting system consisting of standards, mast arms and
luminaries, shall be installed at the intersection of every street sufficient
to provide average illumination in the street of no less than two-tenths (0.2)
foot-candle.
   (B)   Specifications for luminaries and the plan of location for said
luminaries must be approved by the city engineer. In the event there is an
available utility pole at a point where a streetlight should be according to
the approved plan, the utility pole may serve as a proper standard and no
additional standard need be provided at that location. Nothing herein contained
shall relieve the subdivider from providing, at his expense, all first costs
for the entire system.
   (C)   Upon completion of the street lighting system and as a condition for
final approval of the final plat, the subdivider shall cause all right, title
and interest to said street lighting system to be conveyed to the city or an
agent thereof at no cost to the city. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979)
11-5-12: MONUMENTS:
Permanent metal monuments consisting of bars not less than one- half inch (1/
2") in diameter and thirty six inches (36") in length, encased in a concrete
cylinder at least four inches (4") in diameter and thirty six inches (36") in
depth shall be located in the ground at all angles at the boundaries of the
land platted and at all intersections of the lines of streets with the
boundaries of the plat. Shorter bars of not less than one-half inch (1/2")
diameter may be used provided they are lapped over each other at least six
inches (6") with an overall length of not less than thirty six inches (36").
When there are permanent objects in the vicinity of such monuments, the
bearings and distances of such witness point or objects, as well as the
character of the monuments, shall be distinctly stated on the plat. The
surveyor making the plat shall certify that the plat is correct and that the
monuments described on it have been installed as herein described. (Ord. 726,
7-17-1979)
11-5-13: CONSTRUCTION PLANS:
Construction plans, including the following, for improvements to be installed
shall be furnished in accordance with the specifications of the city engineer
and shall receive his approval before the improvements are installed:
   (A)   The profile for each proposed street, with tentative grades indicated;
   (B)   The cross section of each proposed street, showing the width of
pavement, the location and width of sidewalks and the location and size of
utility mains;
   (C)   The plans and profiles of proposed sanitary sewers and storm water
sewers with grades and sizes indicated or method of sewage or storm water
disposal in lieu of sewers;
   (D)   A plan of the proposed water distribution system showing pipe sizes
and the location of valves and fire hydrants;
   (E)   Location map of all sewer and water service connections. (Ord. 726, 7-
17-1979)
11-5-14: CONSTRUCTION PERMITS:
Prior to starting any of the work covered by the plans, arrangements shall have
been made to provide for inspection of the work which, in the opinion of the
city engineer, shall ensure compliance with the plans and specifications as
approved and written approval shall be obtained from the city engineer to start
the work. The city engineer's office shall be notified no less than forty eight
(48) hours in advance of commencing any of said work. Failure to do so may
result in work stoppage, dismantling or uncovering of installations and/or
disapproval of the final plat. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979)
11-5-15: TIMING:
The construction of all improvements required by these regulations must be
completed within two (2) years from the date of approval of the final plat by
the platting authority, unless good cause can be shown for the granting of an
extension of time to the platting authority. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979)
11-5-16: APPROVAL:
The approval of the final plat by the platting authority and acceptance by the
city council shall constitute acceptance of the dedication of any public
street, road or highway dedicated in such plat. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979)
11-5-17: OVERSIZE IMPROVEMENTS:
Wherever it is deemed to be in the best interests of the city and future
development of adjacent areas of a proposed subdivision, the city engineer may
require that certain improvements be of a greater size than is necessary to
serve that particular subdivision.
In such case the city engineer shall present to the city council for action a
separate agreement to participate in the extra cost of such improvements,
whether it be extra wide streets, or oversize water mains, sewers or storm
drains, or any other improvements required in these regulations. (Ord. 726, 7-
17-1979)
CHAPTER 6
THE FINAL OR RECORD PLAT
SECTION:
11-6-1: Number Of Copies; Symbols
11-6-1: NUMBER OF COPIES; SYMBOLS:
The original tracing and five (5) blueprints or photostatic copies of the final
or record plat of the subdivision or of any part of a larger subdivision shall
be submitted to the platting authority for approval. The final plat shall be
drawn with waterproof, nonfading black ink at the scale of one hundred feet
(100') or less to the inch. Said scale shall be indicated on the plat
graphically. In addition, the plat shall clearly show the following features
and information:
   (A)   Boundary Lines: All plat boundary lines with lengths of courses to
hundredths of a foot and bearings to half minutes. These boundaries shall be
determined by an accurate survey in the field, which shall be balanced and
closed with an error of closure of not to exceed one to ten thousand (10,000).
   (B)   Recorded Streets: The exact location and width along the property line
of all existing recorded streets intersecting or paralleling within two hundred
feet (200') of the boundaries of the tract.
   (C)   Bearings, Distances: True bearings and distances to the nearest
established street bounds, patent or other established survey lines or other
official monuments, which monuments shall be located or accurately described on
the plat. Any patent or other established survey or corporation lines shall be
accurately monument marked and located on the plat, and their names shall be
lettered on them.
   (D)   Monuments: The accurate location and material of all permanent
reference monuments.
   (E)   Layout: The exact layout, including:
      1.   Street and alley lines, their names, bearings, angles of
intersection and widths (including widths along the line of any obliquely
intersecting street);
      2.   The length of all arcs, radii, points of curvature and tangent
bearings;
      3.   All easements and rights of way, when provided for or owned by
public services (with the limitation of the easement rights definitely stated
on the plat);
      4.   All lot lines with dimensions in feet and hundredths of feet, and
with bearings in minutes.
   (F)   Lot Numbers: Lots shall be numbered consecutively as shown on the
preliminary plat.
   (G)   Property Offered For Dedication: The accurate outline of all property
which is offered for dedication for public use, and of all property that may be
reserved by covenant in the deeds for the common use of the property owners in
the subdivision, with the purpose indicated thereon. All lands dedicated to
public use other than streets or roads shall be marked "Dedicated to the
Public". Streets and roads not dedicated shall be marked "Private Street".
   (H)   Watercourses: In case the subdivision is traversed by a watercourse,
channel, stream or creek, the prior or present location of such watercourse,
channel, stream or creek. (In the event the subdivision borders or includes
water in which the state has property rights or interest, approval by the
Illinois department of transportation shall be obtained before recording.)
   (I)   Setback Lines: Setback building lines as fixed by the zoning title 1
or the official street map or any other setback lines or street lines
established by public authority, or those stipulated in the deed restrictions,
whichever is the most restrictive.
   (J)   Name Of Subdivision: The name of the subdivision and name or number of
the larger subdivision or tract of which the tract now subdivided forms a part.
   (K)   Adjoining Subdivisions, Lakes, Etc.: The names and locations of
adjoining subdivisions and locations and ownership of adjoining unsubdivided
property. Where provisions are made for access to an adjoining lake or stream,
a sketch illustrating such access shall be submitted.
   (L)   Names Of Owners, Etc.: The names and addresses of the owner or owners
of record, the subdivider and the registered Illinois land surveyor or
engineer.
   (M)   Legend: North point, scale, date and title.
   (N)   Statement Concerning Lot Area: At the subdivider's discretion, a
statement that any lot transferred will have a minimum width and area
substantially the same as those shown on the plat, and that only one principal
building will be permitted on any such lot.
   (O)   Affidavits And Certificates: Affidavits and certificates by the
surveyor to the effect that he has fully complied with the requirements of this
title and the subdivision laws of the state of Illinois in surveying, dividing
and mapping the land; that the plat is a correct representation of all the
exterior boundaries of the land surveyed and the subdivision of it; and that
the plat represents a survey made by him and that all monuments indicated
thereon actually exist and their location, size and material is correctly
shown.
   (P)   Owner's Certificate: A certificate by the owner of the land in
substantially the following form: "As owner I hereby certify that I caused the
land described on this plat to be surveyed, divided, mapped and dedicated as
represented on the plat". This certificate shall be executed as a conveyance.
   (Q)   Certificate Of Taxes Paid: A certificate issued by the authorized city
and county officials to the effect that there are no unpaid taxes or unpaid
special assessments on any of the lands included in the plats. (Ord. 726, 7-17-
1979)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 10 of this code.
CHAPTER 7
MODIFICATIONS
SECTION:
11-7-1: Modification Undue Hardship
11-7-2: Planned Unit Development
11-7-1: MODIFICATION UNDUE HARDSHIP:
In any case where the subdivider can show that by reason of exceptional
topographic or other physical conditions, strict compliance with any
requirement of this title would cause undue hardship, the platting authority
may relax such requirements to the extent deemed just and proper, so as to
relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided that such relief may be granted
without detriment to the public good and without impairing the intent and
purpose of these regulations or the desirable general development of the
neighborhood and the community in accordance with the comprehensive plan and
the zoning title 1 . Any modification thus granted shall be stated in writing
and filed with the records of the subdivision and in the office of the joint
planning and zoning commission setting forth the reasons which, in the opinion
of the platting authority, justified the modification. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979;
amd. Ord. 3041, 12-3-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 10 of this code.
11-7-2: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT:
The standards and requirements of these regulations may be modified by the
joint planning and zoning commission in the case of a plan and program for a
complete community or a planned unit development which, in the judgment of the
joint planning and zoning commission, will provide adequate public spaces and
improvements for traffic circulation, recreation, light, air and the service
needs of the area when fully developed and populated 1 .
Such plan and program shall include such legal provisions as will assure
achievement of the plan as finally approved by the joint planning and zoning
commission. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979; amd. Ord. 3041, 12-3-2013)
 
Notes
1 2. See title 10, chapter 13 of this code for planned unit developments.
CHAPTER 8
REPEALER; SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
11-8-1: Repeal Of Conflicting Ordinances
11-8-2: Saving Clause
11-8-3: Effective Date
11-8-1: REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
(Ord. 726, 7-17-1979)
11-8-2: SAVING CLAUSE:
The provisions of this title are hereby declared to be separable and the
invalidity of any section or provision hereof shall not affect the validity of
other provisions hereof. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979)
11-8-3: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This title shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979)
CHAPTER 9
PRINCIPLES OF DESIGN AND MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
11-9-1: Principles And Requirements
11-9-1: PRINCIPLES AND REQUIREMENTS:
In laying out a subdivision, the subdivider shall comply with the following
principles and requirements:
   (A)   General:
      1.   The subdivision layout shall conform to the official major street
plan:
         (a)   Whenever a tract to be subdivided embraces any part of a major
or collector street, so designated on said plan, such part of such public way
shall be platted by the subdivider at the location and of the width indicated
on the plan. Section and quarter section line streets should be considered for
collector streets.
         (b)   Where a proposed park, playground, school site or other public
area shown on the park and playground plan or other part of the master plan is
located in whole or in part within the proposed subdivision, such proposed
public ground or park shall be dedicated to the city, park district and board
of education of the county. Where considered desirable by the developer and
appropriate by the platting authority, open spaces constituting a reasonable
proportion of the gross acreage of the subdivision, suitably located and of
adequate size for parks, playgrounds or other recreational purposes for local
or neighborhood use, shall be provided for in the proposed subdivision, and, if
not dedicated to the city, park district, board of education or county, as the
case may be, may be reserved for the common use of all property owners in the
proposed subdivision by covenant or deed restriction.
   (B)   The Street And Block Layout:
      1.   The street layout of the subdivision shall be in general conformity
with a plan for the most advantageous development of adjoining areas and the
entire neighborhood.
         (a)   Where appropriate to the design, proposed streets shall be
continuous and in alignment with existing, planned or platted streets with
which they are to connect.
         (b)   Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the
tract to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical
conditions or unless, in the opinion of the platting authority, such extension
is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the
subdivision with the existing layout or the most advantageous future
development of the adjacent tracts. Dead end streets of reasonable length
(normally not over 500 feet) will be approved where necessary by topography.
         (c)   Proposed streets shall intersect one another as nearly at right
angles as topography and other limiting factors of good design permit.
         (d)   Wherever there exists adjacent to the tract to be subdivided an
existing township or county roadway, the subdivider shall be responsible for
the construction of said roadway to the subdivision standards for that half of
the roadway abutting the property to be subdivided. In lieu of the above
construction, an escrow in the amount of the construction may be accepted by
the city council.
         (e)   Alleys shall be platted in all business districts. To provide
safe access to residential lots fronting on major streets, alleys shall be
platted in the rear of such lots or service drives in front thereof.
         (f)   Easements for utilities shall be provided in the rear of all
residential lots except where alleys are provided for under subsection (B)1(e)
of this section. Easements for utilities also shall be provided alongside lot
lines where required.
         (g)   Lands abutting major streets shall be platted with the view of
making the lots, if for residential use, desirable for such use by cushioning
the impact of heavy traffic on such trafficways and with the view also of
minimizing interference with traffic on such trafficways as well as the
accident hazard. This may be accomplished in several ways:
            (1)   By platting the lots abutting such trafficways at very
generous depth, with setbacks or front yards at least ten feet (10') greater or
deeper than otherwise required; and providing vehicular access to them by means
of either alleys or service drives in the rear, or frontage access roads next
to the highways, connected therewith at frequent intervals.
            (2)   By not fronting the lots on the highway but on a minor street
paralleling the highway at a distance of a generous lot depth. Private
driveways in this case shall connect with such minor streets.
            (3)   By a collector street platted more or less parallel with a
highway, six hundred (600) to one thousand feet (1,000') distance therefrom,
from which loop streets or dead end streets would extend toward the highway,
the ends of which provide access to the lots abutting the highway to their
rear.
The foregoing, or other methods for accomplishing the purposes in question must
necessarily be done in consideration of the topography and other physical
conditions, the character of existing and contemplated developments and other
pertinent factors that apply in each case.
      2.   Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two (2) tiers of
lots of appropriate depth.
         (a)   The length of blocks shall be such as, in the opinion of the
platting authority, are appropriate for the locality and the type of
development contemplated, but shall not exceed one thousand five hundred feet
(1,500') where the average size of lots does not exceed two (2) acres in the
area.
         (b)   In any block over nine hundred feet (900') in length, the
platting authority may require that a crosswalk or pedestrianway not less than
ten feet (10') wide be provided near the center and entirely across such block.
         (c)   The number of intersecting streets along major streets shall be
held to a minimum. Wherever practicable, blocks along such trafficways shall
not be less than one thousand two hundred feet (1,200') in length.
   (C)   Minimum Right Of Way Widths Of Streets, Alleys And Easements For
Utilities:
      1.   Major streets shall be no less than one hundred feet (100') with
median and not less than eighty feet (80') where there is to be no median.
      2.   Collector streets shall not be less than sixty feet (60') wide.
      3.   Local streets shall not be less than sixty feet (60') wide in all
residential districts.
      4.   All dead end streets shall terminate in a circular turnaround having
a minimum right of way diameter of one hundred feet (100').
      5.   Alleys shall not be less than twenty feet (20').
      6.   Where easements are required for utilities, they shall be centered
on rear or side lot lines and their widths shall not be less than ten feet
(10') where electric and telephone lines are to be accommodated and ordinarily
not more than twenty feet (20') if, in addition, sewer, water or gas lines are
to be accommodated.
      7.   Easements for open drainage channels shall be thirty feet (30') wide
centered on the channel. Easements for enclosed storm drains shall be no less
than ten feet (10') or five (5) times the diameter of the storm drain.
   (D)   Minimum Pavement Widths:
      1.   Minimum pavement width for local streets shall be thirty feet (30')
between faces of curbs in all residential districts and thirty feet (30')
between faces of curbs on all other local streets and thirty six feet (36')
between faces of curbs on collector streets. The pavement widths for major
streets shall be determined by the city in each case. The pavement of a turning
circle at the end of a dead end street shall have a minimum outside diameter of
eighty feet (80').
   (E)   Street Grades, Curves And Sight Distances:
      1.   The grades of streets shall not exceed the following except where
topography necessitates:
         (a)   Mayor streets: Four percent (4%),
         (b)   Collector streets, local streets, services drives and alleys:
Seven percent (7%),
         (c)   Pedestrianways or crosswalks: Twelve percent (12%).
Unless steps of an acceptable design are to be constructed.
      2.   All changes in street grades in excess of one percent (1%) shall be
connected by vertical curves of a minimum length equal to fifteen (15) times
the algebraic difference in the rate of grade for major streets and one-half
(1/2) of this minimum for all other streets.
      3.   The radii of curvature on the center line shall not be less than the
following:
         (a)   Major streets: Four hundred feet (400'),
         (b)   Collector streets: Three hundred feet (300'),
         (c)   Local streets and service drives: One hundred feet (100').
   (F)   Intersections:
      1.   Street curb intersections shall be rounded by radii of at least
twenty feet (20') where local streets intersect with other local streets; and
shall be at least twenty five feet (25') at any intersection with a street of
higher classification.
      2.   The above minimum radii shall be increased when the smallest angle
of intersection is less than sixty degrees (60°).
   (G)   Lots:
      1.   The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the
location of the proposed subdivision and for the type of development
contemplated, provided that no residential lot shall contain less than seven
thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet in area.
      2.   Excessive depth in relation to width shall be avoided. (Appreciation
of 2 to 1 shall normally be considered as appropriate.)
      3.   Every lot shall abut on a street.
      4.   Lots for residential purposes shall be at least sixty feet (60')
wide at the building setback line in order to permit compliance with the side
yard requirements of the zoning title 1  and still be adequate for a building
of practicable width.
      5.   Double frontage lots and reversed frontage lots shall not be platted
except as hereinbefore permitted under subsections (G)2 and (G)3 of this
section.
      6.   Side lot lines shall be approximately at right angles to the right
of way line of the street on which the lot abuts.
      7.   Corner lots for residential use shall be platted at least seventy
five feet (75') wide in order to permit conformance with the setback on the
side street required by the zoning title.
      8.   Residential lots fronting or abutting on major streets shall have a
minimum setback distance or front yard depth of at least ten feet (10') greater
than otherwise required.
   (H)   Utility Location:
      1.   Water, sanitary sewer and storm drains shall be located within the
street right of way. As built plans will be provided to the office of the city
engineer and shall show the dimensioned location of all private sewer and water
taps. (Ord. 726, 7-17-1979)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 10 of this code.
CHAPTER 10
CERTIFICATES; PLAT PROCEDURE SUMMARIES
SECTION:
11-10-1: Examples
11-10-1: EXAMPLES:
Every preliminary and final plat shall have imprinted thereon the following:
This Plat was approved by the City of Canton Joint Planning And Zoning
Commission at a meeting held                     , 19        .
         Chairman of Canton Joint Planning And
         Zoning Commission
      ATTEST:      
         Secretary
This Plat was approved by the City Council of the City of Canton, Illinois at a
meeting held                     , 19        .
            Mayor of the City of Canton
(SEAL)   ATTEST:      
            City Clerk
   SAMPLE OF CERTIFICATES
STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
      ) SS.
COUNTY OF FULTON    )
   I,                     , Clerk of the City of Canton, Fulton County,
Illinois do hereby certify that this plat was duly approved and accepted by the
Mayor and City Council at a meeting held on the          day of
               , 19        .
            City Clerk
STATE OF ILLINOIS    )
      ) SS.
COUNTY OF FULTON    )
   Approved by the Plat Officer, City of Canton, this        day of
              , 19         .
            Plat Officer
STATE OF ILLINOIS   )
      ) SS.
COUNTY OF FULTON   )
   Approved by the City Engineer, City of Canton, this        day of
           , 19        .
            City Engineer
   PREAPPLICATION PROCEDURE
   (Optional but strongly recommended)
1.   Landowner investigates possibility of development.
         (a)   Market analysis;
         (b)   Availability of utilities;
         (c)   Subdivision regulation review.
2.   Prepare tentative sketch plan (layout of streets).
3.   Review sketch plan with city engineer (check against master plan and
zoning map).
   SUMMARY OF PRELIMINARY PLAT PROCEDURE
1.   Engage engineer or land surveyor to prepare preliminary plat.
2.   Make application with the city engineering department for preliminary plat
approval, submit fifteen (15) copies of plat documents and pay application fee
($50.00).
Preliminary plat documents include:
         (a)   Street and lot layout;
         (b)   Vicinity sketch;
         (c)   Existing and proposed utility layout;
         (d)   Topography map;
         (e)   Street cross section;
         (f)   Design criteria for storm drains and sanitary sewers;
         (g)   Notes of commitment to install other required improvements not
shown on drawings; and
         (h)   Zoning.
3.   City engineering department places the preliminary plat on joint planning
and zoning commission agenda for review at its next regular public hearing
scheduled no less than three (3) weeks following application date.
4.   City engineering department distributes copies of preliminary plat to
other agencies for review, comment and information.
5.   City engineering department reviews comments returned from other agencies.
6.   City engineering department reviews preliminary plat against department
checklist.
7.   City engineering department summarizes findings and submits written report
to joint planning and zoning commission prior to meeting at which preliminary
plat is to be considered.
8.   Notices sent to owners of adjacent unplatted land of hearing pending.
9.   Joint planning and zoning commission reviews preliminary plat and engineer
report.
10.   Joint planning and zoning commission renders recommendation.
11.   Joint planning and zoning commission forwards recommendation to city
council accompanied by staff report.
12.   City council approves or amends joint planning and zoning commission
recommendations.
13.   If approved by city council, said approval will be noted on copies of the
preliminary plat along with conditions stipulated, if any, and attested to by
the city clerk.
14.   Copies of approved preliminary plat with approval noted thereon will be
distributed to the developer and public works department.
15.   If not approved by city council the developer will be notified by mail of
such disapproval with reasons stipulated.
16.   Developer secures permits for construction of required improvements.
   SUMMARY OF FINAL PLAT PROCEDURE
1.   Approval of preliminary plat.
2.   Completion of construction plans for streets and utilities of part to be
developed and submit to city engineer for approval and estimate of costs.
3.   Completion of final plat of part to be developed and submit five (5)
copies for approval to the city clerk and pay application fee ($10.00 plus
$2.00 per lot).
4.   City engineering department places final plat on joint planning and zoning
commission agenda for review at its next regular meeting scheduled no less than
three (3) weeks following application date.
5.   Developer submits bond or escrow in amount estimated by city engineer to
cover cost of required improvements.
6.   Bond reviewed by city engineer and city attorney.
7.   City engineering department submits written report to joint planning and
zoning commission prior to meeting at which final plat is to be considered.
8.   Joint planning and zoning commission reviews final plat and reports from
city engineer and renders recommendation to city council. (A recommendation for
unconditional approval includes authorization for chairman and secretary of
joint planning and zoning commission to sign plat attesting to joint planning
and zoning commission approval.)
9.   City council considers report and recommendation of joint planning and
zoning commission and approves, disapproves, or conditionally approves final
plat.
10.   Unconditional approval by city council includes authorization for mayor
and city clerk to sign plat attesting to approval and acceptance of
dedications.
11.   Conditional approval by city council requires that all conditions
stipulated be complied with before any of the authorized signatures will be put
on the final plat.
12.   If final plat is disapproved, the developer shall be notified in writing
with reasons for such disapproval listed.
(Ord. 726, 7-17-1979; amd. Ord. 3041, 12-3-2013)
