VILLAGE OF CAROL STREAM, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-6 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 22025-12-44, passed 12-15-2025
State legislation current through 2024 Pam. No. 2
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
VILLAGE OFFICIALS
CAROL STREAM, ILLINOIS
2025
MAYOR (VILLAGE PRESIDENT)
Frank Saverino, Sr.
VILLAGE CLERK
Julia Schwarze
BOARD OF TRUSTEES
Jeff Berger
Mary Frusolone
Joe Anselmo
James Guthrie
Matthew McCarthy
John Zalak
VILLAGE MANAGER
William Holmer
 
CHAPTER 1: GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATION
      Article
         
1.   ORGANIZATION OF CODE
         
2.   SEAL, FISCAL YEAR, OFFICIAL TIME, CHARGES FOR RECORDS, BUDGET, BAD CHECK
SERVICE CHARGE
         
3.   VILLAGE PRESIDENT
         
4.   BOARD OF TRUSTEES
         
5.   RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURES
         
6.   VILLAGE CLERK
         
7.   USE OF VILLAGE PROPERTY
         
8.   ETHICS
         
9.   DISCRIMINATORY WORKPLACE HARASSMENT POLICY
         
10.   WHISTLEBLOWER REPORT POLICY
ARTICLE 1: ORGANIZATION OF CODE
Section
   
1-1-1   Title
   
1-1-2   Acceptance
   
1-1-3   Amendments
   
1-1-4   Numbering of sections
   
1-1-5   Distribution of code
   
1-1-6   Construction of words
   
1-1-7   Reference to section numbers
   
1-1-8   Amendment of section subject to penalty
   
1-1-9   General penalty
   
1-1-10   Offense having two penalties
   
1-1-11   Repeal of general ordinances
   
1-1-12   Further effect of repeal
   
1-1-13   Repeal of repealing ordinance
   
1-1-14   Invalidation of part
   
1-1-15   Liability of employers and agents
   
1-1-16   Intent
   
1-1-17   Waiver to the code of ordinances
Cross-reference:
   Publication of ordinances, see §
1-6-17
§ 1-1-1 TITLE.
   Upon adoption by the Board of Trustees of an ordinance adopting this code in
its entirety, the code and all amendments thereto as are from time to time
passed, shall be declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official
“Code of Ordinances of the Village of Carol Stream”. The passage of this code,
or portions thereof, shall not effect the continuing validity of prior
ordinances of the village with which this code is not in conflict, or
ordinances which are passed, but not specifically made a part of this code. Any
reference made to the number of any section contained herein shall be
understood to refer to the position of the same under its appropriate chapter
and article heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as
well as the section itself, when reference is made to this code of ordinances
by title in any legal document.
§ 1-1-2 ACCEPTANCE.
   This code of ordinances, as hereby presented in printed form, shall
hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in all
administrative tribunals of the state as the ordinances of the Village of Carol
Stream of general and permanent effect.
§ 1-1-3 AMENDMENTS.
   Any additions or amendments to this code, when passed in such form as to
indicate the intention of the Board of Trustees to make the same a part hereof,
shall be deemed to be incorporated in this code so that a reference to the
“Code of Ordinances of the Village of Carol Stream” shall be understood as
including them.
§ 1-1-4 NUMBERING OF SECTIONS.
   Each section number shall consist of three component parts separated by a
dash. The first figure shall refer to the chapter number, the second figure to
the article number and the third figure shall refer to the position of the
section within the article.
§ 1-1-5 DISTRIBUTION OF CODE.
   (A)   All printed copies of this code belonging to the village shall be
deposited with the Village Clerk. The Village Clerk shall deliver one copy
thereof to the Village President, each member of the Board of Trustees, the
Village Manager, the Village Attorney, the Village Prosecutor, and copies to
such other persons as the Village Board may direct.
   (B)   The Village Clerk shall sell printed copies of the code or sections
thereof at such price as the Board of Trustees shall fix.
   (C)   The Village President shall have the power to extend or reciprocate
courtesies of other municipalities by presenting a copy of this code, bound at
the expense of the village, as shall seem suitable, and the Village President
shall also have the power to present two copies of this code to the Illinois
Municipal League.
§ 1-1-6 CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS.
   (A)   Whenever in this code the plural number is used in describing or
referring to any matters, parties or persons, it shall also apply to the
singular number unless the context shall indicate otherwise. When any subject
matter, party or person is referred to in this code by words importing the
singular number only, or the masculine gender, several matters, parties or
persons, and female as well as male, and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be
included. The words PERSON, FIRM or CORPORATION shall be deemed to include any
association or organization of any kind. Words in the present tense shall be
deemed to include the future tense. The words THIS ORDINANCE whenever used in
this code shall be held to mean the entire code, in each and every section
thereof. The word VILLAGE whenever used in this code shall be held to mean the
Village of Carol Stream, Illinois. The words WRITTEN and IN WRITING may include
printing. The word SHALL as used in this code is mandatory. Provided that,
these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this code
which contains any express provisions excluding such construction or where the
subject matter or content of such section may be repugnant thereto or where the
context clearly requires a different interpretation.
   (B)   Whenever reference is made in this code to a village officer or
employee by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words
“of the Village of Carol Stream” and shall be taken to mean the officer or
employee of this village having the title mentioned or performing the duties
indicated. No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or
employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for
any fine or penalty provided in this code for a failure to perform such duty,
unless the intention of the Village Board to impose such a fine or penalty on
such officer or on an employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the
section creating the duty.
§ 1-1-7 REFERENCE TO SECTION NUMBERS.
   Reference to any section of this code shall be understood to refer to and
include the penalty section relating thereto, unless otherwise expressly
provided.
§ 1-1-8 AMENDMENT OF SECTION SUBJECT TO PENALTY.
   In case of the amendment of any section of this code containing provisions
for which a penalty is provided in another section, the penalty so provided in
such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, whether
re-enacted in the amendatory ordinance or not, unless such penalty is
specifically repealed therein.
§ 1-1-9 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Whenever in this code a minimum but not maximum fine or penalty is
imposed, the court may, in its discretion, fine the offender any sum exceeding
the minimum fine or penalty, but not exceeding $750.
   (B)   Whenever in this code the doing of any action or the omission to do
any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code, and
there shall be no fine or penalty declared for such breach, any person who
shall be convicted of any such breach shall be fined not more than $750 for
each offense. Many sections of this code will not state a specific penalty and
it is the intent of the structure of this code that the penalty set forth
herein shall apply. The Prosecuting Officer may suggest a specific penalty in
an amount less than $750.
   (C)   Whenever the violation of a provision of any ordinance of the village
would entitle the village to recover a fine, it shall not be necessary that
such ordinance specifically say that a penalty is recoverable or specify the
amount of such penalty; in all of such cases, the penalty provision of this
section shall be applicable and included automatically in such ordinance.
   (D)   In addition to, or in lieu of, any fine or penalty which may be
imposed for violation of an ordinance of the village, a disposition of
supervision may be entered by the court upon a plea of guilty or a stipulation
by the defendant of the facts supporting the charge, or a finding of guilty.
Pursuant to such disposition of supervision, the court may defer further
proceedings and the imposition of a sentence, and enter an order for
supervision of the defendant.
   (E)   SUPERVISION means a disposition of conditional and revocable release
without probationary supervision, but under such conditions and reporting
requirements as are imposed by the court, at the successful conclusion of which
disposition the defendant is discharged and a judgment dismissing the charges
is entered.
   (F)   Each day any violation of any provision of this code, or of any
ordinance, shall continue, shall constitute a separate offense.
Cross-reference:
   Index of minimum fines, see §
15-4-5
§ 1-1-10 OFFENSE HAVING TWO PENALTIES.
   In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this code, the Prosecuting Officer may elect
under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense; provided that the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other
penalty being enforced.
§ 1-1-11 REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES.
   All general ordinances of the village passed prior to the adoption of this
code of ordinances and in conflict with the provisions herein, or which are in
conflict with subsequent amendments to this code shall be repealed by the
passage of the conflicting enactment.
§ 1-1-12 FURTHER EFFECT OF REPEAL.
   (A)   No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former
ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to
any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any
penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such
offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceedings, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the
party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   (B)   This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   (C)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as abating any
action now pending, under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the village
herein repealed; or as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any
penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm
or corporation, or as waiving any right of the village under any ordinance or
provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this code of
ordinances.
§ 1-1-13 REPEAL OF REPEALING ORDINANCE.
   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall
be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former
ordinance, clause or provision.
§ 1-1-14 INVALIDATION OF PART.
   If any part, section, sentence or clause of this code shall be adjudged void
and of no effect, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portion of this code.
§ 1-1-15 LIABILITY OF EMPLOYERS AND AGENTS.
   When the provisions of any section of this code prohibits the commission of
an act, not only the person actually doing the prohibiting act or omitting the
directed act, but also the employer and all other persons concerned with or in
aiding or abetting the person shall be guilty of the offense described and
liable to the penalty set forth.
§ 1-1-16 INTENT.
   All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this
code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of
the Board of Trustees may be fully carried out.
§ 1-1-17 WAIVER TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES.
   The Village Board may grant waivers and/or variances from provisions within
this code of ordinances by motion; except where state statute or this code
require a different or more formal procedure, in which case any waivers and/or
variances granted shall be temporary in nature, and each such motion shall be
limited to the granting of waivers and/or variances for a period not in excess
of 120 days.
(Ord. 2003-11-75, passed 11-17-2003)
ARTICLE 2: SEAL, FISCAL YEAR, OFFICIAL TIME, CHARGES FOR RECORDS, BUDGET, BAD
CHECK SERVICE CHARGE
Section
   
1-2-1   Seal
   
1-2-2   Custody of seal
   
1-2-3   Private use of seal
   
1-2-4   Fiscal year
   
1-2-5   Official time
   
1-2-6   Charges for copies of village records
   
1-2-7   Budget Act adopted
   
1-2-8   Bad check service charge
§ 1-2-1 SEAL.
   The seal heretofore provided and used by and for the village, circular in
form, the impression on which are the words “Village of Carol Stream, Illinois,
Corporate Seal” shall be and is hereby established and declared to be the
corporate seal of the village.
§ 1-2-2 CUSTODY OF SEAL.
   The seal shall remain in the custody of the Village Clerk to be used by the
Clerk as required by law and the provisions of this code.
§ 1-2-3 PRIVATE USE OF SEAL.
   No person shall fraudulently forge, deface, corrupt or counterfeit the seal
of the village, nor shall any person, other than the duly authorized public
official, make use of the seal. Any person violating the provision of this
section, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than $100, nor more
than $750, for each offense.
§ 1-2-4 FISCAL YEAR.
   The fiscal year of the village shall commence May 1 of each and every year,
and close on the April 30 of the year following.
§ 1-2-5 OFFICIAL TIME.
   Central standard or central daylight savings time shall be the official time
within the village.
§ 1-2-6 CHARGES FOR COPIES OF VILLAGE RECORDS.
   Except as otherwise provided by law, the charge for all copies of village
ordinances, resolutions or other records shall be such amount as is established
from time to time by motion of the Board of Trustees, the Village Manager or,
in the absence of such a direction, such amount as shall be, in the discretion
of the Village Clerk, sufficient to compensate the village for its costs in
reproducing such material. No additional fee shall be charged for certification
of such records.
§ 1-2-7 BUDGET ACT ADOPTED.
   Pursuant to Ord. 391, the village has adopted 65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.1 through 8-2-
9.11, and shall operate under the budget method provided for therein.
§ 1-2-8 BAD CHECK SERVICE CHARGE.
   Any person who pays any bill, fine, charge, fee or penalty due the village
with any check which is subsequently returned unpaid to the village because of
insufficient funds, account closed, no account or because of a stop order on
such check, shall be liable to the village for a bad check service charge of
$25 for each and every check so returned. Such service charge shall be in
addition to any bill, fine, charge, fee or penalty owed the village.
ARTICLE 3: VILLAGE PRESIDENT
Section
   
1-3-1   Election and term of office
   
1-3-2   Qualification
   
1-3-3   Oath of office
   
1-3-4   Bond
   
1-3-5   Compensation
   
1-3-6   Powers and duties
   
1-3-7   Presiding officer and vote
   
1-3-8   Veto powers
   
1-3-9   Reconsideration, passing over veto
   
1-3-10   President Pro Tem and Temporary Chairperson
   
1-3-11   Vacancy
Cross-reference:
   Liquor Control Commissioner, see §
11-1-1
§ 1-3-1 ELECTION AND TERM OF OFFICE.
   (A)   The President shall be elected by the electors of the village for a
term of four years and until a successor is elected and has qualified.
   (B)   The Village President, if qualified, shall be inaugurated and take
office on the first regular meeting or special meeting of the Board of Trustees
held in the month of May following the general village election.
§ 1-3-2 QUALIFICATION.
   (A)   No person shall be eligible to hold the office of Village President
unless that person is a qualified elector of the village and has resided
therein at least one year next preceding the person’s election or appointment.
   (B)   No person shall be eligible to hold the office of Village President
who is a defaulter to the village, in arrears in the payment of any tax or
other indebtedness due to the village.
   (C)   The President shall not be interested in any way in the manufacture,
sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor within the village as prescribed by
statute.
§ 1-3-3 OATH OF OFFICE.
   Before entering upon the duties of the office of President, whether elected
or appointed, the President shall take and subscribe the oath of office as
prescribed by statute. This oath, so subscribed, shall be filed in the office
of the Village Clerk.
§ 1-3-4 BOND.
   The President, before entering upon the duties of President, shall execute a
bond in the amount of $3,000, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the
President’s duties, to be approved by the corporate authorities and filed with
the Village Clerk. The premium of such bond shall be paid by the village. The
bond of the Village President may be part of a blanket bond.
§ 1-3-5 COMPENSATION.
   The President shall receive as compensation the sum of $7,800 per year. The
compensation of the President shall neither be increased nor decreased during
the term for which the President is elected, nor for the remainder of the term
for which the President is appointed.
(Ord. 95-01-03, passed 1-16-1995)
§ 1-3-6 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The President shall be the official head of the village for all legal
purposes. The President shall, at all times, have the power and authority to
examine and inspect all books and records relating to village business kept by
any village agent, employee or officer. The President shall sign all
proclamations, commissions, resolutions and ordinances issued or adopted by the
Board of Trustees, except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance.
   (B)   The President shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the Board
of Trustees, all members of boards, commissions, committees or other agencies
as may be authorized by ordinance or resolution of the Board of Trustees, or as
may be authorized by statute.
   (C)   Whenever there is a question as to the respective powers or duties of
any officer of the village who is appointed by the Village President, this
question shall be settled by the Village President. The President shall have
the power to delegate to any such officer any duty which is to be performed
when no specific officer has been directed to perform the duty.
   (D)   The President shall devote to the duties of the President’s office
whatever time the faithful discharge thereof may require.
   (E)   In addition to the foregoing, the President shall perform all such
other duties and acts and have all additional powers that are or may be
prescribed by the laws of the State of Illinois, or the ordinances of the
village.
§ 1-3-7 PRESIDING OFFICER AND VOTE.
   (A)   The President shall preside at all meetings of the Board of Trustees.
The President shall not vote on any ordinance, resolution or motion, except:
      (1)   Where the vote of the Trustees has resulted in a tie;
      (2)   Where one-half of the Trustees elected have voted in favor of an
ordinance, resolution or motion, even though there is no tie vote; or
      (3)   Where a vote greater than a majority of the corporate authorities
is required by statute of the state to adopt an ordinance, resolution or
motion.
   (B)   In each instance specified, the President shall vote.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall deprive an Acting President or President
Pro Tem from voting in his or her capacity as a Trustee, but such person shall
not be entitled to another vote in his or her capacity as Acting President or
President Pro Tem.
§ 1-3-8 VETO POWERS.
   All resolutions and motions which create any liability against the village,
or which provide for the expenditure or appropriation of its money, or to sell
any village property, and all ordinances passed by the Board of Trustees shall
be deposited with the Village Clerk. If the President approves of them, the
President shall sign them. If the President disapproves of any, the President
shall return them to the Board of Trustees, with written objections, at the
next regular meeting of the Board of Trustees occurring not less than five days
after their passage. The President may disapprove of any one or more sums
appropriated in any ordinance, resolution or motion making an appropriation, or
the President may disapprove entirely of an ordinance, resolution or motion
making an appropriation. If the President fails to return any ordinance or any
specified resolution or motions with written objections within the designated
time, it shall become effective despite the absence of the President’s
signature.
§ 1-3-9 RECONSIDERATION, PASSING OVER VETO.
   Every resolution and motion specified in the preceding section, and every
ordinance which is returned to the Board of Trustees by the President shall be
reconsidered by the Board of Trustees at the next regular meeting. If, after
such reconsideration, two-thirds of all the Trustees elected to the Board of
Trustees shall vote to pass an ordinance, resolution or motion, notwithstanding
the President’s refusal to approve it, then it shall be effective. The vote on
a question of passage over the President’s veto shall be by ayes and nays, and
shall be recorded in the journal.
§ 1-3-10 PRESIDENT PRO TEM AND TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON.
   (A)   A temporary absence or disability of the President incapacitating the
President from the performance of the duties of this office does not create a
vacancy in the office. In that case, the Board of Trustees shall elect one of
its members to act as President Pro Tem. The President Pro Tem, during the
President’s absence or disability, shall perform the duties and possess all the
rights and powers of the President. No additional salary or compensation shall
be paid the President Pro Tem for acting as President Pro Tem.
   (B)   Where the President or President Pro Tem is only temporarily absent
from a meeting, but within the general area of the village and ready and able
to assume the duties of this office upon imminent return, a Temporary
Chairperson shall be elected from among the Trustees. The Temporary Chairperson
shall have only the powers of a presiding officer and the right to vote as a
Trustee.
§ 1-3-11 VACANCY.
   (A)   A vacancy occurs in the office of President by reason of resignation,
failure of one to be elected or to qualify, death, permanent physical or mental
disability, conviction of a disqualifying crime, abandonment of office or
removal from office, or by removal of his or her residence from the village.
   (B)   If a vacancy occurs in the office of the President during the
President’s term, the vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the term at
the next election of Trustees, unless the vacancy is filled by a special
election as provided by statute.
   (C)   During the period from the time that the vacancy occurs until a
President is elected and has qualified, the vacancy may be filled by the
election of an Acting President by the Board of Trustees.
   (D)   The Acting President shall be paid the President’s salary for the
period of time served as Acting President.
ARTICLE 4: BOARD OF TRUSTEES
Section
   
1-4-1   Election, term of office and functions
   
1-4-2   Qualification
   
1-4-3   Oath of office
   
1-4-4   Compensation
   
1-4-5   Vacancy
Cross-reference:
   Meetings, see §§
1-5-1 and
1-5-2
   Order of business, see §
1-5-3
   Procedure and rules, see §
1-5-4
§ 1-4-1 ELECTION, TERM OF OFFICE AND FUNCTIONS.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees, consisting of six members, shall be elected to
office for a four year term and until their successors are elected and have
qualified as is provided by statute.
   (B)   Village Trustees, if qualified, shall be inaugurated and take office
at the first regular meeting or special meeting of the Board of Trustees held
in the month of May following the general village election.
   (C)   The Board, together with the President, shall be the legislative
department of the village government, and shall perform such duties and have
such powers as may be authorized by statute. Wherever herein the term BOARD or
the term BOARD OF TRUSTEES is used, it shall be construed to mean this
legislative department.
§ 1-4-2 QUALIFICATION.
   (A)   No person shall be eligible to hold the office of Village Trustee
unless that person is a qualified elector of the village and has resided
therein at least one year next preceding election or appointment.
   (B)   No person shall be eligible to hold the office of Village Trustee who
is a defaulter to the village, in arrears in the payment of any tax or other
indebtedness due the village, has been convicted in a state court of
malfeasance in office, bribery or other corrupt crimes.
   (C)   No Village Trustee shall be eligible to any office, the salary of
which is payable out of the village treasury, except that of Acting President
or President Pro Tem, if, at the time of appointment, such person is a member
of the Board of Trustees.
   (D)   No Village Trustee shall be interested in any way in the manufacture,
sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor within the village, as prescribed by
statute.
§ 1-4-3 OATH OF OFFICE.
   Before entering upon the duties of Village Trustee, all persons, whether
elected or appointed, shall take and subscribe the oath of office as prescribed
by statute. This oath, so subscribed, shall be filed in the office of the
Village Clerk.
§ 1-4-4 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The compensation for each Trustee, whether elected or appointed, shall
be increased in the following manner.
      (1)   Effective 5-1-1995 through 5-1-1996, the salary for Village Trustee
will be $650 per year.
      (2)   Effective 5-1-1996 through 5-1-1997, the salary for Village Trustee
will be $1,300 per year.
      (3)   Effective 5-1-1997 through 5-1-1998, the salary for Village Trustee
will be $1,950 per year.
      (4)   Effective 5-1-1998, the salary for Village Trustee will be $2,600
per year.
   (B)   The compensation of a Trustee shall neither be increased nor decreased
during the term for which the Trustee is elected, nor for the remainder of the
term for which the Trustee is appointed.
(Ord. 95-01-03, passed 1-16-1995)
§ 1-4-5 VACANCY.
   Whenever a vacancy in the office of a Trustee occurs during his or her term,
the vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the term at the next general
village election as provided in 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-50.
Statutory reference:  
   Elections and primary elections to be conducted pursuant to state law, see
Illinois Election Code, 10 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.
ARTICLE 5: RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE
Section
   
1-5-1   Regular Board meetings
   
1-5-2   Special meetings
   
1-5-3   Order of business
   
1-5-4   Procedures and rules
§ 1-5-1 REGULAR BOARD MEETINGS.
   (A)   The regular meetings of the Board of Trustees shall be held on each of
the first and third Monday of each month of the year at the hour of 6:00 p.m.
in the boardroom of the Village Hall.
   (B)   No meeting of the Village Board or any other meeting required to be
open to the public shall be held on a legal holiday unless the regular meeting
day falls on that holiday.
   (C)   If there is no quorum present, the meeting shall be held on the next
business day at the same hour and place, unless the members present shall
adjourn to another time.
   (D)   Unless otherwise specified in the call of the meeting, all meetings of
the Board of Trustees shall be held in the Village Hall, including special and
adjourned meetings, and all meetings, except closed sessions, shall be open to
the public as is required by statute.
(Ord. 2013-08-35, passed 8-5-2013; Ord. 2021-01-01, passed 1-18-2021)
§ 1-5-2 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (A)   Special meetings may be called by the President or by any three
Trustees by written request or notice. At least 24-hours’ written notice shall
specify the time and purpose of such meeting and shall be delivered to each
member of the Board of Trustees and the Village Clerk, personally if he or she
can be found, and if he or she cannot be found, then by leaving a copy of such
notice at the home of such Board member and Clerk in the presence of an adult
member of the family of the member of the Board and the Clerk; provided,
however, that, emergency meetings may be called in the manner provided by
statute.
   (B)   If the notice is given by the Village Clerk, the Village Clerk shall
cause an affidavit showing service of such notice to be filed in his or her
office prior to the time fixed for such special meeting, together with a
statement of compliance with the notices to members of the media as provided by
statute. The failure to cause such an affidavit and statement of compliance to
be prepared shall not invalidate any action taken at such special meeting which
is otherwise accomplished in accordance with law.
   (C)   No business may be transacted at the special meeting, except that for
which it is called.
§ 1-5-3 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   The order of business shall be determined from time to time by the actions
of the Board of Trustees.
§ 1-5-4 PROCEDURES AND RULES.
   The procedures and rules of the Board of Trustees shall be as follows.
   Rule 1. Presiding officer.
      The Village President shall take the chair at the hour appointed, or to
which the Board shall have adjourned, and shall immediately call the members to
order; whereupon, the Clerk shall proceed to call the roll of members. If a
quorum is present, the Clerk shall so announce and the Board shall proceed with
the order of business.
   Rule 2. Quorum.
      (A)   A quorum shall consist of a majority of the entire Board of
Trustees, including the Village President. A quorum shall be necessary to
transact the business of the Village Board.
      (B)   If no quorum is present, the Board shall not thereby stand
adjourned, but the members present shall adjourn or recess the Board by a
majority vote.
   Rule 3. Absence of President.
      At any meeting of the Board where a majority shall be assembled, and if
the President is temporarily absent, but within or near the community, the
Clerk shall preside and call the roll, whereupon the Board shall elect a
Temporary Chairperson from its membership. In the event that the absence of the
President shall be of a more permanent nature, as provided by statute, a
President Pro Tem shall be elected.
   Rule 4. The President.
      (A)   The President shall preserve order and decorum and may speak to
points of order in preference to other members and shall decide all questions
of order subject to appeal.
      (B)   If the President refuses to allow the Trustees to exercise their
right to appeal a decision of the Chair, the Trustees may consider and pass
upon the matter in spite of the Chair’s failure to grant them appeal.
      (C)   The President shall have the power to require the boardroom to be
cleared, or to have any disorderly person or persons ejected, in case of any
disturbances or disorderly conduct which prevent the meeting from being
continued in an orderly manner.
   Rule 5. Duties of members.
      (A)   While the President is stating the motion, or deciding a point of
order, the members shall be seated and no member shall leave the boardroom
during the session without permission from the presiding officer.
      (B)   Every member, previous to his or her speaking, making a motion or
seconding the same, shall address the presiding officer and shall not proceed
with his or her remarks until recognized and named by the Chair.
      (C)   A member so recognized by the Chair, shall confine himself or
herself to the question under debate.
      (D)   No member shall speak more than once on the same question, except
by permission of the Chair, and then not until every other member desiring to
speak shall have had an opportunity to do so.
      (E)   No member shall speak longer than five minutes at any one time,
except by consent of the Chair.
      (F)   While a member is speaking, no member shall hold any private
discussion, nor pass between the speaker and the Chair.
      (G)   A member, when called to order by the Chair, shall thereupon
discontinue speaking. The order or ruling of the Chair shall be binding and
conclusive, subject only to the right to appeal.
      (H)   Any member may appeal to the Board from a ruling of the Chair and,
if the appeal is seconded, the member making the appeal may briefly state his
or her reason for the same, and the Chair may briefly explain his or her
ruling; but there shall be no debate on the appeal and no other member shall
participate in the discussion. The Chair shall then put the question, “Shall
the decision of the Chair be overruled?” Otherwise, it shall be sustained.
      (I)   The right of a member to address the Board on a question of
personal privilege shall be limited to cases in which his or her integrity,
character or motives are assailed, questioned or impugned.
   Rule 6. Seconding of motions required.
      No motion shall be put or debated in the Board or in committee unless it
be seconded. When a motion is seconded, it shall be stated by the presiding
officer before debate.
   Rule 7. Reading of resolutions, ordinances and correspondence.
      Resolutions, ordinances and correspondence need not be read.
   Rule 8. Withdrawal of motions.
      After a resolution or a motion is stated by the President, it shall be
deemed to be in the possession of the Board, but it may be withdrawn by the
maker thereof with or without the consent of the Trustee seconding the motion
prior to the call for the vote by the President.
   Rule 9. Division of questions.
      If any question under consideration contains several distinct
propositions, the Board, by a majority vote of the members present, may divide
such questions.
   Rule 10. Record of motions.
      In all cases where a resolution or motion is entered in the journal, the
name of the member moving and seconding the same shall be entered.
   Rule 11. Vote.
      (A)   The ayes and nays shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances
and on all propositions to create any liability against the village, or for the
expenditure or appropriation of its money, and upon any question and in all
other cases at the request of any member of the Board. When the Clerk has
commenced to call the roll of the Board for the taking of a vote by “Ayes” and
“Nays”, all debate on the question before the Board shall be deemed concluded,
and during the taking of the vote a member shall be permitted to briefly
explain his or her vote and shall respond to the calling of his or her name by
the Clerk by answering “Aye” or “Nay”, as the case may be.
      (B)   The names of each member of the Board of Trustees shall be listed
on the official copy of every ordinance passed indicating specifically the
names of those voting “Aye” and those voting “Nay”.
      (C)   Every Trustee present shall vote unless he or she has an interest
in the matter, in which event he or she shall disqualify himself. If a Trustee
who has not disqualified himself or herself does not vote, his or her failure
to vote shall, to the extent permitted by law, be construed as concurring with
the majority.
      (D)   The President shall announce the result of the Board’s vote and
such votes shall be entered in the journal of the proceedings, as is provided
by statute.
      (E)   The President shall vote and possess such veto powers as are
prescribed in the state statutes.
   Rule 12. Precedence of motion.
      When a question is before the Board, no motion shall be received, except
as herein specified, and which shall have precedence in the order herein
stated:
      (A)   To fix the time to which to adjourn;
      (B)   To adjourn;
      (C)   To take a recess;
      (D)   To raise a question of privilege;
      (E)   To call for the orders of the day;
      (F)   To lay on the table;
      (G)   To call for the previous question;
      (H)   To postpone to a certain time;
      (I)   To refer to committee;
      (J)   To amend;
      (K)   To postpone indefinitely; and
      (L)   To the main motion.
   Rule 13. Undebatable motions and exceptions to order.
      The motion to adjourn or to lay on the table shall be decided without
debate, and the motion to fix the time to which to adjourn and the motion to
adjourn shall always be in order, except:
      (A)   When a member is in possession of the floor;
      (B)   When the roll call votes are being called;
      (C)   While the members are voting;
      (D)   When adjournment was the last preceding motion; and
      (E)   When it has been decided that the “previous question” shall be
taken.
   Rule 14. Motion to adjourn.
      A motion to adjourn cannot be amended; but a motion to adjourn to a given
day or time shall be open to amendment and debate.
   Rule 15. Motion to postpone indefinitely.
      When a question is postponed indefinitely, it shall not be taken up again
before the next regular meeting.
   Rule 16. Motion to amend.
      A motion to amend an amendment shall be in order, but a motion to amend
an amendment to an amendment shall not be entertained.
   Rule 17. Amendments.
      Only one amendment at a time may be offered to any question before the
Board. The vote shall first be taken on the amendment and, if the amendment
passes, then further amendments may be proposed. Finally, a vote shall be taken
on the principal motion as finally amended.
   Rule 18. Reconsideration.
      (A)   A vote or question may be reconsidered at any time during the same
meeting, or at the first regular meeting held thereafter. A motion for
reconsideration, once having been made and decided in the negative, shall not
be renewed. A matter once having been decided and a motion to reconsider such
matter having been defeated, it may nonetheless come before the Board at a
future time by way of a motion to rescind or as a new motion. If the Chair
determines that new facts are to be presented to the Board, or that there is a
likelihood that the Board will reverse its previous decision, the Chair shall
rule the motion in order. If a motion is continuously brought before the Board
and rejected, the Chair may rule its reintroduction under a motion to rescind
or as a new motion to be out of order.
      (B)   No motion to reconsider the approval or denial of the
recommendation of an advisory body required to hold public hearings shall be
entertained except at the same meeting at which the original action was taken
or after the matter has been referred to the advisory body for a further
hearing and recommendation.
      (C)   A motion to reconsider must be made and seconded by members who
voted on the prevailing side of the question to be reconsidered, unless
otherwise provided by law; provided, however, that, where a motion has received
a majority vote in the affirmative, but is declared lost solely on the ground
that a greater number of affirmative votes is required by statute for the
passage or adoption of such motion, then in such case a motion to reconsider
may be made and seconded only by those who voted in the affirmative on such
question to be reconsidered, so long as the issue presented is the same, no new
information is forthcoming and the rights of third parties have not intervened.
   Rule 19. Visitors petitioners and public comment.
      (A)   Village Board meetings constitute legislative sessions of the Mayor
and Board of Trustees of the village providing the opportunity for the Mayor
and Board of Trustees to formally conduct village business and, as such, are
limited public forums held for the specific purpose of conducting business of
the village.
      (B)   Except during the time allotted for public discussion and comments
(referred to as the Listening Post), no person, other than a member of the
Board, shall address that body, except with the consent of a majority of the
members present. During the time allotted for public discussion and comments,
members of the general public may only address the Board with respect to items
listed on the agenda for consideration or with concerns or comments regarding
issues that are relevant to village business.
      (C)   Members of the public shall be called to address the Board in the
following order:
         (1)   Presentations scheduled with the Village Manager and set forth
on the agenda;
         (2)   Written presentations received prior to the Board meeting;
         (3)   Presentations by members of the public who have signed the
request to speak form prior to the commencement of the meeting.
      (D)   A person addressing the Board shall be allotted three minutes to
resent his or her comments.
      (E)   All members of the public addressing the Board shall, at all times,
maintain proper decorum. No person shall speak unless recognized by the Mayor
or Mayor Pro Tem. All discussion and debate shall be courteous, respectful, and
to the point. Impugning motives; contentions, slanderous or boisterous
statements; obscene or insulting language; threats; or personal remarks or
attacks directed at the members of the Board, staff, speakers or other members
of the public shall be out of order.
      (F)   All public comment shall be addressed to the Mayor and Board of
Trustees as a whole and no comments shall be addressed to individual members of
the Board, village staff or other members of the public.
      (G)   No final action may be taken on any public comment or concern which
requires an ordinance, resolution, or written contract, or which has the effect
of approving any expenditure of funds unless such item is on the agenda for
that meetings. The Board may, however, direct that any matter raised on these
orders be set for a future agenda, including the preparation of ordinances,
resolutions, or other documents for consideration at such time.
      (H)   Any person who shall disrupt by disorderly conduct a meeting of the
Mayor and Board of Trustees, its committees or any meeting of a board,
commission or advisory body of the village shall, upon conviction thereof, be
fined not less than $50 nor more than $750.
   Rule 20. Reports, communications, petitions, and the like.
      All communications, reports, petitions or any other papers addressed to
the Board shall be made available to the Village Clerk prior to the meeting.
The Village Clerk shall endeavor to distribute copies or read such material to
the members of the Board.
   Rule 21. The journal.
      The Village Clerk shall keep the journal of the proceedings of the Board.
Within no more than ten days after each meeting of the Board, the Clerk shall
supply to each member a typewritten copy of the minutes.
   Rule 22. Record of ordinances and documents.
      The Clerk shall keep a record of all ordinances passed in an ordinance
book for such purpose. All reports made by committees and all resolutions
adopted by the Board shall be filed and preserved by the Clerk.
   Rule 23. Publication.
      All ordinances imposing any penalty for a violation thereof or making any
appropriation shall be published as required by statute, either in a newspaper
or in pamphlet form, in which case, the ordinance in its pamphlet form shall be
displayed for a reasonable period in a public place in the Village Hall.
   Rule 24. Time for taking effect.
      No ordinance which must be published to comply with the foregoing section
shall go into effect until ten days after it is so published unless a statement
of the urgency of the ordinance is contained in it, and it achieves passage by
a two-thirds vote of the Board of Trustees then holding office. In all other
cases, the ordinances shall go into effect upon the passage thereof, as
provided by statute, even though the operation of the ordinance may not take
effect until a later date.
   Rule 25. Adoption of Robert’s Rules of Order, Revised.
      The rules of parliamentary practice comprised in the latest published
edition of Robert’s Rules of Order, Revised shall govern the Board in all cases
to which they are applicable and in which they are not inconsistent with the
ordinances of the village including these rules, or the statutes of the state.
   Rule 26. Temporary suspension of rules; amendment of rules.
      The rules of the Board may be temporarily suspended, altered or amended,
by concurrence of a majority vote of all the Trustees then in office.
   Rule 27. Expulsion of members.
      Any member acting or appearing in a lewd or disgraceful manner, or who
uses opprobrious, obscene or insulting language to or about any member of the
Board, or who does not obey the order of the Chair, shall be, on motion,
censured by a majority vote of the Board and, with the concurrence of two-
thirds of the Board of Trustees elected, the Board may expel a Trustee, but not
a second time for the same offense.
(Ord. 2013-08-35, passed 8-5-2013)
ARTICLE 6: VILLAGE CLERK
Section
   
1-6-1   Election and term of office
   
1-6-2   Qualifications
   
1-6-3   Oath of office
   
1-6-4   Bond
   
1-6-5   Compensation
   
1-6-6   Duties
   
1-6-7   Custody of seal
   
1-6-8   Attesting
   
1-6-9   Meetings and minutes
   
1-6-10   Notice of meetings
   
1-6-11   Money collected
   
1-6-12   Accounts
   
1-6-13   Records
   
1-6-14   Publication of Treasurer’s report
   
1-6-15   Documents
   
1-6-16   Indices
   
1-6-17   Publication of ordinances
   
1-6-18   Records and notices of election
   
1-6-19   Conduct of elections
   
1-6-20   Additional duties
   
1-6-21   Vacancy
   
1-6-22   Assistance with duties
   
1-6-23   Deputy Clerk
Cross-reference:
   Duties at meetings, see §§
1-6-9 and
1-6-10
§ 1-6-1 ELECTION AND TERM OF OFFICE.
   The Village Clerk shall be elected to office and serve for a four-year term
and until a successor is elected and qualified, as provided by statute.
§ 1-6-2 QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall be eligible to hold the office of Village Clerk unless
that person is a qualified elector of the village and has resided therein at
least one year next preceding the person’s election or appointment.
   (B)   No person shall be eligible to hold the office of Village Clerk who is
a defaulter to the village, in arrears in the payment of any tax or other
indebtedness due to the village, has been convicted in a state court of
malfeasance in office, bribery or other corrupt crimes.
   (C)   The Village Clerk shall hold no other village office during such
person’s term as Village Clerk.
§ 1-6-3 OATH OF OFFICE.
   Before entering upon the duties of this office, the Village Clerk shall take
and subscribe the oath of office as prescribed by statute.
§ 1-6-4 BOND.
   The Village Clerk, before entering upon the duties of this office, shall
execute a bond in the amount of $1,000, conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the Village Clerk’s duties, to be approved by the corporate
authorities. The bond of the Clerk shall be filed with the Village Treasurer.
The premium of such bond shall be paid by the village. The bond of the Village
Clerk may be part of a blanket bond.
§ 1-6-5 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The compensation for each Village Clerk shall be increased in the
following manner.
      (1)   Effective 5-1-1995 through 5-1-1996, the salary for Village Clerk
will be $650 per year.
      (2)   Effective 5-1-1996 through 5-1-1997, the salary for Village Clerk
will be $1,300 per year.
      (3)   Effective 5-1-1997 through 5-1-1998, the salary for Village Clerk
will be $1,950 per year.
      (4)   Effective 5-1-1998, the salary for Village Clerk will be $2,600 per
year.
   (B)   The compensation of the Village Clerk shall neither be increased nor
decreased during the term for which the Village Clerk is elected, nor for the
remainder of the term for which the Village Clerk is appointed.
(Ord. 95-01-03, passed 1-16-1995)
§ 1-6-6 DUTIES.
   (A)   The Village Clerk shall keep all records and reports as required by
statute or ordinance from time to time. It shall be the duty of the Village
Clerk to review all ordinances after codification to determine that the code of
ordinances is a true representation of the ordinance and that it is not in
conflict with other sections of the code of ordinances.
   (B)   The Clerk shall see that all officers required to file a bond with the
village and subscribe to an oath of office shall do so upon appointment to
their respective offices. The bonds of the Village President, Village
Treasurer, all appointed officers and members of the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners, and all oaths of office, shall be filed with the Village Clerk.
   (C)   The Village Clerk shall devote such time to this office as the duties
of the office shall require and as may be required by statute or ordinance.
§ 1-6-7 CUSTODY OF SEAL.
   The Clerk shall be the custodian of the village seal and shall affix its
impression on documents whenever required.
§ 1-6-8 ATTESTING.
   The Clerk shall seal and attest all licenses, permits and such other
documents as shall require this formality.
§ 1-6-9 MEETINGS AND MINUTES.
   The Clerk shall attend all meetings of the Village Board and keep a full
record of its proceedings in the journal which shall be preserved by the Clerk.
The minutes shall be distributed to members of the Board of Trustees within no
more than ten days after each meeting.
§ 1-6-10 NOTICE OF MEETINGS.
   The Clerk, when called upon to do so, shall issue and cause to be served
upon all members of the Board of Trustees notices of all special meetings of
the Board.
§ 1-6-11 MONEY COLLECTED.
   The Clerk shall turn over all money received on behalf of the village to the
Village Treasurer promptly upon receipt of same; and with such money he or she
shall give a statement as to the source thereof.
§ 1-6-12 ACCOUNTS.
   The Clerk shall have such responsibility for accounts as established by
statute.
§ 1-6-13 RECORDS.
   (A)   In addition to the record of ordinances and other records the Clerk is
required by statute to keep, the Clerk shall keep such other records as may be
required from time to time by the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   Upon recording with the County Recorder of Deeds, the original of all
annexation plats, plats of subdivision, easements, vacated properties, titles,
deeds and such other records, and all official contracts and documents shall be
maintained and kept by the Village Clerk in a safe and secure place in the
Village Hall.
§ 1-6-14 PUBLICATION OF TREASURER’S REPORT.
   Upon receipt of the Treasurer’s accounts of all moneys received and
expenditures incurred during the preceding fiscal year, filed with the Clerk by
the Village Treasurer, the Clerk shall cause the Treasurer’s annual report to
be published at least once, in one or more newspapers published within the
village or, if no newspaper is published therein, then in one or more
newspapers having a general circulation within the village, as required by
statute.
Cross-reference:
   Treasurer’s report, see §
2-2-13
§ 1-6-15 DOCUMENTS.
   (A)   The official Clerk’s records include the following:
      (1)   The Minute Book;
      (2)   The Ordinance Book;
      (3)   The Resolution Book;
      (4)   Election materials;
      (5)   Documents presented to the Clerk for further presentation to the
President and Board or to another officer or employee of the village; and
      (6)   Such other documents as may be required from time to time by the
Board of Trustees.
   (B)   All other documents of the village shall be filed in the appropriate
administrative office by function. This includes copies as necessary of
official documents.
§ 1-6-16 INDICES.
   The Clerk shall keep and maintain a proper index to all documents and
records kept by him or her, so that ready access thereto and use thereof may be
had.
§ 1-6-17 PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES.
   The Clerk shall publish in pamphlet form all ordinances as provided by
statute.
§ 1-6-18 RECORDS AND NOTICES OF ELECTION.
   The Clerk shall keep a record of the election or appointment of all officers
of the village and the record shall exhibit the name of the officer, to what
office elected or appointed, the date or declaration of election, the date of
his or her commission and the date of death, resignation, removal from office
or expiration of term of office. The Clerk shall, within five days after the
result of any election is declared or appointment is made, notify all persons
elected or appointed.
§ 1-6-19 CONDUCT OF ELECTIONS.
   The Clerk shall carry out all duties relating to village elections as may be
authorized by the Village Board or as shall be provided by statute.
§ 1-6-20 ADDITIONAL DUTIES.
   In addition to the duties herein provided, the Clerk shall perform such
other duties and functions as may be required by statute or ordinance.
§ 1-6-21 VACANCY.
   In case the office of Village Clerk shall become vacant for any reason, the
Village President and the Board of Trustees shall appoint an Acting Clerk to
serve until a Clerk is elected for the remainder of the term at the next
election of Trustees, and has qualified, as provided by statute.
§ 1-6-22 ASSISTANCE WITH DUTIES.
   The Village Manager shall assign village staff, at the request of the
Village Clerk and as the Village Manager deems necessary, to assist in the
performance of the duties of Village Clerk. The Village Clerk may authorize
such village staff to affix the seal of the Clerk and to execute documents on
behalf of the Village Clerk, which documents shall have the same effect as if
the documents had been signed by the Village Clerk.
(Ord. 2011-04-10, passed 4-18-2011)
§ 1-6-23 DEPUTY CLERK.
   (A)   The Mayor may appoint a Deputy Clerk, with the advice and consent of
the Board of Trustees. The Deputy Clerk shall not be required to be a qualified
elector of the village. The Deputy Clerk may affix the seal of the Village
Clerk wherever required and attest to all ordinances, resolutions, licenses,
permits or other documents, which the Village Clerk is authorized to attest.
   (B)   The duties of the Village Clerk shall be exercised by the Deputy Clerk
in the absence of the Village Clerk from the place where the Village Clerk's
office is maintained, and only when either written direction has been given by
the Village Clerk to the Deputy Clerk to exercise such duties or when the
corporate authorities have determined by resolution that the Village Clerk is
temporarily or permanently incapacitated to perform that function or that a
vacancy exists in the office of Village Clerk. When a Deputy's signature is
duly authorized as provided in this section and is affixed by the Deputy Clerk
in the manner prescribed in this section on any document (including but not
limited to ordinances, resolutions, licenses, permits, contracts, bonds, or
other documents of the village), the document shall have the same effect as if
the document had been signed by the Village Clerk in person.
(Ord. 2020-07-20, passed 7-6-2020)
ARTICLE 7: USE OF VILLAGE PROPERTY
Section
   
1-7-1   Use of Village Hall and other public buildings by other local taxing
bodies and quasi-governmental entities
   
1-7-2   Use of Village Hall and other public buildings for public forums events
or activities
   
1-7-3   Use of village parks and open spaces
§ 1-7-1 USE OF VILLAGE HALL AND OTHER PUBLIC BUILDINGS BY OTHER LOCAL TAXING
BODIES AND QUASI-GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES.
   Groups, organizations or entities permitted to seek permission to hold
events within the Village Hall and other public buildings shall include
overlapping taxing bodies, such as the library or park district and their
committees and commissions, and agencies engaged in work for the village
pursuant to a contract or intergovernmental agreement. These groups may use
available meeting room space within the Village Hall on an “as available”
basis, with priority being given to village governmental boards, committees and
commissions.
(Ord. 2001-04-17, passed 4-2-2001)
§ 1-7-2 USE OF VILLAGE HALL AND OTHER PUBLIC BUILDINGS FOR PUBLIC FORUMS EVENTS
OR ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   The Mayor and Board of Trustees may, on occasion, choose to sponsor,
co-sponsor or make portions of the Village Hall available for public forums,
events or activities which will normally be concluded within one day, but under
no circumstances will extend beyond two consecutive days. Only public forums,
events or activities which conform with all of the following requirements may
be considered for use of the Village Hall. The forum, event or activity must:
      (1)   Be open to all citizens of the village;
      (2)   Be sponsored or put on by a local not-for-profit group or
organization based within the village;
      (3)   Not be a religious assembly for purposes of prayer or worship;
except that, wedding ceremonies shall be permitted; and
      (4)   Not be a partisan political rally, assembly or meeting.
   (B)   The permitted meeting uses of Village Hall shall have a priority over
public forums, events and activities in terms of scheduling the use of Village
Hall space. Applications for the use of the Village Hall to conduct a public
forum, event or activity shall be delivered to the Village Manager with all
required information no later than 30 days prior to the scheduled event. The
Village Manager may schedule such uses of the Village Hall, which will, at the
Manager’s discretion, be least disruptive to the normal operations of the
Village Hall and the most convenient to the members of the public in terms of
attending the public event. Groups sponsoring or putting on such public events
within the village shall comply with all applicable village ordinances,
regulations and requirements.
(Ord. 2001-04-17, passed 4-2-2001)
§ 1-7-3 USE OF VILLAGE PARKS AND OPEN SPACES.
   (A)   Apart from recreational uses by individual residents and their guests,
village parks and open spaces shall be restricted to public forums, events or
activities which will normally be concluded within one day, but under no
circumstances will extend beyond two consecutive days except as may be approved
for other local taxing bodies or quasi-governmental entities. Only public
forums, events or activities which conform with all of the following
requirements may be considered for use of village parks and open spaces. The
forum, event or activity must:
      (1)   Be sponsored or put on by a local not-for-profit group or
organization based within the village or local taxing body or quasi-
governmental entity;
      (2)   Not be a religious assembly for purposes of prayer or worship;
except that, wedding ceremonies shall be permitted; and
      (3)   Not be a partisan political rally, assembly or meeting.
   (B)   Applications for the use of village parks and open spaces to conduct a
public forum, event or activity shall be delivered to the Village Manager with
all required information no later than 30 days prior to the scheduled event.
Subject to availability of space, public forums, events or activities shall
only be held during daylight hours. Groups sponsoring or putting on such public
events within the village shall comply with all applicable village ordinances,
regulations and requirements.
   (C)   The village reserves the right to deny any use of village property,
parks and open spaces which the Village Board, in its discretion, determines to
be inconsistent with the policy set forth herein. Failure to abide by the
village’s policy and rules of conduct for the use of village property, parks
and open spaces may result in cancellation or refusal of future reservations.
(Ord. 2001-04-17, passed 4-2-2001)
ARTICLE 8: ETHICS
Section
   
1-8-1   Statement of policy and intent
   
1-8-2   Application of laws and policies
   
1-8-3   Definitions
   
1-8-4   Financial interest in village contracts or property—Village officers
   
1-8-5   Financial interest in village contracts or property—Employees
   
1-8-6   Disclosure of economic interests
   
1-8-7   Prohibited political activities
   
1-8-8   Gift ban
   
1-8-9   Confidential information
   
1-8-10   Misuse of office or village property
   
1-8-11   Complaints
   
1-8-12   Procedure for complaints against village employees
   
1-8-13   Procedure for complaints against village officials
   
1-8-14   Retaliation
   
1-8-15   Penalties
   
1-8-16   Copies to village officials and personnel
   
1-8-17   Provisions are additional
§ 1-8-1 STATEMENT OF POLICY AND INTENT.
   (A)   All village officials and employees, paid or unpaid, hold their
positions for the benefit of the village. It is the policy of the village to
uphold, promote and demand the highest standards of conduct and ethics from all
officials and employees, and to avoid any actions that might, to a reasonable
person, suggest the appearance of impropriety.
   (B)   All village officials and employees share a commitment to ethical
conduct in service to the community. The purpose of this ethics code is to
ensure that all persons regulated by this code of ethics have clear guidance
for carrying out their roles and responsibilities.
   (C)   In recognition of these expectations, there is hereby established a
code of ethics for all village officials and employees.
(Ord. 2018-04-17, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 1-8-2 APPLICATION OF LAWS AND POLICIES.
   All covered individuals, as defined herein, are subject to the provisions of
this ethics code as provided herein, and all applicable state laws addressing
ethics. In addition, the actions of covered individuals, to the extent
applicable, shall be subject to the provisions of the Village of Carol Stream
Personnel Manual and any other rules of operation and performance, including
written contracts applicable to the performance of their duties.
(Ord. 2018-04-17, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 1-8-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE. Any activity in furtherance of an effort to
influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any
individual to any federal, state or local public office or office in a
political organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of
presidential or vice presidential electors, but does not include activities:
      (1)   Relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative, or administrative action;
      (2)   Relating to collective bargaining;
      (3)   That are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
   CANDIDATE. A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for
nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill
a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot
at a "regular election", as defined in § 1-3 of the Illinois Election Code (10
ILCS 5/1-3).
   COMMISSIONER/COMMITTEE MEMBER. Individuals appointed by the Mayor to serve
on the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals, Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners, Police Pension Board, or any other village commission or
committee formed by ordinance or resolution duly adopted by the Village Board
of Trustees.
   COMPENSATED TIME. With respect to an employee, any time worked by or
credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement
imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for the purposes of this
article, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal
time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on leave of
absence. With respect to officers, or employees whose hours are not fixed,
COMPENSATED TIME includes any period of time when the officer or employee is on
premises under the control of the employer and any other time when the officer
or employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
   COMPENSATORY TIME OFF. Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an
employee to  compensate, in whole or in part, for time worked in excess of the
minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her
employment.
   CONTRIBUTION. Has the same meaning as the term defined in § 9-1.4 of the
Illinois Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-1.4).
   COVERED INDIVIDUAL. The Mayor, Trustees, Village Clerk, appointed officers,
village employees, commission members, and committee members.
   ELECTED OFFICIALS. The Mayor, Village Clerk and Village Trustees.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person employed by the village, whether on a full time or part
time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the direction
and control of the village with regard to the material details of how the work
is to be performed, but does not include independent contractors.
   EMPLOYER. The Village of Carol Stream.
   GIFT. Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance,
or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not
limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagement related
to or attributable to government employment or the official position of a
covered individual.
   LEAVE OF ABSENCE. Any period during which an employee does not receive:
      (1)   Compensation for employment;
      (2)   Service credit for pension benefits; and
      (3)   Health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
   OFFICER or OFFICIAL. A person who holds, by election or appointment, an
office created by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is
compensated for service in his or her official capacity.
   POLITICAL ACTIVITY. Any activity in support of or in connection with any
campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities:
      (1)   Relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative, or administrative action;
      (2)   Relating to collective bargaining; or
      (3)   That are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
   POLITICAL ORGANIZATION. A party, committee, association, fund, or other
organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement
of organization with the State Board of Elections or the County Clerk under §
9-3 of the Illinois Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-3), but only with regard to
those activities that require filing with the State Board of Elections or
County Clerk.
   PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY. 
      (1)   Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political
meeting, political rally, political demonstration, or other political event.
      (2)   Soliciting contributions including, but not limited to, the
purchase of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any
political fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.
      (3)   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document
or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution.
      (4)   Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
      (5)   Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters
in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with
a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for
political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
      (6)   Assisting at the polls on Election Day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
      (7)   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a
political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in
an effort to get voters to the polls.
      (8)   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or
filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
      (9)   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office
in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elected office.
      (10)   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
      (11)   Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign
literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
      (12)   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any
referendum question.
      (13)   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
      (14)   Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party
convention.
      (15)   Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
   PROHIBITED SOURCE. Any person or entity who:
      (1)   Is seeking official action:
         (a)   By an officer; or
         (b)   By an employee, or by the officer of another employee directing
that employee;
      (2)   Does business or seeks to do business:
         (a)   With an officer; or
         (b)   With an employee, or with the officer or another employee
directing that employee;
      (3)   Conducts activities regulated:
         (a)   By an officer; or
         (b)   By an employee, or with the officer or another employee
directing that employee; or
      (4)   Has an interest that may be substantially affected by the
performance or nonperformance of the official duties of the covered individual.
(Ord. 2018-04-17, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 1-8-4 FINANCIAL INTEREST IN VILLAGE CONTRACTS OR PROPERTY—VILLAGE OFFICERS.
   Prohibited interests.
   (A)   No village officer shall be interested, directly or indirectly, in his
or her own name or in the name of any other person, association, trust or
corporation, in any contract, work or business of the village, or in the sale
of any article, whenever the expense, price or consideration of the contract,
work, business or sale is paid either from the village treasury or by any
assessment levied by statute or village ordinance as provided in § 3.1-55-10 of
the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/3.1-55-10).
   (B)   No village officer shall be interested, directly or indirectly, in the
purchase of any property which belongs to the village; or is sold for taxes or
assessments; or is sold by virtue of legal process at the suit of the village,
as provided in § 3.1-55-10 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/3.1-55-
10).
(Ord. 2018-04-17, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 1-8-5 FINANCIAL INTEREST IN VILLAGE CONTRACTS OR PROPERTY—EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   Village policy. It is the policy of the village that it shall not
enter into any contract for goods or services with any village employee.
   (B)   Prohibited interests.
      (1)   No village employee shall be interested, directly or indirectly, in
his or her own name or in the name of any other person, association, trust or
corporation, in any contract, work or business of the village, or in the sale
of any article, whenever the expense, price or consideration of the contract,
work, business or sale is paid either from the village treasury or by any
assessment levied by statute or village ordinance.
      (2)   No employee shall be interested, directly or indirectly, in the
purchase of any property which:
         (a)   Belongs to the village; or
         (b)   Is sold for taxes or assessments; or
         (c)   Is sold by virtue of legal process at the suit of the village.
   (C)   For purposes of this section only, a village employee shall not be
interested if the employee owns or holds an interest of 1% or less in a company
whose stock is traded on a nationally recognized securities market.
(Ord. 2018-04-17, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 1-8-6 DISCLOSURE OF ECONOMIC INTERESTS.
   All elected officials, appointed officers, commissioners, committee members
and employees required to file economic disclosure statements with the county
clerk pursuant to § 4A-101 of the Illinois Governmental Ethics Act (5 ILCS 420/
4A-101) shall be in violation of this code of ethics if they fail to comply
with and fulfill the requirements set forth in said state Act.
(Ord. 2018-04-17, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 1-8-7 PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   No covered individual shall intentionally perform any prohibited
political activity during any "compensated time", as defined in § 1-8-2. No
covered individual shall intentionally use any property or resources of the
village in connection with any prohibited political activity.
   (B)   At no time shall any covered individual intentionally require any
other covered individual to perform any prohibited political activity:
      (1)   As part of that covered individual's duties;
      (2)   As a condition of employment;
      (3)   During any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or
personal time off).
   (C)   No covered individual shall be required at any time to participate in
any prohibited political activity in consideration for that covered individual
being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a
salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or
otherwise, nor shall any covered individual be awarded additional compensation
or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited
political activity.
   (D)   Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for
a covered individual to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or
activities that are undertaken by a covered individual on a voluntary basis
which are not prohibited by this article.
(Ord. 2018-04-17, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 1-8-8 GIFT BAN.
   (A)   Prohibitions and exceptions.
      (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no covered
individual shall intentionally solicit or accept any gift, prize, favor or
other consideration from any prohibited source as defined herein, or which is
otherwise in violation of any federal or state statute, rule, or regulation.
This ban applies to and includes the spouse of and immediate family living with
the covered individual. No prohibited source shall intentionally offer or make
a gift that violates this division (A)(1).
         (b)   The restriction does not apply to the following:
            1.   Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on
the same conditions as for the general public.
            2.   Anything for which the covered individual pays the market
value.
            3.   Any:
               A.    Condition that is lawfully made under the election code or
under this section; or
               B.    Activities associated with a fundraising event in support
of a political organization or candidate.
            4.   Educational materials and missions.
            5.   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss village business.
            6.   A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the
covered individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle,
aunt, great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife,
grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-
law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather,
stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half-brother, half-
sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the
covered individual's spouse and the covered individual's fiancé or fiancée.
            7.   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship unless the covered individual has reason to believe that, under the
circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the covered individual and not because of the personal
friendship. In determining whether a gift is provided on the basis of personal
friendship, the covered individual shall consider the circumstances under which
the gift was offered, such as:
               A.   The history of the relationship between the individual
giving the gift and the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange
of gifts between those individuals;
               B.    Whether, to the actual knowledge of the covered
individual, the individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or
sought a tax deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and
               C.    Whether, to the actual knowledge of the covered
individual, the individual who gave the gift also, at the same time, gave the
same or similar gifts to other covered individuals.
            8.   Food or refreshments not exceeding $75 per person in value on
a single calendar day; provided that the food or refreshments are: 1) consumed
on the premises from which they were purchased or prepared; or 2) catered. For
the purposes of this section, CATERED means food or refreshments that are
purchased ready to eat and delivered by any means.
            9.   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other
benefits resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside
activities that are not connected to the duties of the covered individual as an
office holder or employee) of the officer, member, or employee, or the spouse
of the covered individual, if the benefits have not been offered or enhanced
because of the official position or employment of the covered individual and
are customarily provided to others in similar circumstances.
            10.    Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the
purpose of this section, INTRAGOVERNMENTAL GIFT means any gift given to a
covered individual from another covered individual, and INTERGOVERNMENTAL GIFT
means any gift given to a covered individual by a member, officer, or employee
of another government entity.
            11.   Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
            12.   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any
calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than $100.
      (2)   Each of the exceptions listed in this division (A) is mutually
exclusive and independent of one another.
   (B)   Disposition of gifts. A covered individual does not violate this
article if the covered individual promptly takes reasonable action to return
the prohibited gift to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its
value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under § 501
(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as now or hereafter amended,
renumbered, or succeeded.
(Ord. 2018-04-17, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 1-8-9 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   No covered individual shall, without proper legal authorization,
disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or
affairs of the village without the express consent of the corporate authorities
or the Village Manager.
   (B)   The use of confidential information to advance the financial or any
other private interest of any covered individual or any other person is
prohibited.
   (C)   Any discussions of subject matter committed to executive session shall
be confidential. No public disclosure of the corporate authority's discussions
held or any decisions made in executive session shall be made unless directed
by the corporate authorities or the Village Manager; or until the matter is
made public by announcement, publication or official action by the corporate
authorities.
(Ord. 2018-04-17, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 1-8-10 MISUSE OF OFFICE OR VILLAGE PROPERTY.
   (A)   Misuse of office. No covered individual shall use his or her position
for individual gain rather than for the benefit of the village.
   (B)   Use of public property. No covered individual shall request or permit
the use of village owned vehicles, equipment, materials or any other property
for personal use or personal profit, except when the property is made available
to the public in general, or when provided to the covered individual for his or
her use as part of an approved village policy, adopted by either the Board of
Trustees or the Village Manager.
(Ord. 2018-04-17, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 1-8-11 COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   Any person who believes that a violation of any portion of this
article has occurred may file a
complaint with the Village Clerk. Any such complaint shall be based on personal
knowledge and shall include a statement of facts and circumstances sufficient
to inform the covered individual of the nature of the alleged violation. Each
complaint shall be in writing, signed by the person alleging the violation and
shall contain the following certification:    
   The undersigned, ________________, hereby certify and affirm that I have
read the complaint, have knowledge of the contents thereof, and the statements
set forth therein are true and correct in substance and in fact, to the best of
my knowledge.
   ___________________________________
   (Signature of person filing complaint)
   (B)   No person shall intentionally make a false statement in a complaint
filed pursuant to this article.
   (C)   Within two business days of receiving a complaint, the Village Clerk
shall forward a copy to the Village Manager and to the person alleged to be in
violation of this code of ethics.
(Ord. 2018-04-17, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 1-8-12 PROCEDURE FOR COMPLAINTS AGAINST VILLAGE EMPLOYEES.
   Upon receipt of the complaint, the Village Manager shall cause an
investigation to be conducted, shall review of the evidence and shall prepare a
written report containing his or her findings and conclusions. If the Village
Manager determines that the complaint is not sustained, he or she shall so
state in the conclusions portion of his or her written report. On the other
hand, if the Village Manager determines that the complaint is sustained, the
report shall include his or her conclusions as to the appropriate action to be
taken against the employee, including but not limited to suspension, demotion
or discharge. In the event no violation is found, the Village Manager's
complaint files shall not be open for public inspection except as provided by
law or unless requested by the individual who was the subject of the complaint.
However, the person making the complaint shall be notified in writing by the
Village Manager of his or her decision.
(Ord. 2018-04-17, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 1-8-13 PROCEDURE FOR COMPLAINTS AGAINST VILLAGE OFFICIALS.
   Upon receipt of the complaint, the Village Manager shall cause an
investigation to be conducted by the Village Attorney or such other attorney as
may be deemed appropriate. The Village Attorney or assigned attorney shall
review of the evidence, and shall prepare a written report and recommendation
for the Board of Trustees. If it is determined that the complaint is not
sustained, he or she shall so state in the recommendation portion of his or her
written report. On the other hand, if he or she determines that the complaint
is sustained, the report shall include recommendations for such administrative
or legal action as deemed appropriate. The Board shall then review the report
and recommendations and, by majority vote including the Mayor, determine what
action, if any, is to be taken in accordance with the provisions of this
article. If it is a member of the Mayor and Board of Trustees who is accused,
that member shall not participate in the vote. In the event no violation is
found, the complaint files shall not be open for public inspection except as
provided by law or unless requested by the individual who was the subject of
the complaint. To the extent that it is practical to do so, an elected official
should use his or her best efforts to notify, in writing, other elected village
officials prior to filing a complaint or charges against any village official.
(Ord. 2018-04-17, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 1-8-14 RETALIATION.
   No covered individual shall retaliate against any person because that person
has opposed that which he or she reasonably and in good faith believes to be in
violation of this code of ethics or any federal or state statute, rule, or
regulation. No covered individual shall retaliate against any person because
that person has made a charge, filed a complaint, testified, assisted, or
participated in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing.
(Ord. 2018-04-17, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 1-8-15 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any person who intentionally violates §§
1-8-4,
1-8-5 or
1-8-7 may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other
than a penitentiary for a period of not more than 364 days, and may be fined in
any amount not to exceed $2,500.
   (B)   Any person who intentionally violates §§
1-8-6,
1-8-8,
1-8-9, or
1-8-14 shall be subject to a fine in the amount of not less than $1,000 and not
more than $5,000.
   (C)   Any person who intentionally makes a false report or complaint
alleging a violation of any provision of this article to the village, State's
Attorney or any other law enforcement official may be punished by a term of
incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a period of
not more than 364 days, and may be fined in any amount not to exceed $2,500.
   (D)   A violation of §§
1-8-4,
1-8-5,
1-8-7 or
1-8-11(B) shall be prosecuted as a criminal offense by the Village Prosecutor.
The prosecution shall be under the Rules of Criminal Procedure. Conviction
shall require the establishment of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
   (E)   A violation of §§
1-8-6,
1-8-8,
1-8-9,
1-8-10 or
1-8-14 shall be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal offense by the Village
Prosecutor and shall require the establishment of guilt by a preponderance of
the evidence.
   (F)   In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether
criminal or civil, an officer who intentionally violates any provision of this
article shall be subject to censure or removal from office as may be provided
by law.
   (G)   In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether
criminal or civil, an employee who intentionally violates any provision of this
article shall be subject to discipline, including but not limited to
suspension, demotion or discharge.
(Ord. 2018-04-17, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 1-8-16 COPIES TO VILLAGE OFFICIALS AND PERSONNEL.
   A copy of this code of ethics shall be provided to all elected officials,
appointed officers and appointed commissioners/committee members upon beginning
their term of office. A copy of this code of ethics shall be provided to all
employees upon its passage and to new employees upon employment. All appointed
officers, employees, and commission and committee members shall sign a receipt
acknowledging delivery of the code of ethics in a manner to be determined by
the Village Manager.
(Ord. 2018-04-17, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 1-8-17 PROVISIONS ARE ADDITIONAL.
   Nothing in this article shall be deemed to in any way restrict the
application of any state, local or common law provision with respect to
conflict of interest, malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or
employment which would otherwise be applicable to any individual subject to the
provisions of this article. The provisions of this article shall be deemed to
be additional requirements and shall in no way be construed as a derogation of
present statutory penalties and other local remedies for acts prohibited in
this article.
(Ord. 2018-04-17, passed 4-16-2018)
ARTICLE 9: DISCRIMINATORY WORKPLACE HARASSMENT POLICY
Section
   
1-9-1   Purpose
   
1-9-2   Policy
   
1-9-3   Definitions
   
1-9-4   Complaint procedure
   
1-9-5   Legal rights under the law
   
1-9-6   Prohibition on retaliation
   
1-9-7   False reports of harassment
   
1-9-8   Consequences of violating the harassment policy
§ 1-9-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this policy is to establish the village's commitment to
provide a work environment free from harassment, to define discriminatory
harassment, and to set forth the procedure for investigating and resolving
internal complaints of harassment.
(Ord. 2017-12-73, passed 12-18-2017; Ord. 2019-04-15, passed 4-15-2019)
§ 1-9-2 POLICY.
   (A)   All village employees and village officials have a right to work in an
environment free from harassment. It is critical that all village employees and
village officials treat all other village employees and village officials with
dignity and respect. It is the responsibility of each and every village
official, employee, supervisor and department head to make sure that there is
no inappropriate behavior occurring in the workplace. Inappropriate behavior
that impacts the village work environment, or has the potential to impact the
work environment will not be tolerated.
   (B)   Harassment of a village official or employee by any village official
or employee on the basis of race, religion, color, national origin, ancestry,
disability, medical condition, marital status, pregnancy, sexual orientation,
gender, age, or other protected characteristic violates this policy, may be in
violation of state and/or federal law and will not be tolerated by the Village
of Carol Stream. Harassment within the work environment of the village by a
contractor, business invitee guest or customer and harassment within the work
environment of the village of a contractor business, invitee, guest or customer
by a village employee or official shall be prohibited by this policy.
(Ord. 2017-12-73, passed 12-18-2017; Ord. 2019-04-15, passed 4-15-2019)
§ 1-9-3 DEFINITIONS.
   Harassment in violation of this policy includes but is not limited to the
following behaviors set forth below. For purposes of this definition, "working
environment" or "workplace" is not limited to a physical location a person
covered by this policy is assigned to perform his or her duties and does not
require an employment relationship.
   EMPLOYEE. Any full time, part-time or contractual employee.
   OFFICIAL. Any elected or appointed official regardless of wheher the
official is compensated.
   PHYSICAL HARASSMENT. Assault, impeding or blocking movement, leering, or the
physical interference with normal work, privacy or movement. PHYSICAL
HARASSMENT includes but is not limited to uninvited and/or unwanted touching,
pinching, patting, hugging, kissing, grabbing, inappropriate behavior in any
area of the village, or making explicit or implied threats or promises in
return for submission to physical acts.
   SEXUAL HARASSMENT. Any unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual
favors or any conduct of a sexual nature when:
      (1)   Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly
a term or condition of an individual's employment,
      (2)   Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used
as the basis for an employment decision, or
      (3)   Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering
with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or
offensive working environment.
   VERBAL HARASSMENT. Nicknames, derogatory or suggestive comments, innuendos,
slurs, insults, threats, derogatory or discriminatory jokes, propositioning, or
otherwise offensive words, comments or gestures on the basis of race, status,
pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender, age, or other protected characteristic,
whether made in general or directed to an individual, regardless of whether the
behavior was intended to harass. This includes but is not limited to persistent
unwelcome flirting, pressure for dates, inappropriate sexually related
comments, sexual rumors, jokes, code words and stories.
   VISUAL FORMS OF HARASSMENT. Derogatory, prejudicial, stereotypical or
otherwise offensive posters, signs, photographs, cartoons, e-mails, texting,
cyber stalking, notes, bulletins, drawings, pictures, online postings, blogs,
or social network site postings.
(Ord. 2017-12-73, passed 12-18-2017; Ord. 2019-04-15, passed 4-15-2019)
§ 1-9-4 COMPLAINT PROCEDURE.
   The village will investigate any allegations of discriminatory village work
environment harassment, sexual harassment or retaliation. All allegations,
including anonymous reports, will be accepted and investigated regardless of
how the matter comes to the attention of the village. However, because of the
difficulties associated with the investigation of workplace harassment, the
claimant's willing cooperation is a vital component of an effective
investigation. The following procedure has been instituted for making
complaints about conduct in violation of this policy.
   (A)   Any person covered by this policy observing an act of harassment or
who is the object of harassment shall report the suspected harassment by a
village employee, village official, contractor, business invitee, customer or
village guest to their immediate supervisor, department head or the Human
Resources Director The report may be made initially either orally or in
writing, but the village may require a written statement as a part of the
investigation.
   (B)   Any person covered by this policy who is experiencing what he or she
believes to be an act of harassment must not assume that the village is aware
of the conduct. If there are no witnesses and a victim of harassment fails to
notify the village as provided herein, the village will not be presumed to have
knowledge of the harassment.
   (C)   The immediate supervisor department head informed of the complaint
will notify the Human Resources Department within 24 hours. An investigation of
the suspected harassment will be initiated at the direction of the Human
Resources Department, generally within five working days of notification. If
deemed necessary, additional individuals may assist in the investigation. The
investigation will include an interview with the person(s) who made the initial
report and the person(s) toward whom the suspected harassment was directed. Any
other person who may have information regarding the alleged harassment may also
be interviewed.
   (D)   The individual conducting the investigation is responsible for
preparing a written report within ten working days of his or her completion of
the investigation, unless extenuating circumstances prevent him or her from
doing so. The report shall include a finding that the harassment has been
substantiated or the harassment cannot be substantiated.
   (E)   Every effort shall be made to keep all matters related to the
investigation and various reports as confidential as possible.
(Ord. 2017-12-73, passed 12-18-2017; Ord. 2019-04-15, passed 4-15-2019)
§ 1-9-5 LEGAL RIGHTS UNDER THE LAW.
   Any person covered by this policy who believes he or she has been subjected
to discriminatory harassment has the right to file a complaint with the
Illinois Department of Human Rights, 100 West Randolph Street, Chicago,
Illinois 60601; (312) 814-6200 and/or the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, 500 West Madison, Suite 2000, Chicago, Illinois 60661; 1-800-669-
4000. The Illinois Human Act provides that complaints harassment must be filed
within 300 days of the alleged incident. A complaint with the EEOC must be
filed within 300 days of the alleged incident.
(Ord. 2017-12-73, passed 12-18-2017; Ord. 2018-11-41, passed 11-5-2018; Ord.
2019-04-15, passed 4-15-2019)
§ 1-9-6 PROHIBITION ON RETALIATION.
   (A)   Any person filing a report of harassment and any person who cooperates
in a harassment investigation have the right to be protected from retaliation.
The Whistleblower Act, 740 ILCS 174/15(a) and the Illinois Human Rights Act,
775 ILCS 5/6-101, prohibit retaliation against a person because he or she has
reported any act which he or she reasonably and in good faith believes to be
unlawful harassment, or because he or she has made a charge, filed a complaint,
testified, assisted, or participated in an investigation, proceeding, or
hearing with respect to any alleged harassment. Any form of retaliation, if
established, is subject to administrative and/or disciplinary action.
   (B)   Any person covered by this policy who believes he or she has
experienced or witnessed retaliation should report such conduct immediately to
his or her immediate supervisor, department head, except where such person is
the one accused of retaliation. In such case, the complaint should be reported
to the Human Resources Director. The complaint procedures in this policy will
also apply to complaints of retaliation.
(Ord. 2017-12-73, passed 12-18-2017; Ord. 2019-04-15, passed 4-15-2019)
§ 1-9-7 FALSE REPORTS OF HARASSMENT.
   Complaints of harassment are taken seriously by the village. The village
also recognizes that making false accusations of harassment in bad faith can
have serious consequences for those who are wrongly accused. Submitting an
allegation of harassment, reporting or providing information that is
intentionally false or misleading is a severe offense and a violation of this
policy.
(Ord. 2017-12-73, passed 12-18-2017; Ord. 2019-04-15, passed 4-15-2019)
§ 1-9-8 CONSEQUENCES OF VIOLATING THE HARASSMENT POLICY.
   Any person who violates this policy, the prohibition on sexual harassment
contained in 5 ILCS 430/5-65, or makes a false report of harassment shall be
subject to discipline including but not limited to suspension, demotion or
discharge and any applicable fines and penalties established pursuant to
ordinance, state law or federal law. Each violation shall constitute a separate
offense. Any discipline imposed shall be separate and distinct from any fine or
penalties imposed by a court of law or a state or federal agency.
(Ord. 2017-12-73, passed 12-18-2017; Ord. 2019-04-15, passed 4-15-2019)
ARTICLE 10: WHISTLEBLOWER REPORT POLICY
Section
   
1-10-1   Statement of purpose
   
1-10-2   Appointed Auditing Official
   
1-10-3   Who is covered
   
1-10-4   What is covered
   
1-10-5   What is prohibited
   
1-10-6   Report filing procedure
   
1-10-7   Responsibilities of the Auditing Official
   
1-10-8   Penalties for policy violations
   
1-10-9   Remedies for retaliation
   
1-10-10   Employee notice requirements
   
1-10-11   Other village work rule violations
§ 1-10-1 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The Village of Carol Stream is committed to identifying and stopping
improper governmental actions as defined by the Public Officer Prohibited
Activities Act (50 ILCS 105/4.1), and maintaining a work environment free of
retaliation against those who report, testify about, or participate in
investigations regarding alleged improper governmental actions. The Village of
Carol Stream will not tolerate retaliation against employees for reporting or
threatening to report improper governmental actions, cooperating with
investigations into the same, and/or testifying in a proceeding arising out of
an improper governmental action. Any report of retaliation will promptly be
reported to the Village of Carol Stream's appointed Auditing Official for
review. All employees are responsible for reporting improper governmental
actions as well as reporting any retaliatory conduct resulting therefrom.
(Ord. 2021-09-43, passed 9-7-2021; Ord. 2025-01- 01, passed 1-6-2025)
§ 1-10-2 APPOINTED AUDITING OFFICIAL.
   The appointed Auditing Official is an individual appointed by the Village of
Carol Stream whose duties are to receive, register, and investigate reports and
information concerning misconduct, inefficiency, and waste within the Village
of Carol Stream based upon the prohibitions set forth below. The Village of
Carol Stream has appointed the Village Manager or his designee as its Auditing
Official. The Village Manager can be reached at 630-871-629 or by emailing
wholmer@carolstream.org.
(Ord. 2021-09-43, passed 9-7-2021; Ord. 2025-01- 01, passed 1-6-2025)
§ 1-10-3 WHO IS COVERED.
   Anyone employed by the Village of Carol Stream, whether in a permanent or
temporary position, including full-time, part-time, and intermittent workers.
This includes members of appointed boards or commissions, such as the Village
of Carol Stream's Pension Boards, Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, and
Plan Commissioners, whether or not paid. Further, this policy covers persons
who have been terminated because of any report submitted under this policy.
(Ord. 2021-09-43, passed 9-7-2021; Ord. 2025-01- 01, passed 1-6-2025)
§ 1-10-4 WHAT IS COVERED.
   Improper governmental actions under this policy include any action by the
Village of Carol Stream (including its employees, appointed officials and
elected officials) that is undertaken in violation of a federal, state, or
Carol Stream law or rule; is an abuse of authority; violates the public's trust
or expectation of the individual's conduct; is of substantial and specific
danger to the public's health or safety; or is a gross waste of public funds.
For purposes of this policy, an "improper governmental action" does not cover
personnel actions or violations of collective bargaining agreements unless the
personnel action or violation amounts to retaliation within the meaning of this
policy.
(Ord. 2021-09-43, passed 9-7-2021; Ord. 2025-01- 01, passed 1-6-2025)
§ 1-10-5 WHAT IS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The Village of Carol Stream prohibits retaliation, or threats of
retaliation, made against a Village of Carol Stream employee based on the
employee's reporting of improper governmental actions, disclosing or
threatening to disclose information regarding improper government actions to
any supervisor, board member, or principal officer, cooperating with
investigations into the same, and/or testifying in a proceeding arising out of
an improper governmental action.
   (B)   Retaliation means any adverse change in an employee's employment
status or the terms and conditions of employment that results from an
employee's protected activity under this policy. Retaliation includes, but is
not limited to, denial of adequate staff to perform duties; frequent staff
changes; frequent and undesirable office changes; refusal to assign meaningful
work; unsubstantiated letters of reprimand or unsatisfactory performance
evaluations; demotion; reduction in pay; denial of promotion; transfer or
reassignment; suspension or dismissal; or other disciplinary action made
because of an employee's protected activity under this policy.
(Ord. 2021-09-43, passed 9-7-2021; Ord. 2025-01- 01, passed 1-6-2025)
§ 1-10-6 REPORT FILING PROCEDURE.
   If employees covered by this policy believe there has been an improper
government action and/or they were subject to prohibited retaliation under this
policy, they must report the improper government actions and/or retaliatory
acts to the Auditing Official. The employees must submit their report in
writing within 60 days of gaining knowledge of the improper government action
and/or retaliatory conduct. If the alleged retaliation involves the Village of
Carol Stream's designated Auditing Official, the employees may submit their
report to the Human Resources Director or any State's Attorney. All reports
under this policy will be promptly and thoroughly investigated. These
investigations shall remain confidential unless the employee chooses to waive
confidentiality or the disclosure of the employee's identity is required by
law.
(Ord. 2021-09-43, passed 9-7-2021; Ord. 2025-01- 01, passed 1-6-2025)
§ 1-10-7 RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE AUDITING OFFICIAL.
   The Auditing Official is responsible for determining whether improper
government actions and/or retaliation have occurred under this policy and/or
the Public Officer Prohibited Activities Act. In doing so, the Auditing
Official has the power and authority to conduct investigations consistent with
this policy, seek legal advice, and/or transfer a report to outside
investigators for investigation, including but not limited to the local State's
Attorney. In the event the Auditing Official concludes that an improper
government action and/or retaliation has occurred or that a Village of Carol
Stream official has hindered the investigation, the Auditing Official shall
notify the Mayor and anyone else that the Auditing Official deems appropriate.
(Ord. 2021-09-43, passed 9-7-2021; Ord. 2025-01- 01, passed 1-6-2025)
§ 1-10-8 PENALTIES FOR POLICY VIOLATIONS.
   Village of Carol Stream employees who are found to have committed an
improper governmental action and/or engaged in prohibited retaliation under
this policy and/or the Public Officer Prohibited Activities Act may be subject
to discipline, up to and including discharge. If the Auditing Official
concludes that a Village of Carol Stream official or employee has engaged in an
improper governmental action and/or retaliation prohibited by this policy and/
or the Public Officer Prohibited Activities Act, the Auditing Official will
refer the matter to a local State's Attorney for the potential imposition of
monetary fines and/or criminal prosecution as permitted by the Act.
(Ord. 2021-09-43, passed 9-7-2021; Ord. 2025-01- 01, passed 1-6-2025)
§ 1-10-9 REMEDIES FOR RETALIATION.
   When the Auditing Official concludes that an employee has been subject to
prohibited retaliation under this policy and/or Public Officer Prohibited
Activities Act, the Auditing Official may submit a recommendation to the
Village of Carol Stream Mayor and Board of Trustees for appropriate
reimbursement or restitution.
(Ord. 2021-09-43, passed 9-7-2021; Ord. 2025-01- 01, passed 1-6-2025)
§ 1-10-10 EMPLOYEE NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   The Village of Carol Stream shall provide copies of 50 ILCS 105/4.1 and this
policy to all new employees upon commencement of employment, as well as all
current employees on an annual basis.
(Ord. 2021-09-43, passed 9-7-2021; Ord. 2025-01- 01, passed 1-6-2025)
§ 1-10-11 OTHER VILLAGE WORK RULE VIOLATIONS.
   Nothing in this policy is intended to limit the Village of Carol Stream's
ability to discipline, discharge and/or remove an employee or official for
conduct that violates other Village policies, procedures and/or work rules,
even if such conduct does not technically qualify as an "improper governmental
action" or "retaliation" under this policy and/or the Public Officer Prohibited
Activities Act, or even if such conduct was reported more than 60 days after
the employee gained knowledge of the conduct.
(Ord. 2021-09-43, passed 9-7-2021; Ord. 2025-01- 01, passed 1-6-2025)
CHAPTER 2: APPOINTED OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY
      Article
         
1.   VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR
         
2.   VILLAGE TREASURER
         
3.   FINANCE DIRECTOR
         
4.   RESERVED
         
5.   VILLAGE ATTORNEY
         
6.   VILLAGE PROSECUTOR
         
7.   OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY
ARTICLE 1: VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR
Section
   
2-1-1   Authorization to employ Administrator; appointment
   
2-1-2   Bond
   
2-1-3   Compensation
   
2-1-4   Chief Administrator
   
2-1-5   Acting Administrator
   
2-1-6   Appointment powers
   
2-1-7   Administrator to serve as Budget Officer
   
2-1-8   Powers and duties of Budget Officer
   
2-1-9   Authority to revise budget
   
2-1-10   Powers and duties of Administrator
   
2-1-11   Matters directed to Administrator’s attention
Cross-reference:
   Purchasing and contracting, see
Ch. 5, Art. 8
§ 2-1-1 AUTHORIZATION TO EMPLOY ADMINISTRATOR; APPOINTMENT.
   The President and Board of Trustees are hereby authorized to employ a
Village Administrator. Such Administrator shall be appointed by the President,
by and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. The Village
Administrator may also be referred to or be known as the Village Manager.
§ 2-1-2 BOND.
   The Village Manager shall furnish a bond in such amount and with such surety
as may be approved by the corporate authorities, such bond to be conditioned
upon the faithful performance of his or her duties. The cost of the bond shall
be paid by the village. The bond of the Village Manager may be part of a
blanket bond.
§ 2-1-3 COMPENSATION.
   The Village Manager shall receive such compensation as the corporate
authorities shall, from time to time, establish.
§ 2-1-4 CHIEF ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Village Manager, under and subject to the direction of the corporate
authorities, shall be the Chief Administrator of the village, and shall be
responsible to the corporate authorities for the proper administration of the
affairs of the village.
§ 2-1-5 ACTING ADMINISTRATOR.
   If, because of a temporary absence, disability or illness, the Manager is
unable to carry out the functions of this office, the corporate authorities may
appoint an Acting Administrator to carry out the duties of the Village Manager
during the Village Manager’s absence.
§ 2-1-6 APPOINTMENT POWERS.
   The Village Manager may appoint such assistants, department heads or
employees as are necessary to the proper functioning of the village; except
that, the Village Manager may not appoint those officers which are by law or
ordinance required to be appointed by the Village President.
§ 2-1-7 ADMINISTRATOR TO SERVE AS BUDGET OFFICER.
   The Village President and Board of Trustees shall appoint the Budget Officer
who is the Village Manager.
§ 2-1-8 POWERS AND DUTIES OF BUDGET OFFICER.
   The Village Manager shall have all the powers and duties provided for in 65
ILCS 5/ now in effect and as hereafter amended.
§ 2-1-9 AUTHORITY TO REVISE BUDGET.
   The Village Manager has the authority to approve budget transfers where the
amount, in total, does not exceed $5,000 and the transfer is within the same
department. Any transfers in excess of $5,000 and/or transfers between
departments must be presented to the Village Board for its approval. Any
increase or decrease to the budget, in the form of a budget amendment must also
be presented to the Village Board for its approval. Pertaining to program
budgets, the Village Manager has the authority to approve budget transfers, in
any amount, between programs within the same department as long as the total
amount of the department’s budget does not change.
(Ord. 2009-10-59, passed 10-19-2009)
§ 2-1-10 POWERS AND DUTIES OF ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Village Manager shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   Enforce all laws and ordinances of the village;
   (B)   Attend all meetings of the Board of Trustees. The Village Manager
shall have the right to take part in the discussion of all matters coming
before the Board, but shall have no right to vote. The Village Manager shall be
entitled to notice of all special and regular meetings of the Board of
Trustees;
   (C)   Recommend to the Board such measures as, in his or her judgment, he or
she deems to be in the best interest of the village;
   (D)   Appoint all village employees, except for those covered by the Board
of Fire and Police Commissioners;
   (E)   The Village Manager shall present to the Board of Trustees personnel
rules and regulations to be adopted by motion of the Board of Trustees. These
rules may cover procedures and policies to govern the following phases of the
personnel program:
      (1)   The administration of the position classification and pay plans;
      (2)   Procurement, promotion, evaluation, transfer and separation of
village personnel;
      (3)   Establishment of hours of work, attendance, leave regulations and
working conditions;
      (4)   Rules covering the outside employment, nepotism and political
activity of village personnel;
      (5)   Maintenance and use of necessary records and forms; and
      (6)   System of handling all grievances.
   (F)   Conduct the collective bargaining process of the village;
   (G)   Exercise control of all departments and divisions thereof now in
existence or that may hereafter be created by the Board, except as limited or
restricted by ordinance;
   (H)   Recommend to the Board the creating, consolidating and combining of
offices, positions, departments or units of the administrative and executive
departments of the village;
   (I)   Investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the
administration of the government of the village and services maintained by the
public utilities in the village, and see that all franchises, permits and
privileges granted by the village are faithfully observed;
   (J)   Sign on behalf of the village any contract authorized by the Board of
Trustees, except where the Board or state statutes direct that some other
officer shall do so. It shall be the duty of the Village Manager to see that
all terms of any contract to which the village is a party are fully performed
by all parties hereto;
   (K)   Keep a current inventory of all real and personal property of the
village and location of such property. The Village Manager shall be responsible
for the care and custody of all village property which is not assigned to some
other officer or body for care and control;
   (L)   Devote his or her entire time to the discharge of his or her official
duties; and
   (M)   The Village Manager shall perform such other duties as may be required
by the Board of Trustees consistent with law and the ordinances of the village.
§ 2-1-11 MATTERS DIRECTED TO ADMINISTRATOR’S ATTENTION.
   All offices and departments shall submit all matters requiring Board of
Trustees’ action or attention to the Village Manager, who shall submit them to
the Board with recommendations as may be deemed necessary. All departmental or
employee requests shall be submitted to the Village Manager and shall receive
instruction as to policy and departmental operation from the Manager.
ARTICLE 2: VILLAGE TREASURER
Section
   
2-2-1   Office established, appointment and term of office
   
2-2-2   Qualifications
   
2-2-3   Oath of office
   
2-2-4   Bond
   
2-2-5   Compensation
   
2-2-6   General duties
   
2-2-7   Deposit of funds; private use of funds
   
2-2-8   Records
   
2-2-9   Accounting
   
2-2-10   Special assessment funds
   
2-2-11   Warrants and transfer of funds
   
2-2-12   Report of funds
   
2-2-13   Annual report of Treasurer
   
2-2-14   Additional duties
§ 2-2-1 OFFICE ESTABLISHED, APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF OFFICE.
   There is hereby established the office of Village Treasurer, who shall be
appointed by the Village President, with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees. The Village Treasurer shall serve an indefinite term which shall not
be longer than that of the appointing authority, and shall immediately
relinquish the office and its records to such person as may be named by the
Village President as the Village Treasurer’s successor.
§ 2-2-2 QUALIFICATIONS.
   No person shall be eligible to hold the office of Village Treasurer unless
he or she is a qualified elector of the village and has resided therein at
least one year next preceding his or her appointment, and who is not a
defaulter to the village. The Village Treasurer shall hold no other village
office during his or her term as Treasurer.
§ 2-2-3 OATH OF OFFICE.
   Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, the Village Treasurer
shall take and subscribe the oath of office as prescribed by statute. This
oath, so subscribed, shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk.
§ 2-2-4 BOND.
   (A)   The Village Treasurer shall give a bond, before entering upon the
duties of the office, in the sum required by the Board of Trustees, but the
amount shall not be less than that required by statute. This bond shall be
conditioned upon the faithful performance of the Village Treasurer’s duties and
shall be conditioned to indemnify the village for any loss by reason of any
neglect of duty or any act of the Treasurer.
   (B)   Such bond shall be approved by the corporate authorities and filed
with the Village Clerk. The premium of such bond shall be paid by the village.
§ 2-2-5 COMPENSATION.
   The Village Treasurer shall receive such compensation as may, from time to
time, be prescribed.
§ 2-2-6 GENERAL DUTIES.
   The Village Treasurer shall receive all money collected by other officers or
employees. The Treasurer shall pay out money only on vouchers or orders
properly signed by the Village President and Village Clerk.
§ 2-2-7 DEPOSIT OF FUNDS; PRIVATE USE OF FUNDS.
   The Village Treasurer shall deposit the village funds in such depositories
as may be selected from time to time by ordinance, by the corporate authorities
and in accordance with statutes. The Treasurer shall keep the deposit of the
village money separate and distinct from the Treasurer’s own money, and shall
not make private or personal use of any village money.
§ 2-2-8 RECORDS.
   The Village Treasurer shall keep records showing all money received, showing
the source from which it is received and the purpose for which it is paid, and
the Treasurer shall keep records at all times showing the financial status of
the village.
§ 2-2-9 ACCOUNTING.
   The Village Treasurer shall keep such books and accounts and in such manner
as required by statute or ordinance.
§ 2-2-10 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FUNDS.
   (A)   All moneys received on any special assessment shall be held by the
Village Treasurer in special funds, one for each assessment, to be applied only
to the payment of the improvement, or bonds and vouchers issued therefor,
together with interest thereon, for which the assessment was made, and such
money shall be used for no other purpose, unless to reimburse the village for
money expended for such improvement.
   (B)   Payment on bonds or vouchers shall be made in accordance with
statutes, and the Village Treasurer shall keep books and accounts in such a
manner that proper prorations in payments of principal and interest can be made
and ascertained.
§ 2-2-11 WARRANTS AND TRANSFER OF FUNDS.
   All warrants drawn on the Village Treasurer must be signed by the Village
President and countersigned by the Village Clerk, stating the particular fund
or appropriation to which the same is chargeable, and the person to whom
payable; and no money shall be otherwise paid, except as may be provided by
statute. Money shall not be transferred by the Village Treasurer from one fund
to another after it has been received by the Treasurer, nor appropriated to any
purpose other than that for which it has been collected or paid, except as may
be ordered by the President and Board of Trustees in the manner and form
prescribed by statute.
§ 2-2-12 REPORT OF FUNDS.
   The Village Treasurer or the Finance Director shall render an account under
oath to the Village Board, monthly, showing the state of the treasury at the
date of the account and the balance of the money in the treasury. There shall
accompany such account a statement of all moneys received into the treasury and
on what account, together with all warrants, bonds, vouchers, redeemed and paid
by the village.
§ 2-2-13 ANNUAL REPORT OF TREASURER.
   The Village Treasurer, prior to September 1 of each year, shall prepare and
file with the Village Clerk an account of all moneys received and expenditures
incurred during the preceding fiscal year as prescribed by statute. A copy of
the annual account of the Treasurer shall also be filed with the County
Collector of Taxes who collects taxes levied by the village, together with an
affidavit of the Village Clerk certifying its publication as required by law
and its correctness.
Cross-reference:
   Publication of report by Clerk, see §
1-6-14
§ 2-2-14 ADDITIONAL DUTIES.
   In addition to the duties herein provided, the Village Treasurer shall
perform such other duties and functions as may be required by statute or
ordinance.
ARTICLE 3: FINANCE DIRECTOR
Section
   
2-3-1   Position established; appointment
   
2-3-2   Bond
   
2-3-3   Duties
   
2-3-4   Endorsement of instruments payable to the village
   
2-3-5   Signing of checks, orders for payment of money
   
2-3-6   Procedure for bad debt write-off
Cross-reference:
   Taxation and Finance, see
Ch. 5
§ 2-3-1 POSITION ESTABLISHED; APPOINTMENT.
   The position of Finance Director is hereby created as an employment with the
village and shall be appointed by the Village Manager. At the Village Manager’s
discretion, the Finance Director may be removed. In the absence of the
appointment of a Village Treasurer, the Finance Director shall perform all
duties and shall possess all powers authorized or established by the ordinances
of the village or the statutes of the state for the office of Village
Treasurer. If a Village Treasurer is appointed, the Finance Director shall
perform such duties as are assigned by ordinance, the corporate authorities,
the Village Manager or the Treasurer with permission of the Village Manager.
§ 2-3-2 BOND.
   (A)   The Finance Director shall give a bond, before entering upon the
duties of employment, in the sum required by the Board of Trustees. This bond
shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of Finance
Director, and shall be conditioned to indemnify the village for any loss by
reason of any neglect of duty or any act of the Finance Director. The bond of
the Finance Director may be a blanket bond.
   (B)   Such bond shall be approved by the corporate authorities and filed
with the Village Clerk. The premium of such bond shall be paid by the village.
§ 2-3-3 DUTIES.
   The Finance Director shall report directly to the Village Manager. In
addition to such duties which may be assigned to the Finance Director by the
corporate authorities, Village Manager or the Treasurer with permission of the
Village Manager, the Finance Director shall have the following
responsibilities:
   (A)   Maintenance and custody of all payroll and general personnel records,
except the Board of Fire and Police Commissioner’s records;
   (B)   Keeping the general ledger and accounts of the village;
   (C)   Keeping a record of all liens which may accrue on behalf of the
village and filing such liens with the appropriate governmental body;
   (D)   Receiving all revenue to the village;
   (E)   Performing all utility billing on behalf of the village;
   (F)   Working with the Village Manager and Budget Officer in preparation of
the village budget;
   (G)   Providing financial planning analysis, forecasting and investment
advice to the village; and
   (H)   Reporting to the Village Manager and the Board of Trustees on the
financial status of the village.
§ 2-3-4 ENDORSEMENT OF INSTRUMENTS PAYABLE TO THE VILLAGE.
   The Finance Director is hereby authorized to endorse for deposit any and all
checks, drafts, notes, bills of exchange and orders payable to the order of the
village.
§ 2-3-5 SIGNING OF CHECKS, ORDERS FOR PAYMENT OF MONEY.
   The Mayor or a Trustee and the Manager, Finance Director or Treasurer must
sign all checks for the withdrawal of funds so that each check shall have the
signature of an elected official or employee of the village. However, a
facsimile signature of the Mayor and the Finance Director or Treasurer may be
affixed to such documents by the Finance Director or his or her designee by
means of engraving, imprinting or other means of reproducing the manual
signatures.
(Ord. 97-07-44, passed 7-7-1997)
§ 2-3-6 PROCEDURE FOR BAD DEBT WRITE-OFF.
   (A)   All payments and debts due to the village and deemed uncollectible
shall be reported to the corporate authorities in an annual report within 90
days after the conclusion of each fiscal year. If such debts or payments deemed
uncollectible shall in any fiscal year amount to less than $2,500 in the
aggregate with no single amount in excess of $500, the unpaid amount may be
written off the books and records of the village as “bad debts” by
administrative action. In such case, the amount “written off” shall be reported
to the Village Manager. All payments or debts deemed uncollectible which shall
in any fiscal year amount to an aggregate total of more than $2,500 and any
individual amount of more than $500 may only be “written off” the books and
records of the village by the Finance Director after such action is approved by
motion of the corporate authorities.
   (B)   If the “write-off” is the result of a bankruptcy, the approval of the
corporate authorities is not necessary and the amount written off shall be
included in the report that is given to the Village Manager.
(Ord. 99-03-21, passed 3-15-1999)
ARTICLE 4: RESERVED
Editor’s note:
   This article, formerly “Deputy Village Clerk”, was repealed by Ord. 2011-04-
10, passed 4-18-2011. It was reserved for future use at the discretion of the
editor.
ARTICLE 5: VILLAGE ATTORNEY
Section
   
2-5-1   Employment of Village Attorney
   
2-5-2   Compensation
   
2-5-3   Duties
   
2-5-4   Suits and actions
   
2-5-5   Special assessments
   
2-5-6   Additional legal counsel
§ 2-5-1 EMPLOYMENT OF VILLAGE ATTORNEY.
   The corporate authorities shall employ an attorney or firm of attorneys as
the Village Attorney for the village, either as an officer or as an independent
contractor. If serving as an officer, the Village Attorney shall take an oath
of office and post a bond in the amount of $1,000. The cost of such bond shall
be paid by the village.
§ 2-5-2 COMPENSATION.
   The Village Attorney shall receive such compensation as may, from time to
time, be provided by contract, motion or ordinance.
§ 2-5-3 DUTIES.
   (A)   The Village Attorney shall advise the President and Board of Trustees
or any officer of the village in all matters of law in which the interests of
the corporation are involved and, when required by the President or Board of
Trustees, shall furnish written opinions upon any subject submitted to him or
her pertaining to the village and its interests.
   (B)   When requested by the President or Board of Trustees, and upon such
financial arrangement as shall prevail, the Village Attorney shall prepare all
ordinances and resolutions, contracts, leases and other documents or
instruments to which the village may be a party, and shall attend all regular
and special meetings of the Board and such other village meetings at which the
Village Attorney’s attendance is required.
   (C)   The Village Attorney shall assist the Village Prosecutor upon his or
her request.
§ 2-5-4 SUITS AND ACTIONS.
   Except for the prosecution of ordinance violation cases, which he or she
shall perform only when specifically so directed, the Village Attorney, upon
such financial arrangement as shall prevail, shall prosecute or defend any and
all suits or actions at law or equity to which the village may be a party, or
in which it may be brought against, or by, any officer of the village on behalf
of the village, or in the capacity of such person as an officer of the village.
§ 2-5-5 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   Upon such financial arrangement as shall prevail, it shall be the duty of
the Village Attorney to carry out the legal work involved in all special
assessment proceedings and condemnation proceedings.
§ 2-5-6 ADDITIONAL LEGAL COUNSEL.
   The corporate authorities may, from time to time, employ additional lawyers
to perform specialized, consultant or advisory services to the Village Attorney
or the village.
ARTICLE 6: VILLAGE PROSECUTOR
Section
   
2-6-1   Employment of Village Prosecutor
   
2-6-2   Compensation
   
2-6-3   Duties
§ 2-6-1 EMPLOYMENT OF VILLAGE PROSECUTOR.
   The corporate authorities shall employ an attorney or firm of attorneys as
the Village Prosecutor for the village, either as an officer or as an
independent contractor.
§ 2-6-2 COMPENSATION.
   The Village Prosecutor shall receive such compensation as may, from time to
time, be provided by contract, motion or ordinance.
§ 2-6-3 DUTIES.
   (A)   The Village Prosecutor shall prosecute all ordinance violations of the
village unless the corporate authorities shall assign the prosecution of
certain cases to some other attorney.
   (B)   The Village Prosecutor shall notify the Village Attorney of any notice
of appeal served in connection with the imposition of any fine or other penalty
for a violation of a village ordinance. The Village Attorney shall, when
directed and upon such financial arrangement as shall prevail, represent the
village in such appeal.
ARTICLE 7: OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY
Section
   
2-7-1   Provisions
   
2-7-2   Term of office
   
2-7-3   Vacancy
   
2-7-4   Oath of office
   
2-7-5   Bond
   
2-7-6   Compensation
   
2-7-7   Assignment of duties
   
2-7-8   Inspection of records
   
2-7-9   Delivery of records upon termination
   
2-7-10   Moneys received
   
2-7-11   Resignation
   
2-7-12   Conservators of peace
   
2-7-13   Police powers of certain employees
   
2-7-14   Holding other offices prohibited
   
2-7-15   Declaration of employment policy
   
2-7-16   Coverage and application of personnel rules and regulations
   
2-7-17   Amendments of personnel rules and regulations
   
2-7-18   Emergency interim successors
§ 2-7-1 PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of this article shall apply to all officers and employees of
the village, regardless of the time of the creation of the office or position
or the time of the appointment of the officer or employee.
§ 2-7-2 TERM OF OFFICE.
   Every appointed officer of the village shall hold office for an indefinite
term, or until his or her successor is appointed and qualified, unless
otherwise provided by ordinance. Any officer appointed by the Village President
for an indefinite term may be removed by the Village President at any time
without cause.
§ 2-7-3 VACANCY.
   In the event a vacancy occurs, it shall be filled in the same manner in
which appointments are made in the absence of provisions to the contrary.
§ 2-7-4 OATH OF OFFICE.
   Every officer of the village shall, before entering upon his or her duties,
take the oath prescribed by statute. This oath, so subscribed, shall be filed
with the Village Clerk.
§ 2-7-5 BOND.
   Unless otherwise specified by this code, or by statute, the bond required of
any appointed officer shall be $1,000. All bonds, except the bond for the
Village Treasurer, may be under a blanket bond.
§ 2-7-6 COMPENSATION.
   All appointed officers and employees of the village shall receive such
compensation as may, from time to time, be provided by the corporate
authorities.
§ 2-7-7 ASSIGNMENT OF DUTIES.
   The Village President and Board of Trustees shall have the power to
establish by ordinance any additional duties, rules and regulations for
appointed officers.
§ 2-7-8 INSPECTION OF RECORDS.
   All records kept by any officer or employee of the village shall be open to
inspection by the President, or any member of the Board of Trustees, at all
reasonable times whether or not such records are required to be kept by statute
or ordinance.
§ 2-7-9 DELIVERY OF RECORDS UPON TERMINATION.
   (A)   Every officer of the village, upon the expiration of his or her term,
for whatever cause, shall deliver to his or her successor all property, books,
records and effects belonging to the village, or pertaining to the office he or
she has held, within five days after notification and request to do so. If no
successor has been appointed, such property shall be delivered to the Village
Clerk or Village Treasurer.
   (B)   Any officer or employee violating the provisions of this section
shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $100, nor more than $500.
§ 2-7-10 MONEYS RECEIVED.
   Every officer and employee of the village shall, within seven days, turn
over all money received by him or her in his or her official capacity to the
Village Treasurer with a statement showing the source from which the same was
received.
§ 2-7-11 RESIGNATION.
   Any officer of the village may resign from his or her office. If such
officer resigns, he or she shall continue in office until his or her successor
has been chosen and has qualified. If there is a failure to appoint a village
officer, or the person appointed fails to qualify, the person filling the
office shall continue in office until his or her successor has been chosen and
has qualified.
§ 2-7-12 CONSERVATORS OF PEACE.
   The Village President, members of the Board of Trustees and all sworn
personnel of the Police Department, are hereby declared to be conservators of
the peace with such powers as are given to conservators of the peace by
statute.
§ 2-7-13 POLICE POWERS OF CERTAIN EMPLOYEES.
   For the purpose of enforcing this code of ordinances, the Subdivision Code,
Zoning Code and Building Construction and Maintenance Codes of the village, the
following employees shall be vested with police powers in the enforcement of
code compliance and issuance of citations for ordinance violations: Community
Service Technicians, Engineering Services Director, Assistant Village Engineer,
Civil Engineer II, Stormwater Administrator, Engineering Inspectors, Community
Development Director, Planning and Economic Development Manager, Development
Services Manager, Code Professionals, Public Works Director and Superintendent
of Operations. For the purpose of enforcing the Fire Code, the above officials
and employees shall all be vested with police powers as shall employees of the
Carol Stream Fire Protection District acting under an intergovernmental
agreement with the village.
(Ord. 2009-05-20, passed 5-4-2009; Ord. 2018-07-29, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 2-7-14 HOLDING OTHER OFFICES PROHIBITED.
   The Village President, Village Trustees, Village Clerk and the Village
Treasurer shall hold no other village office during their respective terms as
President, Trustees, Clerk or Treasurer.
§ 2-7-15 DECLARATION OF EMPLOYMENT POLICY.
   It is the intent of the corporate authorities of the village that employment
in the village shall be based upon merit and shall be free of personal and
political considerations. Just and equitable incentives and conditions of
employment shall be established and maintained to promote efficiency and
economy in operation of the village government. Positions shall be classified
and compensated for on a rational basis. Appointments and promotions, where
possible, shall be based on systematic tests and evaluations. Every effort
shall be made to stimulate high morale by fair administration and consideration
of the rights and interest of the persons affected, consistent with the best
interests of the public and the village.
§ 2-7-16 COVERAGE AND APPLICATION OF PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The personnel rules and regulations adopted by the corporate authorities
shall apply to all appointed officers and employees of the village, except
members of citizens’ boards and commissions, the Village Manager, volunteer
personnel and persons appointed to serve without pay, consultants and counsel
rendering professional service and such positions involving seasonal or part-
time temporary employment. If a matter is not covered within the personnel
rules and regulations adopted by the corporate authorities, that matter shall
be governed by the general provisions of state law governing the power of
municipal governments to deal with its officers and employees.
§ 2-7-17 AMENDMENTS OF PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   Amendments of personnel rules and regulations may be proposed by the Village
Manager and shall become effective upon approval by motion of the President and
Board of Trustees.
§ 2-7-18 EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSORS.
   The emergency interim successors for the Office of Mayor shall be that
Trustee who is currently serving as Mayor Pro Tem and, thereafter the Trustee
who has served the longest continuous period. In the event that two Trustees
shall have assumed office at the same time, the person to be chosen shall be
selected in alphabetical order. The emergency interim successors shall take
office in the event of the occurrence of those conditions and in the manner
provided for in the Emergency Interim Executive Succession Act, 5 ILCS 275/1-
1 et seq.
(Ord. 97-07-45, passed 7-7-1997)
CHAPTER 3: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
      Article
         
1.   BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
         
2.   BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
         
3.   BOARD OF TRUSTEES, POLICE PENSION FUND
         
4.   ELECTRICAL COMMISSION
         
5.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (EMA)
         
6.   PLAN COMMISSION
         
7.   ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
         
8.   HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION
         
9.   COLLEGE OF DU PAGE-CAROL STREAM REGIONAL CENTER ADVISORY COMMITTEE
ARTICLE 1: BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
Section
   
3-1-1   Establishment
   
3-1-2   Duties
   
3-1-3   Secretary
§ 3-1-1 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby established a Board of Local Improvements as follows: the
Village President shall serve as President of the Board of Local Improvements
and the Village Trustees shall serve as members of the Board.
§ 3-1-2 DUTIES.
   The Board of Local Improvements shall have all the powers conferred and all
the duties prescribed by the provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes
pertaining to local improvements.
§ 3-1-3 SECRETARY.
   The Village Clerk shall serve as ex-officio Secretary of the Board of Local
Improvements. The Clerk shall attend all meetings of the Board and shall keep
minutes of its proceedings. The Clerk shall preserve and file all petitions,
resolutions, papers and documents and other official actions of the Board. The
Clerk shall mail and post all estimates and notices which are required by law
to be made by the Board to the corporate authorities. The Secretary shall
perform all other acts and duties required by statute and by the Board of Local
Improvements.
ARTICLE 2: BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
Section
   
3-2-1   Establishment, appointments and term of office
   
3-2-2   Qualifications
   
3-2-3   Oath of office
   
3-2-4   Bond and compensation
   
3-2-5   Removal of office
   
3-2-6   Secretary
   
3-2-7   Appointments by the Board
   
3-2-8   Rules
   
3-2-9   Publication of rules
   
3-2-10   Annual report and budget request
   
3-2-11   Attorney for Board
   
3-2-12   Rooms and funds
   
3-2-13   Additional powers and duties
Cross-reference:
   Police Department, see
Ch. 4, Art. 1
§ 3-2-1 ESTABLISHMENT, APPOINTMENTS AND TERM OF OFFICE.
   (A)   There is hereby established a Board of Fire and Police Commissioners,
consisting of three members, each of whose term of office shall be three years
and until their respective successors are appointed and have qualified.
   (B)   Members shall be appointed by the Village President, with the advice
and consent of the Board of Trustees; provided, however, that, no appointment
shall be made by the President within 30 days before the expiration of the
President’s term of office.
§ 3-2-2 QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The members of the Board shall be considered officers of the village.
No person is eligible to hold an appointed village office who has not been a
qualified voter of the village and has not resided therein at least one year
next preceding his or her appointment, or who is a defaulter to the village.
   (B)   No person holding an office under a municipality shall be a member of
the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners of the village, or the Secretary
thereof.
   (C)   No person shall be appointed a member of the Board who is related,
either by blood or marriage up to the degree of first cousin, to any elected
official of the village.
   (D)   No more than two members of the Board may be members of the same
municipal political party or, if there is none, then national political parties
shall be considered in making such appointments. Party affiliation shall be
determined by affidavit.
§ 3-2-3 OATH OF OFFICE.
   Each member of the Board shall take and subscribe the oath of office as
prescribed by statute.
§ 3-2-4 BOND AND COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Each member of the Board shall execute a bond in the amount of $1,000,
conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of a Fire and Police
Commissioner. The bonds shall be approved by the corporate authorities and
filed with the Village Clerk. The premium of such bonds shall be paid by the
village. The bonds may be part of a blanket bond.
   (B)   Commencing 5-1-2010, the members of the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners shall receive compensation of $10 per meeting attended, and the
Chairperson shall receive $20 per meeting attended.
(Ord. 2001-11-55, passed 11-5-2001; Ord. 2001-12-59, passed 12-3-2001; Ord.
2010-03-07, passed 3-15-2010)
§ 3-2-5 REMOVAL OF OFFICE.
   Members of the Board shall not be subject to removal, except for cause, upon
written charges and after an opportunity to be heard within 30 days in his, her
or their own defense, before a regular meeting of the Board of Trustees. A
majority vote of the Board of Trustees shall be required to remove such members
from office.
§ 3-2-6 SECRETARY.
   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners may employ a Secretary or may
designate one of its own members to act as such. The Secretary shall keep the
minutes of the Board’s proceedings, shall be custodian of all records
pertaining to the business of the Board, shall keep a record of all
examinations held and shall perform such other duties as the Board shall
prescribe. The Secretary shall receive such compensation as may be established
by the corporate authorities.
§ 3-2-7 APPOINTMENTS BY THE BOARD.
   The Board shall appoint all sworn officers of the Police Department, which
does not include Community Service Technicians and civilian employees of the
Police Department of the village, except the Chief of Police; provided,
however, that, all appointments to the Department other than that of the lowest
rank shall be from the rank next below that to which the appointment shall be
made, except in the appointment of the Chief of Police, who shall be appointed
by the Village Manager; provided further that, such appointment of Chief of
Police need not be from among the members of the Police Department.
§ 3-2-8 RULES.
   The Board shall make such rules for the appointment and removal of all sworn
officers of the Police Department; however, these rules shall apply only to the
conduct of examinations for original appointments and promotions, and to the
conduct of hearings on charges brought against all sworn officers of the
Department. Appointments and promotions shall be made after an examination as
provided by statute.
§ 3-2-9 PUBLICATION OF RULES.
   All rules and regulations and any charges therein shall be printed
immediately for distribution, and notice shall be given of where the printed
rules and regulations may be obtained and of the date, not less than ten days
subsequent to the time of printing, when the rules or changes therein shall go
into effect. This notice shall be published in one or more newspapers with a
general circulation within the village.
§ 3-2-10 ANNUAL REPORT AND BUDGET REQUEST.
   On or before April 1 of each year, the Board shall submit to the Village
President a report of its activities for the previous calendar year. The Board
shall also submit, on or before March 1 of each year, an annual budget request
to the Village President and Board of Trustees.
§ 3-2-11 ATTORNEY FOR BOARD.
   The Village Attorney shall serve as counsel for the Board.
§ 3-2-12 ROOMS AND FUNDS.
   The corporate authorities shall provide suitable rooms for the Board and
shall allow reasonable use of public buildings for holding examinations by the
Board and shall further provide adequate funds in the annual appropriation
ordinance for the operation of the Board.
§ 3-2-13 ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board shall have such other powers and duties as prescribed by the
statutes of the state.
ARTICLE 3: BOARD OF TRUSTEES, POLICE PENSION FUND
Section
   
3-3-1   Establishment, appointment and election
   
3-3-2   Meetings, organization, duties and powers
Cross-reference:
   Police Department, see
Ch. 4, Art. 1
§ 3-3-1 ESTABLISHMENT, APPOINTMENT AND ELECTION.
   (A)   There is hereby established a Board of Trustees of the Police Pension
Fund, consisting of five members, a majority of whom shall be residents of the
village. Two of the Board members shall be appointed by the Village President,
with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, for a term of two years
each. However, members appointed by the Board of Trustees shall be appointed to
staggered terms so that the term of one member shall expire each year.
   (B)   The third and fourth Board members shall be elected from the regular
police force by the active sworn officers thereof. The fifth member shall be
elected by the beneficiaries of the Fund. The elected members shall serve for a
term of two years. Their term of election shall be at the time and in the
manner provided by statute.
§ 3-3-2 MEETINGS, ORGANIZATION, DUTIES AND POWERS.
   The Board shall elect such officers, hold such meetings, keep such records
and submit such reports as shall be required by statutes and, in addition,
shall make all necessary rules and regulations and perform such duties and have
such powers as are conferred upon it by the statutes of the state.
ARTICLE 4: ELECTRICAL COMMISSION
Section
   
3-4-1   Establishment, appointments and term of office
   
3-4-2   Functions
Cross-reference:
   Electrical Code, see
Ch. 6, Art. 2
   Electrical Contractors, see
Ch. 10, Art. 3
§ 3-4-1 ESTABLISHMENT, APPOINTMENTS AND TERM OF OFFICE.
   (A)   There is hereby established an Electrical Commission, which shall
consist of six members as follows: the Chief Electrical Inspector shall be ex-
officio Chairperson of the Commission; and five other members who shall be such
persons as are available within the village possessing the qualifications
established by statute.
   (B)   All of the members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Village
President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. The members
shall serve until their successors are duly appointed.
§ 3-4-2 FUNCTIONS.
   The Electrical Commission shall recommend:
   (A)   Safe and practical standards and specifications for the installation,
alteration and use of electrical equipment to meet the necessities and
conditions of the village;
   (B)   Reasonable rules and regulations governing the issuance of permits by
the Electrical Inspection Department; and
   (C)   Reasonable fees to be paid for inspection by the Inspection Department
of all electrical equipment installed or altered within the village; provided
that, such standards and specifications, rules and regulations and such fees
shall not become effective until adopted by ordinance by the Board of Trustees.
All such fees shall be paid to the village.
ARTICLE 5: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (EMA)
Section
   
3-5-1   Policy and procedures
   
3-5-2   Limitations
   
3-5-3   Definitions
   
3-5-4   Organization and appointments
   
3-5-5   Duties
   
3-5-6   Powers of the Mayor and village officials
   
3-5-7   Local disaster declarations
   
3-5-8   Financing
   
3-5-9   Personnel injury or death compensation
   
3-5-10   Immunity
Cross-reference:
   Civil Emergencies, see
Ch. 15, Art. 1
§ 3-5-1 POLICY AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Because of the possibility of the occurrence of disasters of
unprecedented size and destructiveness resulting from the explosion in this or
in a neighboring municipality of atomic (devices) or other means from without,
or by means of sabotage or other disloyal actions within, or from fire, flood,
earthquake, tornado or other natural or technological causes, and in order to
ensure that the village will be prepared to and will adequately deal with any
such disasters, preserve the lives and the property of the people of the
village and protect the public peace, health and safety in the event of such a
disaster, it is found and declared necessary to:
      (1)   Create a Village of Carol Stream Emergency Management Agency (EMA);
      (2)   Confer upon the Mayor the extraordinary powers provided herein; and
      (3)   Provide mutual aid to other municipalities and political
subdivisions and promote an all-hazard emergency management program.
   (B)   Whenever the Mayor determines after an investigation that a dangerous
situation or potentially dangerous situation exists which could cause death to
individuals or serious injury to property or the health and welfare of the
public, the Mayor may declare that a state of emergency (or disaster) exists.
The extraordinary powers may not be exercised until a formal declaration has
been issued by the Mayor, finding that such standards have been met, setting
forth facts to substantiate such findings, describing the nature of the
emergency (or disaster) and declaring that a state of emergency (or disaster)
exists. This statement shall be filed with the Village Clerk as soon as
practical. A state of emergency (or disaster) shall expire no later than seven
days from the original declaration or at the adjournment of the first regular
meeting of the Village Board after the state of emergency (or disaster) is
declared. A subsequent state of emergency (or disaster) may be declared if
necessary.
   (C)   It is further declared to be the purpose of this article and the
policy of the village that all emergency management functions be coordinated to
the maximum extent with comparable functions of federal and state governments,
including their various departments and agencies, those of other municipalities
and localities and private agencies of every type, to the end that the most
effective preparation and use may be made of the nation’s manpower, resources
and facilities for dealing with any disaster that may occur.
(Ord. 2008-11-64, passed 11-17-2008)
§ 3-5-2 LIMITATIONS.
   Nothing in this article shall be construed to:
   (A)   Interfere with the course or conduct of a labor dispute, except those
actions otherwise authorized by this article or other laws may be taken when
necessary to mitigate imminent or existing danger to public health and safety;
   (B)   Interfere with dissemination of news or comment of public affairs; but
any communications facility or organization (including, but not limited to,
radio and television stations, wire services and newspapers) may be required to
transmit or print public service messages furnishing information or
instructions in connection with a disaster;
   (C)   Affect the jurisdiction or responsibilities of police forces,
firefighting forces, units of the armed forces of the United States, or of any
personnel thereof, when on active duty; but state, local and inter-
jurisdictional emergency operation plans shall place reliance upon forces
available for performance of functions related to emergency management; or
   (D)   Limit, modify or abridge the authority of the Mayor and the Village
Board to exercise any other powers vested in them under the constitution,
statutes or common law of the state, independent of or in conjunction with any
provisions of this article or prohibit any contract or association pursuant to
Art. VII, § 10, of the Illinois Constitution.
(Ord. 2008-11-64, passed 11-17-2008)
§ 3-5-3 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this article, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the
following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed.
   ACT. The Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, as from time to time
amended.
   DISASTER. An occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or
loss of life or property from any natural or technological cause, including,
but not limited to, fire, flood, earthquake,  tornado, wind, storm, hazardous
materials spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to
avert danger or damage, epidemic, blight, air contamination, extended periods
of severe and inclement weather, drought, infestation, critical shortages of
essential fuels and energy, riot, explosion or hostile military or paramilitary
action or an act of terrorism.
   DISASTER TRAINING EXERCISE. A planned event designed specifically to
simulate an actual disaster which will provide emergency operations training
for emergency response personnel.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. The efforts of the municipality to develop, plan,
analyze, conduct, provide, implement and maintain programs for disaster
mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT CO-ORDINATOR. The Emergency Management Coordinator of
the Emergency Management Agency appointed as provided by this article.
   EMERGENCY OPERATING PLAN. The written plan of the municipality describing
the organization, mission and functions of the government and supporting
services for responding to and recovering from disasters.
   EMERGENCY SERVICES. The coordination of such functions by the municipality,
other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, as
may be necessary or proper to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury
and damage resulting from any natural or technological causes. These functions
include, but are not limited to, firefighting services, police services,
medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services,
communications, radiological, chemical and other special weapons defense,
evacuation of persons from stricken or threatened areas, emergency assigned
functions of plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services
and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other
activities necessary or incidental to protecting life and property.
   MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM. The utilization of personnel to be dispatched by the
governor or, if he or she so authorizes, by the Director of the Illinois
Emergency Management Agency to supplement the state and political subdivisions
for emergency management programs in response to a disaster.
   MUNICIPALITY. Any city, village or incorporated town.
   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. The County of DuPage or any municipality with whom
the village has a signed mutual aid agreement.
   PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE OFFICER. The Mayor of the village or, in his or her
absence or disability, the interim successor pursuant to §
2-7-18 of the Village of Carol Stream Code of Ordinances.
   VILLAGE OF CAROL STREAM EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY. The agency established
by this act within the village municipal government responsible for
implementation and coordination of the overall emergency management program of
the village and with private organizations, other local political subdivisions,
taxing districts, the state and federal governments under the direction of the
Emergency Management Coordinator as appointed by this article.
   VOLUNTEER. Any individual, group, corporation, agency or other entity
contributing service, equipment or facilities to the Village Emergency
Management Agency without remuneration.
(Ord. 2008-11-64, passed 11-17-2008)
§ 3-5-4 ORGANIZATION AND APPOINTMENTS.
   (A)   The Village Manager is hereby authorized and directed to create a
Village Emergency Management Agency utilizing to the fullest extent the
existing agencies within the village and shall be responsible for their
emergency organization, administration and operations.
   (B)   The organization shall consist of the following:
      (1)   A Village Emergency Management Agency within the executive branch
of the village government and under the general direction of the Village
Manager which shall be organized and staffed as from time to time as determined
by the Village Manager within budgetary limits;
      (2)   An Emergency Management Coordinator, appointed by the Village
Manager. The Emergency Management Coordinator shall have such powers and duties
as set forth herein, as provided pursuant to the act for the Coordinator, and
as from time to time designated by the Village Manager;
      (3)   Deputy Emergency Management Coordinators, designated as the Village
Manager deems appropriate, to assume the emergency duties of Emergency
Management Coordinator in the event of the Emergency Management Coordinator’s
absence or inability to act;
      (4)   Employees, equipment and facilities of all village departments,
boards, institutions and commissions, shall participate in the emergency
services activity;
      (5)   Volunteers as deemed necessary by the Emergency Management
Coordinator under direction of the Village Manager; and
      (6)   Mutual aid agreements entered into by the village with any other
political subdivision, municipality, taxing district or quasi-municipality, or
as provided by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, 20 ILCS 3305/1 et
seq. (1994), as amended.
(Ord. 2008-11-64, passed 11-17-2008)
§ 3-5-5 DUTIES.
   The Village Emergency Management Agency shall:
   (A)   Continuously update the Village Emergency Operations Plan with new
information, changes and guidelines for compliance;
   (B)   Coordinate employee training related to emergency management, ensuring
that employees meet all local, state and national requirements in a timely
manner;
   (C)   Prepare a budget that addresses the needs of the village in dealing
with mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery efforts;
   (D)   Maintain the village’s primary and secondary Emergency Operations
Centers (EOC) in a state of readiness in the event of activation;
   (E)   Conduct exercises to measure the effectiveness of the village’s
Emergency Operations Plan;
   (F)   Establish relationships with other local, county, state and federal
emergency management agencies, attending regular meetings with emergency
management officials;
   (G)   Actively seek federal, state and local funding through available
grants and donations;
   (H)   Promote disaster preparedness and resilience within the residential
and business community;
   (I)   Prepare, for issuance by the Mayor, ordinances, proclamations and
regulations necessary or appropriate in coping with disasters;
   (J)   Facilitate the implementation and maintenance of a community-wide
warning system; and
   (K)   Perform such other duties as may be provided under the act or from
time to time designated by the Village Manager.
(Ord. 2008-11-64, passed 11-17-2008)
§ 3-5-6 POWERS OF THE MAYOR AND VILLAGE OFFICIALS.
   (A)   The Mayor and village officials shall have such emergency powers as
provided under the law.
   (B)   The Mayor may exercise the emergency power and authority necessary to
fulfill his or her general powers and duties as defined by law. The judgment of
the Mayor shall be the sole criteria necessary to invoke emergency powers
provided by this article. The Village Board may convene to perform its
legislative and administrative powers as the situation demands, and shall
receive reports relative to the emergency service activities. Nothing in this
article shall be construed as abridging or curtailing the powers or
restrictions of the Mayor and/or Village Board as defined by law.
   (C)   The Village Board may authorize any purchase or contracts necessary to
place the village in a position to combat effectively any disaster, and to
protect the public health and safety, protect property and provide emergency
assistance to victims in the case of such disaster. In the event of any
disaster, the Village Manager is authorized, on behalf of the village, to
procure such services, supplies, equipment or materials, as may be necessary
for such purposes in view of exigency, without formalities normally prescribed
by law. If the Village Board meets at the time of such disaster, the Village
Manager shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by the
Village Board.
(Ord. 2008-11-64, passed 11-17-2008)
§ 3-5-7 LOCAL DISASTER DECLARATIONS.
   (A)   A local disaster may only be declared by the Mayor, or his or her
interim emergency successor. It shall not be continued or renewed for a period
in excess of seven days, except by or with the consent of the Village Board.
Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local disaster
shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed with the Village
Clerk.
   (B)   The effect of a declaration of a local disaster is to activate the
Village Emergency Operations Plan and to authorize the furnishing of aid and
assistance as provided for in the plan.
   (C)   A local disaster emergency may not be declared by an official (Fire
Chief, Police Chief and the like) from another jurisdiction who is operating in
the village under a mutual aid agreement.
   (D)   During a local disaster emergency, the Mayor may suspend the
provisions of any municipal ordinance prescribing procedures for the conduct of
village business, or the orders, rules and regulations of the village, if
strict compliance with the provisions of any ordinance, rule or regulation
would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping with the
emergency, as authorized by the Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster Agency
Act of 1988, being 20 ILCS 3305/1; provided that, after the Village Board meets
at such time, the Mayor shall act subject to the directions and restrictions
imposed by the Village Board.
(Ord. 2008-11-64, passed 11-17-2008)
§ 3-5-8 FINANCING.
   (A)   Funds to prepare for and meet disasters may be made available as from
time to time designated by the Village Board within budgetary limits.
   (B)   It is the Village Board’s intent that the first recourse shall be to
fund operations from those moneys regularly allocated to the agency. If the
Mayor finds that demands placed upon budgeted funds in coping with a particular
disaster are unreasonably great, he or she may make application for funds from
the state disaster relief fund. If moneys available from the fund are
insufficient, and if the Mayor finds that other sources of money to cope with
the disaster are not available or are insufficient, he or she shall issue a
call for an immediate session of the Village Board for the purpose of enacting
ordinances as the Board may deem necessary to transfer and expend moneys
appropriated for other purposes, or borrow moneys from the United States
government or other public or private sources. If less than a quorum of the
members of the Board is capable of convening in session to enact such
ordinances for the transfer, expenditure or loan of such moneys, the Mayor is
authorized to carry out these decisions until such time as a quorum of the
Board can convene.
   (C)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to limit the
Mayor’s authority to apply for, administer and expend grants, gifts or payments
in aid of disaster mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery.
   (D)   The Village Board may make appropriations for emergency management
operations in the manner provided by law for making appropriations for the
ordinary expenses of the village.
(Ord. 2008-11-64, passed 11-17-2008)
§ 3-5-9 PERSONNEL INJURY OR DEATH COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Village Emergency Management Agency personnel who, while engaged in a
disaster or disaster training exercise, suffer disease, injury or death shall,
for the purposes of benefits under the Workers’ Compensation Act or Workers’
Occupational Diseases Act only, be deemed to be employees of the state, if: the
claimant is duly qualified and enrolled (sworn in) as a volunteer of the
Illinois Emergency Management Agency or an Emergency Management Agency
accredited by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency; and, if the claimant
was participating in an actual “disaster”, as defined in §
3-5-3 or the exercise participated in was specifically and expressly approved
by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency. The Illinois Emergency Management
Agency shall use the same criteria for approving an exercise and utilizing
state volunteers as required for any political subdivision. The computation of
benefits payable under either of these acts shall be based on the income
commensurate with comparable state employees doing the same work or income from
the person’s regular employment, whichever is greater.
   (B)   If any person who is entitled to receive benefits through the
application of this section receives in connection with the disease, injury or
death giving rise to such entitlement, benefits under an act of Congress or
federal program, benefits payable under this section shall be reduced to the
extent of the benefits received under that other act or program.
(Ord. 2008-11-64, passed 11-17-2008)
§ 3-5-10 IMMUNITY.
   Neither the village, nor, except in cases of negligence or willful
misconduct, the Mayor, the Village Manager, or the officers, employees,
volunteers, or representatives engaged in any emergency management response or
recovery activities, while complying with or attempting to comply with this
article or any rules or regulations promulgated pursuant to this article, are
liable for the death of or any injury to persons, or damage to property, as a
result of such activity. This section does not, however, affect the right of
any person to receive benefits to which he would otherwise be entitled under
this article under the Workers’ Compensation Act or the Workers’ Occupational
Disease Act, or under any pension law, and this section does not affect the
right of any such person to receive any benefits or compensation under any act
of Congress.
(Ord. 2008-11-64, passed 11-17-2008)
ARTICLE 6: PLAN COMMISSION
Section
   
3-6-1   Establishment, appointments and term of office
   
3-6-2   Vacancy
   
3-6-3   Powers and duties
   
3-6-4   Meetings and rules
   
3-6-5   Compensation
   
3-6-6   Removal of office
Cross-reference:
   Administration of Zoning Code, see §
16-15-3
   Zoning Code generally, see
Ch. 16
§ 3-6-1 ESTABLISHMENT, APPOINTMENTS AND TERM OF OFFICE.
   (A)   There is hereby established a Plan Commission consisting of seven
members. The Chairperson of the Plan Commission shall be the Chairperson of the
Zoning Board. Each member shall serve a term of five years and until their
respective successors are appointed and qualified. It is noted that under prior
ordinances, the terms of Plan Commission members have been staggered over seven
years.
   (B)   The Plan Commission shall also serve as the members of the Zoning
Board of Appeals.
Cross-reference:
   Zoning Board of Appeals, see
Ch. 3, Art. 7
§ 3-6-2 VACANCY.
   If a vacancy occurs in the office of any commission member, a successor
shall be appointed to serve for the unexpired term.
§ 3-6-3 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Plan Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   To prepare reports of its planning observa-tions and recommendations
on applications for zoning certificates, amendments and special uses and
thereafter submit its reports to the Board of Trustees in the manner prescribed
by the Zoning Code of the village;
   (B)   To initiate, direct and review, from time to time, studies of the
provisions of the Comprehensive Plan and the Zoning Code of the village, and to
make reports of its recommendations relative to proposed amendments to the
Board of Trustees;
   (C)   To hear applications for textual amendments to the Zoning Code,
special uses and requests for planned unit developments and thereafter to
submit its recommendations to the Village Board of Trustees;
   (D)   To hear all other matters upon which it is authorized or required to
review under the Zoning Code or other ordinances of the village; and
   (E)   To perform such other duties and exercise such other powers germane to
the powers granted by the Board of Trustees and the statutes of the state.
§ 3-6-4 MEETINGS AND RULES.
   (A)   All meetings of the Plan Commission shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson, and at such other times as the Plan Commission may determine. All
hearings conducted by the Plan Commission under the provisions of the Zoning
Code of the village shall be in accordance with state statutes. In all
proceedings of the Plan Commission provided for in the Zoning Code of the
village, the Chairperson and, in his or her absence, the Acting Chairperson,
shall have the power to administer oaths. The Plan Commission shall keep
minutes of its proceedings, and shall also keep records of its hearings and
other official actions.
   (B)   No hearing shall be conducted without a quorum of the Commission being
present, which shall consist of at least four of the members. The Plan
Commission may make recommendations upon the vote of a majority of a quorum.
   (C)   All meetings of the Plan Commission shall be open to the public,
except those parts of meetings authorized to be held in closed session.
   (D)   The Plan Commission shall adopt its own rules and procedures, not in
conflict with the ordinances of the village or with applicable state statutes.
§ 3-6-5 COMPENSATION.
   Members of the Plan Commission shall receive such compensation as may be
established, from time to time, by ordinance.
§ 3-6-6 REMOVAL OF OFFICE.
   If a member of the Plan Commission is removed as a member of the Zoning
Board of Appeals, that member’s term as a Plan Commission member shall also
cease.
ARTICLE 7: ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
Section
   
3-7-1   Establishment, appointments and term of office
   
3-7-2   Vacancy
   
3-7-3   Powers and duties
   
3-7-4   Meetings and rules
   
3-7-5   Compensation
   
3-7-6   Removal of office
Cross-reference:
   Administration of Zoning Code, see §
16-15-4
   Zoning Code generally, see
Ch. 16
§ 3-7-1 ESTABLISHMENT, APPOINTMENTS AND TERM OF OFFICE.
   (A)   There is hereby established a Zoning Board of Appeals consisting of
seven members, one of whom shall be designated as Chairperson at the time of
his or her appointment, to be appointed by the Village President with the
advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. Each member shall serve a term of
five years and until his or her respective successors are appointed and
qualified. It is noted that under prior ordinances, the terms of Zoning Board
members have been staggered over seven years.
   (B)   The Zoning Board members shall also serve as the members of the Plan
Commission.
Cross-reference:
   Plan Commission, see
Ch. 3, Art. 6
§ 3-7-2 VACANCY.
   If a vacancy occurs in the office of any Board member, a successor shall be
appointed to serve for the unexpired term. In the event that the office of
Chairperson is vacated for any reason, the Village President, with the advice
and consent of the Board of Trustees, shall immediately appoint either one of
the remaining members of the Zoning Board of Appeals, or any member who is
appointed to fill such vacancy of the Zoning Board of Appeals as the new
Chairperson.
§ 3-7-3 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   To hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by the Community Development Director under the
Zoning Code of the village;
   (B)   To hear applications for variations and to hold public hearings on
applications for amendments and special uses and thereafter submit reports of
findings and recommendations to the Board of Trustees that it vary the
application of the rules and regulations of the Zoning Code of the village;
   (C)   To hear all other matters upon which it is authorized or required to
review under the Zoning Code or other ordinances of the village; and
   (D)   To perform such other duties and exercise such other powers germane to
the powers granted by the Board of Trustees and the statutes of the state.
§ 3-7-4 MEETINGS AND RULES.
   (A)   All meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held at the call
of the Chairperson, and at such other times as the Board may determine. All
testimony by witnesses at any hearing provided for in the Zoning Code of the
village shall be given under oath. The Chairperson or, in his or her absence,
the Acting Chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses.
   (B)   All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall
keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every
question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating that fact, and shall also
keep records of its examinations and other official actions. Every rule,
regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof, and every order, requirement,
decision or determination of the Board shall immediately be filed in the office
of the Village Clerk and shall be a public record.
   (C)   No hearing shall be conducted without a quorum of the Board being
present, which shall consist of at least four of all the members.
   (D)   A concurring vote of four members of the Board shall be necessary on
any matter it is authorized to decide under the provisions of the Zoning Code
of the village.
   (E)   The concurring vote of four members of the Board shall be necessary to
reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of an administrative
officer, or to decide in favor of the applicant upon any matter upon which it
is required to pass under the Zoning Code of the village or to recommend any
variation to the Board of Trustees.
§ 3-7-5 COMPENSATION.
   Members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall receive such compensation as
may be established, from time to time, by ordinance.
§ 3-7-6 REMOVAL OF OFFICE.
   If a member of the Zoning Board of Appeals is removed as a member of the
Plan Commission, that member’s term as a Zoning Board of Appeals member shall
also cease.
ARTICLE 8: HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION
Section
   
3-8-1   Establishment
   
3-8-2   Functions and duties
   
3-8-3   Funds
   
3-8-4   Meetings and rules
§ 3-8-1 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   There is hereby re-established a Human Services Commission, consisting
of five members, each of whose term of office shall be three years and until
their respective successors are appointed and have qualified. However, to
create staggered terms with the number of members established by this section,
the Mayor shall re-appoint existing members and shall appoint new members to
terms which will be as follows: the term of two members shall expire two years
from the date of appointment; the term of three members shall expire three
years from the date of appointment.
   (B)   In making appointments, the Mayor shall endeavor to name some members
who possess experience in problems of providing social services.
   (C)   Members shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of the Board
of Trustees; provided, however, that, no appointment shall be made by the Mayor
within 30 days before the expiration of the Mayor’s term of office. The
Commission Chairperson shall be chosen by the members of the Commission and
shall serve as Chairperson for a one-year term. The Chair of the Commission
shall not be filled by any elected public official. The Chairperson may also
appoint an executive sub-commission which shall consist of three members and
which can be assigned by the Chairperson any duties or functions which could be
carried out by the Commission.
(Ord. 98-10-67, passed 10-5-1998)
§ 3-8-2 FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES.
   The Human Services Commission shall have the following functions and duties:
   (A)   To represent the community at large in matters of social service and
social policy and to advise the Village President and Board of Trustees in
regard to these matters;
   (B)   To identify the social service needs of the residents of the village
and to work with existing entities to address these needs in the most
meaningful way;
   (C)   To promote community involvement in addressing the various social
service concerns within the village;
   (D)   To work with local organization to coordinate and publicize the use of
all social, recreational and assistance facilities available to the residents
of the village;
   (E)   To submit annually, prior to January 1 of each year, and in its first
year, prior to March 1, a written program for human services with a recommended
budget sufficient to administer such program, in a form satisfactory to the
Village Manager; and
   (F)   Upon the approval of the President and Board of Trustees of the
recommended program and budget, the Human Services Commission shall monitor or
undertake the implementation of the human services program.
§ 3-8-3 FUNDS.
   The Human Services Fund is hereby established. All funds allocated by the
village and all funds donated to the village for human services shall be
deposited in a special fund to be known as the Human Services Fund.
§ 3-8-4 MEETINGS AND RULES.
   (A)   All meetings of the Human Services Commission shall be held at such
times as the Human Services Commission may determine. The Human Services
Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, and shall also keep records
of its hearings and other actions. A member of the Human Services Commission
may receive a stipend, in an amount established by the Village Board, for the
preparation of the minutes of its proceedings.
   (B)   No meeting of the Commission shall be conducted without a quorum of
the Commission being present which shall consist of at least three of the
members. A quorum of the executive sub-commission shall consist of at least two
of the members. The Human Services Commission and its executive sub-commission
may make recommendations upon the vote of a majority of the quorum.
   (C)   All meetings of the Human Services Commission shall be open to the
public, except for such portions of meetings as may be lawfully held in closed
session.
   (D)   The Human Services Commission may adopt its own rules and procedures
not in conflict with the ordinances of the village or with state statutes.
(Ord. 96-03-20, passed 3-18-1996; Ord. 98-10-67, passed 10-5-1998)
ARTICLE 9: COLLEGE OF DUPAGE-CAROL STREAM REGIONAL CENTER ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Section
   
3-9-1   Establishment
   
3-9-2   Functions and duties
   
3-9-3   Funds
   
3-9-4   Meetings and rules
§ 3-9-1 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   There is hereby established a College of DuPage-Carol Stream Regional
Center Advisory Committee consisting of up to 11 members, each of whose term of
office, except as provided for below, shall be for three years or until their
respective successors are appointed and are qualified.
   (B)   The Mayor shall appoint 60% of the members of the committee and those
appointments shall be confirmed by the Village Board.
      (1)   The Mayor shall, from time to time, establish the number of members
on the Committee, which shall determine how many members shall be selected by
the College of DuPage in the manner established by that governmental body.
      (2)   The Mayor may also, for the Carol Stream appointees and for the
College of DuPage appointees, establish staggered terms so that not all of the
appointees’ terms shall terminate in the same year.
      (3)   This information shall be communicated to the President of the
College of DuPage in writing.
      (4)   The Mayor shall specifically name the Chairperson of the Committee.
(Ord. 2002-07-44, passed 7-15-2002)
§ 3-9-2 FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The College of DuPage-Carol Stream Regional Center Advisory Committee
shall provide a written report at least twice a year to the College of DuPage
Director of Academic Services and the Village Manager of the Village of Carol
Stream to identify needed programs and services, including those that address
the digital divide which may exist within the village.
   (B)   It may suggest needed changes in the physical facilities and equipment
utilized, as well as the level of facilities and equipment utilized, as well as
the level of staffing needs.
(Ord. 2002-07-44, passed 7-15-2002)
§ 3-9-3 FUNDS.
   (A)   The Village Board may, from time to time, allocate funds to the
College of DuPage-Carol Stream Regional Center Advisory Committee.
   (B)   The Committee, if funding is required, will also seek funding from the
College of DuPage.
(Ord. 2002-07-44, passed 7-15-2002)
§ 3-9-4 MEETINGS AND RULES.
   (A)   All meetings of the College of DuPage-Carol Stream Regional Center
Advisory Committee shall be held at such times as the Committee may determine.
      (1)   The Committee shall keep minutes of its proceedings.
      (2)   The Committee shall fully comply with the provisions of the
Illinois Open Meetings Act.
   (B)   No meeting of the Committee shall be conducted without a quorum of the
Committee being present.
      (1)   Such a quorum shall consist of at least five members, without
regard to the total number of Committee members in office.
      (2)   A quorum of a subcommittee shall consist of at least two of the
members.
   (C)   All meetings of the College of DuPage-Carol Stream Regional Center
Advisory Committee shall be open to the public, except for such portions of the
meeting as may be lawfully held in closed session.
   (D)   The College of DuPage-Carol Stream Regional Center Advisory Committee
may adopt its own rules and procedures not in conflict with village ordinances
or state statutes.
(Ord. 2002-07-44, passed 7-15-2002)
CHAPTER 4: POLICE
      Article
         
1.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
         
2.   POLICE ALARM SYSTEMS
ARTICLE 1: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
4-1-1   Department established
   
4-1-2   Appointments
   
4-1-3   Employees of the village
   
4-1-4   Authority of Police Chief; rules and regulations
   
4-1-5   Qualifications and residency requirements
   
4-1-6   Duties of Police Chief
   
4-1-7   Duties of members
   
4-1-8   Witness fees
   
4-1-9   Serving processes
   
4-1-10   Disposition of abandoned and/or unclaimed property
   
4-1-11   Administrative fees
Cross-reference:
   Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, see
Ch. 3, Art. 2
   Board of Trustees, Police Pension Fund, see
Ch. 3, Art. 3
§ 4-1-1 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established a Police Department of the village for the
protection of lives and property within the limits of the village, the
enforcement of federal and state statutes, village ordinances and related
police functions.
§ 4-1-2 APPOINTMENTS.
   (A)   The Police Chief shall be appointed by the Village Manager with the
advice of the Mayor and Board of Trustees. The Police Chief shall serve an
indefinite term or until a successor is appointed and qualified, but may be
removed by the Village Manager.
   (B)   (1)   The positions of Deputy Police Chief and Commander shall be
exempt from the Rules and Regulations of the Board of Fire and Police
Commission and shall be appointed by the Village Manager after the Manager
considers the recommendations of the Police Chief. The recruitment of
candidates for the position of Deputy Police Chief shall first be offered to
Carol Stream police officers above the rank of patrol officer, who may apply
for the position by a posted application deadline. The recruitment of
candidates for the position of Commander shall first be offered to Carol Stream
police officers below the rank of Deputy Police Chief, who may apply for the
position by a posted application deadline. The Village Manager may exercise
absolute discretion in choosing the persons to serve in these positions. Should
no applicants be chosen for the Deputy Chief or Commander positions, the
recruitment of candidates will proceed by recruiting qualified candidates from
outside the Village's Police Department. Once selected, the Deputy Chief and
Commander shall serve indefinite terms and may be removed at the absolute
discretion of the Village Manager. If a Deputy Chief or Commander is appointed
from within the Village's Police Department, that police officer, upon removal,
shall revert to the prior Board of Fire and Police Commission rank held. The
reversion shall occur even if there is not then available an authorized
position of Sergeant.
      (2)   The sworn personnel of the Carol Stream Police Department shall be
composed of the following positions: Police Chief, Deputy Police Chief,
Commander, and the Board of Fire and Police Commission rank of Sergeant and
patrol officers. The Village Manager, after considering the Police Chief's
recommendation, from time to time, shall determine the appropriate number of
sworn personnel needed to fill the positions of Deputy Chief and Commander, as
well as the Board of Fire and Police Commission rank of Sergeant and Patrol
Officer, based upon organizational need and authorization by the Village Board.
   (C)   All original appointments to the Police Department and promotions
within the Department, other than the positions of Police Chief, Deputy Police
Chief, Commander, and non-sworn personnel, shall be made and effected by the
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, in accordance with law.
(Ord. 95-06-27, passed 5-15-1995; Ord. 2008-12-71, passed 12-15-2008; Ord.
2010-03-13, passed 3-15-2010; Ord. 2025-08-35, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 4-1-3 EMPLOYEES OF THE VILLAGE.
   The members of the Police Department shall be considered employees of the
village for salary, workers’ compensation and employment benefit purposes.
§ 4-1-4 AUTHORITY OF POLICE CHIEF; RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Police Chief shall make such rules and regulations for the conduct and
guidance of the Police Department personnel as the Police Chief shall deem
advisable, and such rules and regulations, when approved by the Village
President and the Board of Trustees, shall be binding on such members. Police
Department personnel are also covered by the personnel rules and regulations of
the village.
§ 4-1-5 QUALIFICATIONS AND RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Sworn police officers of the Police Department shall possess
qualifications as are required by statute and shall, in addition, be citizens
of the United States or if not a citizen shall be legally authorized to work in
the United States under federal law or be an individual against whom
immigration action has been deferred by the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration
Services under the federal Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA
process) and who is authorized under federal law to obtain, carry, or otherwise
possess a firearm while on duty and serving in their official capacity as a
police officer. Sworn police officers shall reside in the State of Illinois
before the end of their probationary period. The Village Manager, upon
recommendation of the Chief of Police, may grant a temporary fixed-term
exemption of the residency requirement upon a sworn police officer's petition
claiming exigent circumstances preventing residency compliance.
   (B)   Any sworn police officer who, within the time specified above, does
not move into the geographical area established as a mandatory residence zone
in this section, or who does not serve, except in the case of involuntary
discharge instituted by the village, at least one year after the termination of
probation as a sworn police officer shall, at the time of termination or within
60 days thereafter, repay to the village actual costs incurred by the village
in education, training and providing uniforms for the officer.
   (C)   Provided, however, that, in the event that such police officer resigns
and the resignation is accepted, and that officer does not begin employment
with a governmental Police Department within one year of the termination of
employment with the village, such repayment shall not be required from police
officers who have been hired by the village prior to 1-1-2000.
   (D)   Any sworn police officer, who without exemption, fails to meet or
comply with the residency requirements established in this article shall be
subject to discipline, including suspension or discharge.
(Ord. 99-12-70, passed 12-6-1999; Ord. 2004-08-46, passed 8-16-2004; Ord. 2007-
03-10, passed 3-19-2007; Ord. 2007-04-16, passed 3-19-2007; Ord. 2025-08-35,
passed 8-4-2025)
§ 4-1-6 DUTIES OF POLICE CHIEF.
   The Police Chief shall be responsible for the performance of the Police
Department, of all its functions, and all persons who are members of the
Department shall serve subject to the orders of the Police Chief. The Police
Chief shall perform those duties prescribed by the rules and regulations
governing the Police Department, as approved by the Village President and the
Board of Trustees, and shall in addition perform the following duties:
   (A)   He or she shall be the keeper of the Village Jail, and shall have
custody of all persons incarcerated therein;
   (B)   Keep such books and records and make such reports concerning the
activities of the Police Department as may be required by statute or by the
President and Board of Trustees;
   (C)   Provide for the custody, care and control of the public property of
the Department, including all vehicles, firearms and other equipment of the
Department, and have custody and control of all lost, abandoned or stolen
property within the village;
   (D)   Preserve the peace, order and safety of the village;
   (E)   Execute and enforce the state and federal laws, all village
ordinances, police regulations and orders of the corporate authorities;
   (F)   Protect the rights of persons and property within the village;
   (G)   Study police problems in matters of public welfare and administration
as related to crime and law enforcement and make recommendations thereon to the
corporate authorities; and
   (H)   Investigate, study and recommend to the corporate authorities, upon
such request, traffic regulations, routines and changes therein for
improvements of traffic and safety conditions within the village.
§ 4-1-7 DUTIES OF MEMBERS.
   It shall be the duty of all sworn officers of the Police Department to see
to the enforcement of all ordinances of the village and all statutes applicable
therein, and to preserve order and prevent infractions of the law and arrest
violators thereof. Each member shall obey the orders and directions of his or
her superior and shall perform the duties as prescribed by the rules and
regulations governing the Police Department.
§ 4-1-8 WITNESS FEES.
   Every member of the Police Department shall appear as witness whenever this
is necessary in a prosecution for a violation of an ordinance or of any state
or federal law. No such member shall retain any witness fee for service as
witness in any action or suit to which the village is a party; any fees paid
for such services shall be turned over to the Police Chief, who shall deposit
the same with the Village Treasurer.
§ 4-1-9 SERVING PROCESSES.
   The Police Chief shall be authorized to serve writs, summons and other
processes, but no officer or patrol officer shall serve such summons or
processes except on the order of the Police Chief.
§ 4-1-10 DISPOSITION OF ABANDONED AND/OR UNCLAIMED PROPERTY.
   (A)   All abandoned or unclaimed property, including bicycles, which have
come into the possession of the Police Department and the identity or location
of the owner or other person entitled to possession of the property has not
been ascertained within six months after the Police Department obtains such
possession, shall be sold by the Police Department for cash to the highest
bidder at public auction. Any abandoned or unclaimed property, the disposal of
which is otherwise provided by statute, shall be sold in accordance with such
statute.
   (B)   Property offered but not sold at such public auction may be offered
and sold at a subsequent public auction without such notice.
   (C)   The proceeds of the sale of any abandoned or unclaimed property, less
reimbursement to the Police Department of the reasonable expenses incurred,
shall be paid into the village treasury.
   (D)   The owner or other person entitled to possession of such property may
claim and recover possession of the property at any time before its sale at
public auction, upon providing reasonable and satisfactory proof of ownership
or right to possession and reimbursing the Police Department for all reasonable
expenses incurred with the custody thereof.
§ 4-1-11 ADMINISTRATIVE FEES.
   (A)   The village hereby determines to establish administrative fees for
certain services provided by the Police Department.
   (B)   The schedule of fees and services shall be as follows:
 
Administrative fee for Stop Teen        $50
Alcohol Abuse Together Program
                                        Carol Stream residents and citizens
                                        employed within Carol Stream shall be
                                        $15 for a maximum of 2 cards, $7.50 for
Fingerprinting                          each additional card. All other
                                        applicants shall be charged $20 for a
                                        maximum of 2 cards, $7.50 for each
                                        additional card
Reconstruction traffic accident reports $20
Subpoena processing                     $25
Traffic accident reports                $5
Vehicle release for arrestees           $25
 
(Ord. 2009-05-18, passed 5-4-2009)
ARTICLE 2: POLICE ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
   
4-2-1   Purpose and definitions
   
4-2-2   Administrative rules
   
4-2-3   Alarm systems and businesses; regulations and standards
   
4-2-4   Alarm systems; standards and inspection
   
4-2-5   Inspection of alarm devices and businesses
   
4-2-6   Testing of equipment
   
4-2-7   Notice of disruption in service
   
4-2-8   False alarms; disconnection from system
   
4-2-9   False alarms; response charges
   
4-2-10   Alarm activations
   
4-2-11   Violations
§ 4-2-1 PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The purpose of this article is to provide minimum standards and
regulations applicable to burglar alarm systems, holdup alarm systems, alarm
businesses and alarm users as defined in this article.
   (B)   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ALARM BUSINESS. Any business operated by a person for a profit which
engages in the activity of altering, installing, leasing, maintaining,
repairing, replacing, selling, servicing or responding to a burglar or holdup
alarm system, or which causes any of these activities to take place.
      ALARM SYSTEM. An assembly of equipment and devices (or a single device
such as a solid state unit which plugs directly into a 110-volt AC line)
arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to
which the Police Department may be expected to respond. The term ALARM SYSTEM
shall include the terms AUTOMATIC HOLDUP ALARM SYSTEM, as that term is
hereinafter defined, excluding smoke detectors and automobile alarms.
      ALARM USER. Any person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained
within the village, except for proprietary systems. If such a system, however,
employs an audible signal emitting sounds or a flashing light or beacon
designed to signal persons outside the premises, such system shall be within
the definition of “alarm system”, and shall be subject to this article.
      ANNUNCIATOR. The instrumentation on an alarm console at the receiving
terminal of a signal line which, through both visual and audible signals, shows
when an alarm device at a particular location has been activated, and it shall
also indicate line trouble.
      ANSI. Stands for the American National Standards Institution.
      AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE. Refers to an alarm system which automatically
sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a pre-
recorded voice message indicating the existence of the emergency situation that
the alarm system is designed to detect.
      AUTOMATIC HOLDUP ALARM SYSTEM. An alarm system in which the signal
transmission is initiated by the action of the robber.
      BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEM. Refers to an alarm system signaling an entry or
attempted entry into the area.
      DIRECT CONNECT. An alarm system which has the capability of transmitting
system signals to and receiving them at an agency maintained by the local
government, for example, a police communications center.
      DIRECT LINE. A telephone line leading directly from a central station to
the communications center of the Police Department that is for use only to
report emergency signals on a person to person basis.
      FALSE ALARM. The activation of an alarm system through mechanical
failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the owner or
lessee of an alarm system or of his employees or agents. Such terminology does
not include, for example, alarms caused by tornadoes, storms, lightning,
telephone line failure or other violent conditions.
      HOLDUP ALARM SYSTEM. Refers to an alarm system signaling a robbery or
attempted robbery.
      INTERCONNECT. To connect an alarm system to a communication link, either
directly or through a mechanical device that utilizes a standard telephone, for
the purpose of using the telephone line to transmit an emergency message upon
the activation of the alarm system.
      LOCAL ALARM SYSTEM. Refers to a signaling system which, when activated,
causes an audible and/or visual signaling device to be activated in or on the
premises within which the system is installed.
      MANUAL HOLDUP ALARM SYSTEM. Refers to an alarm system in which the signal
transmission is initiated by the direct action of the person attacked or by an
observer of the attack.
      PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company
or organization of any kind.
      POLICE or POLICE DEPARTMENT. The publicly supported Police Department of
the village, or any authorized agent thereof.
      POLICE CHIEF. The Chief of the Police Department of the village, or his
or her designated representative.
      PRIMARY TRUNKLINE. A telephone line leading directly into the
communications center of the Police Department.
      PROPRIETARY SYSTEM. An alarm system sounding and/or recording alarm and
supervisory signals at a control center located within the protected premises,
the control center being under the supervision of the proprietor of the
protected premises. If a PROPRIETARY SYSTEM includes a signal line connected
directly or by means of an automatic dialing device to a central station,
modified central station or answering service, it thereby becomes an “alarm
system”, as defined in this article.
      REMOTE SIGNALING SYSTEM. An alarm signaling system which, when activated
by an alarm device, transmits a signal from an alarm signaling device to the
Police Department, where appropriate action is taken to investigate and respond
to the signal.
      SIGNAL LINE. Refers to the transmission line through which the signal
passes from one of the elements of the signal transmission to another.
      SPECIAL TRUNKLINE. A telephone line leading into a communications center
of an intermediary service and having the primary purpose of handling emergency
signals or messages.
      SUBSCRIBER. A person who buys and/or leases or otherwise obtains an alarm
signaling system and thereafter contracts with or hires an alarm business to
monitor and/or service the alarm device.
      TELEPHONE COMPANY. The utility that furnishes telephone services to the
village.
      UL. Stands for Underwriter’s Laboratories.
      VILLAGE or MUNICIPALITY. The Village of Carol Stream, Illinois.
§ 4-2-2 ADMINISTRATIVE RULES.
   The Police Chief shall promulgate such rules as may be necessary for the
implementation of this article, and for determination of grounds for clerical
suspension or revocation of any license or permit required by this article. The
rules shall be approved by the Village Manager and shall be open to inspection.
§ 4-2-3 ALARM SYSTEMS AND BUSINESSES; REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS.
   (A)   No automatic dialing device shall be interconnected to a police
communications center.
   (B)   All automatic dialing devices interconnected to a police
communications center shall be disconnected therefrom.
   (C)   Persons owning or leasing an automatic dialing device may have the
device interconnected to a telephone line transmitting directly to:
      (1)   A central station;
      (2)   A modified central station; or
      (3)   A licensed answering service.
   (D)   The relaying of messages by intermediate services to central stations
may relay messages over a direct line.
   (E)   Automatic dialing devices may also be interconnected to one or more
telephone numbers available to the owner or lessee of the devices, or his, her
or their designated representatives, at another location.
   (F)   This article shall apply only to those automatic dialing devices
interconnected to intermediary service centers.
   (G)   Every alarm business which has inter-connected any automatic dialing
device in the village to a telephone line serviced directly by an inter-mediary
service shall maintain and submit a current list of such installations for
inspection by the Police Chief during the course of his or her official duties
and include in such list:
      (1)   The name of the principal operator of the entity where the device
is installed;
      (2)   The address of the location where the device is installed and the
telephone number of that location; and
      (3)   The name and telephone number of at least one other person who can
be reached at any time, day or night, and who is authorized to respond to an
emergency signal transmitted by the automatic dialing device, and who can open
the premises wherein the device is installed.
   (H)   The information contained in the lists required by this article shall
be restricted to inspection only by the Police Chief in the course of his or
her official duties.
§ 4-2-4 ALARM SYSTEMS; STANDARDS AND INSPECTION.
   (A)   All alarm systems installed in commercial or public buildings shall
utilize equipment and methods of installation substantially equivalent to or
exceeding the current UL and/or ANSI standards of the alarm industry.
   (B)   All alarm systems installed in residences shall utilize equipment
which shall be substantially equivalent to or exceed the current UL and/or ANSI
standards of the alarm industry.
   (C)   The equipment or hardware used and/or the manner of installation of
the alarm system may correspond to any of the several levels of protection or
grades of service listed in the applicable standards; provided, however, that,
alarm system users shall not be required to provide protection for all of the
areas or openings which may be required to be protected by the applicable
standards.
   (D)   The standards referred to in this article are hereby adopted as part
of this code subject to the modifications and qualifications set forth herein.
   (E)   In those instances where UL and/or ANSI have not established standards
for categories of equipment or where new equipment is undergoing field testing,
the Police Chief may require that the alarm system be inspected at the expense
of the alarm user by a qualified representative of the industry who shall
certify whether the alarm system appears to be safe and reliable.
   (F)   Alarm systems which input an automatic dialing device are subject to
the provisions of this article.
§ 4-2-5 INSPECTION OF ALARM DEVICES AND BUSINESSES.
   (A)   For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, the
Police Chief, or his or her designee, may seek to inspect, at reasonable times
and upon reasonable oral notice, any premises in the village in or upon which
alarm systems subject to this article are located, and to inspect the
installation and/or operation of such alarm systems on official business.
   (B)   If such inspection reveals any violations of the provisions of this
article, a written report detailing such violations shall be promptly sent to
the owner, lessee, or other person responsible for the alarm system or business
in violation of this article. Such report shall require the correction within
ten days after receipt of the notice of the violation discovered, and shall
state that a failure to comply may result in the suspension of response by the
village until the system is repaired.
§ 4-2-6 TESTING OF EQUIPMENT.
   No alarm system designed to transmit emergency messages directly to the
Police Department shall be tested or demonstrated without first obtaining
permission from the Police Chief. Permission is not required to test or
demonstrate alarm devices not transmitting emergency signals directly to the
Police Department unless the signals are to be relayed to the Police
Department.
§ 4-2-7 NOTICE OF DISRUPTION IN SERVICE.
   When an alarm business service to its subscribers is disrupted for any
reason by the alarm business, or the alarm business becomes aware of such
disruption, it shall promptly notify its subscriber by telephone that
protection is no longer being provided.
§ 4-2-8 FALSE ALARMS; DISCONNECTION FROM SYSTEM.
   (A)   More than five false alarms in a calendar year from any alarm system
may constitute grounds for a disconnect of the alarm system.
   (B)   The Police Chief may cause an alarm user to be disconnected from the
authorized alarm panel located in the police communications center after giving
written notice to the subscriber. The subscriber will be given the opportunity
to be heard on appeal to the Village Manager within seven days, upon a
determination that the subscriber’s alarm system has been installed, maintained
or operated in violation of any of the provisions of this article, or for
failure to pay any applicable fees or charges.
(Ord. 94-02-18, passed 2-22-1994)
§ 4-2-9 FALSE ALARMS; RESPONSE CHARGES.
   (A)   When the village’s Police Department responds to false alarms received
from the same premises more than three times in a 12-month period of a calendar
year (January through December), which are not due to factors beyond the
control of the alarm user, the alarm user or subscriber shall pay the village
the following amount within 30 days after receiving notification of the fourth
false alarm:
 
4 to 9 responses occurring in a calendar year   $50 each
10 to 19 responses occurring in a calendar year $100 each
20 or more responses in a calendar year         $250 each
 
   (B)   If payment is not received within the 30-day period, as provided
above, the charge for such response shall be increased to double the amount of
the initial response charge.
(Ord. 94-02-18, passed 2-22-1994; Ord. 2003-11-76, passed 11-17-2003)
§ 4-2-10 ALARM ACTIVATIONS.
   (A)   Nothing in this article is to be construed that the Police Department
will assume any responsibility for providing any watch or guard service over
the property or premises which is equipped with an alarm system.
   (B)   When any alarm has been activated for any reason, it is the
responsibility of the alarm user to provide someone with access to the alarm
system to appear on the scene of the activation to turn off or reset the alarm,
within one hour after being notified by the Police Department to do so.
   (C)   Exterior alarms such as lights, bells, sirens, whistles, buzzers and
the like must be equipped to automatically shut off after one-half hour.
§ 4-2-11 VIOLATIONS.
   A violation of this article shall occur when any person shall fail to:
   (A)   Have current information on persons available to respond to alarm
activations as required in this article;
   (B)   Obey the provisions as required in this article;
   (C)   Appear and turn off or rest any alarm as required in this article;
   (D)   Obey any legal order of the Police Chief; and/or
   (E)   Install or fail to disconnect an automatic dialing device connected to
a trunkline answered by the Police Department communications center.
CHAPTER 5: TAXATION AND FINANCE
      Article
         
1.   MUNICIPAL RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX
         
2.   MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
         
3.   MUNICIPAL USE TAX
         
4.   MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX
         
4.1.   MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
         
5.   MUNICIPAL AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION AND USE TAX
         
6.   ATHLETIC CONTESTS AND EXHIBITIONS FOR GAIN
         
7.   MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSE
         
8.   PURCHASES AND CONTRACTS
         
9.   HOTEL/MOTEL USE TAX
         
10.   REAL ESTATE TRANSFER TAX
         
11.   PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS OF CH. 5
         
12.   MUNICIPAL GAS USE TAX
         
13.   MUNICIPAL MOTOR FUEL TAX
         
14.   MUNICIPAL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE TAX
         
15.   MUNICIPAL AMUSEMENT TAX
         
16.   MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX
         
17.   MUNICIPAL GROCERY TAXES
ARTICLE 1: MUNICIPAL RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX
Editor’s note:
   This article relating to the Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax has been
superseded by Illinois state statutes. However, specific percentages and tax
amounts were amended by Ord. 2003-04-18, passed 4-21-2003, Ord. 2010-04-15,
passed 4-5-2010, and Ord. 2018-03-08, passed 3-5-2018.
ARTICLE 2: MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
Editor’s note:
   This article relating to the Municipal Service Occupation Tax has been
superseded by Illinois state statutes. However, specific percentages and tax
amounts were amended by Ord. 2003-04-18, passed 4-21-2003, Ord. 2010-04-15,
passed 4-5-2010, and Ord. 2018-03-08, passed 3-5-2018.
ARTICLE 3: MUNICIPAL USE TAX
Editor’s note:
   This article relating to the Municipal Use Tax has been superseded by
Illinois state statutes.
ARTICLE 4: MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX
Section
   
5-4-1   Definitions
   
5-4-2   Tax imposed
   
5-4-3   Businesses excluded from tax
   
5-4-4   To be in addition to street use tax
   
5-4-5   Tax remittance and return
   
5-4-6   Overpayment of tax
   
5-4-7   Limitation on actions to recover tax due
   
5-4-8   Collection of tax
   
5-4-9   Resales
   
5-4-10   Books and records
Cross-reference:
   Municipal Gas Use Tax, see
Ch. 5, Art. 12
§ 5-4-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GROSS RECEIPTS. The consideration received for distribution, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas or electricity for use or consumption and not for
resale, as the case may be; and for all services rendered in connection
therewith valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including
cash, credit, services and property of every kind and material and for all
services rendered therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on
account of the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, or any other
expenses whatsoever. GROSS RECEIPTS shall not include receipts from the village
for the sale to the village of any utility products or services.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, municipal
corporation or political subdivision of the state, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
   PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE. Any person having or
maintaining within the state, directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate,
an office, generation facility, distribution facility, transmission facility,
sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent or other
representative operating within the state under the authority of the person or
its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of
business or agent or other representation is located in the state permanently
or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary other affiliate is licensed
or qualified to do business in the state.
   PURCHASE AT RETAIL. Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for
purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the
use of electricity by a public utility, as defined in § 8-11-2 of the Illinois
Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2), directly in the generation, production,
transmission, delivery or sale of electricity.
   PURCHASER. Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of
the village, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail.
   TAX COLLECTOR. The person delivering electricity to the purchaser.
(Ord. 93-12-113, passed 12-14-1993; Ord. 98-07-54, passed 7-20-1998)
§ 5-4-2 TAX IMPOSED.
   (A)   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the occupation or privilege
of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling electricity for use or
consumption within the corporate limits of the village and not for resale, at
the rate of 5% of the gross receipts therefrom. The tax imposed under this
section shall not apply with respect to gross receipts pertaining to bills for
the distribution, supply, furnishing or sale of electricity where the use or
consumption of electricity is subject to the tax imposed under division (B)
below.
   (B)   Pursuant to § 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2)
and any and all other applicable authority, a tax is imposed upon the privilege
of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or
consumed within the corporate limits of the village at the following rates,
calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser:
      (1)   For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month,
0.564 cents per kilowatt-hour;
      (2)   For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month,
0.386 cents per kilowatt-hour;
      (3)   For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used on consumed in a month,
0.383 cents per kilowatt-hour;
      (4)   For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month,
0.320 cents per kilowatt-hour;
      (5)   For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month,
0.319 cents per kilowatt-hour;
      (6)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month,
0.273 cents per kilowatt-hour;
      (7)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month,
0.250 cents per kilowatt-hour;
      (8)   For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month,
0.230 cents per kilowatt-hour;
      (9)   For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month,
0.210 cents per kilowatt-hour; and
      (10)   For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000
kilowatt-hours in a month; 0.190 cents per kilowatt-hour.
(Ord. 93-12-113, passed 12-14-1993; Ord. 98-07-54, passed 7-20-1998; Ord. 2003-
04-17, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 5-4-3 BUSINESSES EXCLUDED FROM TAX.
   No tax is imposed by this article with respect to any transaction to
interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may not,
under the Constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to
taxation by the state or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any
persons engaged in the business of selling gas or electricity be subject to
taxation under the provisions of this article for such transactions as are or
may become subject to taxation under the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.
(Ord. 93-12-113, passed 12-14-1993)
§ 5-4-4 TO BE IN ADDITION TO STREET USE TAX.
   The tax established by this article shall be in addition to the payment of
money, or value of products or services furnished to this village by the
taxpayer as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys, or other public
places, or installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of
poles, wires, pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer’s
business.
§ 5-4-5 TAX REMITTANCE AND RETURN.
   (A)   (1)   Every Tax Collector shall on a monthly basis file a return in a
form prescribed by the village.
      (2)   The return and accompanying remittance shall be due on or before
the last day of the month following the month during which the tax is collected
or is required to be collected under this chapter.
   (B)   If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the
purchaser or is excused from collecting the tax under this chapter, then the
purchaser shall file a return in a form prescribed by the village, and pay the
tax directly to the village on or before the last day of the month following
the month during which the electricity is used or consumed.
(Ord. 98-07-54, passed 7-20-1998)
§ 5-4-6 OVERPAYMENT OF TAX.
   If it shall appear that an amount of tax due under this article has been
paid which was not in fact due, whether as the result of a mistake of face or
an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to
become due, under this article from the taxpayer who made the erroneous
payment. However, no amount erroneously paid more than three years prior to the
filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited.
§ 5-4-7 LIMITATION ON ACTIONS TO RECOVER TAX DUE.
   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this
article shall be commenced more than three years after the due date of such
amount.
§ 5-4-8 COLLECTION OF TAX.
   (A)   (1)   Subject the provisions of §
5-4-9 regarding the delivery of electricity to resellers, the tax imposed under
this chapter shall be collected from purchasers by the person maintaining a
place of business in the state who delivers electricity to such purchasers.
      (2)   This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who
delivers the electricity to the purchaser, and is recoverable at the same time
and in the same manner as the original charge for delivering the electricity.
   (B)   Any tax required to be collected by this chapter, and any tax in fact
collected, shall constitute a debt owned to the village by the person
delivering the electricity; provided that:
      (1)   The person delivering the electricity shall be allowed credit for
such tax related to deliveries of electricity he or she charges for which are
written off as uncollectible; and
      (2)   If such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier
shall be obligated to remit such tax.
   (C)   Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the
purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the
electricity.
      (1)   Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add such
gross charge an amount equal to 3% of the tax they collect to reimburse them
for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing customers, preparing
and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the village upon
request.
      (2)   For purposes of this chapter, any partial payment of a billed
amount not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be deemed to be for
the delivery of electricity.
(Ord. 98-07-54, passed 7-20-1998)
§ 5-4-9 RESALES.
   (A)   Electricity that is delivered to a person in the village shall be
considered to be for use and consumption by that person, unless the person
receiving the electricity has an active resale number issued by the village and
furnishes that number to the person who delivers the electricity, and certifies
to that person that the sale is either entirely or partially non-taxable as a
sale for resale.
   (B)   (1)   If a person who receives electricity in the village claims to be
an authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to the village
for a resale number.
      (2)   The applicant shall state facts showing why it is not liable for
the tax imposed by this chapter on any purchases of electricity, and shall
furnish such additional information as the village may reasonably require.
   (C)   Upon approval of the application, the village shall assign a resale
number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant.
   (D)   The village may cancel the resale number of any person, if the person
fails to pay any tax payable under this chapter for electricity used or
consumed by the person, or if the number:
      (1)   Was obtained through misrepre-sentation; or
      (2)   Is no longer necessary because the person has discontinued making
resales.
   (E)   (1)   If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or
consumption and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by
this chapter directly to the village pursuant to §
5-4-2 on the amount of electricity that the reseller uses or consumes, and
shall collect the tax pursuant to §
5-4-8 and remit the tax pursuant to §
5-4-5 on the amount of electricity delivered by the reseller to a purchaser.
      (2)   Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active
resale number and complying with all other conditions of this section shall be
excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the electricity
delivered to the reseller; provided that, the person reports to the village the
total amount of electricity delivered to the reseller, and such other
information that the village may reasonably require.
(Ord. 98-07-54, passed 7-20-1998)
§ 5-4-10 BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   (A)   Every Tax Collector, and every taxpayer required to pay the tax
imposed by this article, shall keep accurate books and records of its business
or activity, including contemporaneous books and records denoting the
transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability under
this chapter.
   (B)   The books and records shall be subject to and available for inspection
at all times during business hours of the day.
(Ord. 98-07-54, passed 7-20-1998)
ARTICLE 4.1: MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
Section
   
5-4.1-1   Tax imposed
   
5-4.1-2   Collection of tax
   
5-4.1-3   Definitions
   
5-4.1-4   Resale of telecommunications
   
5-4.1-5   Tax return
   
5-4.1-6   Overpayment of tax
   
5-4.1-7   Limitation on actions to recover tax due
§ 5-4.1-1 TAX IMPOSED.
   A tax is imposed on the following acts or privileges:
   (A)   The act or privilege of originating in the village or receiving in the
village intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of 5% of the gross
charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer by such
person. However, such tax is not imposed on such act or privilege to the extent
such act or privilege may not, under the Constitution and statutes of the
United States, be made the subject of taxation by municipalities in the state;
and
   (B)   The act or privilege of originating in the village or receiving in the
village interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of 5% of the gross
charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer by such
person. To prevent actual multi-state taxation of the act or privilege that is
subject to taxation under this division (B), any taxpayer, upon proof that the
taxpayer has paid a tax in another state on such event, shall be allowed a
credit against any tax enacted pursuant to this article to the extent of the
amount of such tax properly due and paid in such other state which was not
previously allowed as a credit against any other state or local tax in the
state. However, such tax is not imposed on the act or privilege to the extent
such act or privilege may not, under the Constitution and statutes of the
United States, be made the subject of taxation by municipalities in the state.
(Ord. 93-10-90, passed 10-12-1993)
§ 5-4.1-2 COLLECTION OF TAX.
   (A)   The tax authorized by this article shall be collected from the
taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in the state and making
or effectuating the sale at retail and shall be remitted by such retailer to
the village. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this article and any
such tax collected by such retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the
retailer to the village. Retailers shall collect the tax from the taxpayer by
adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications when sold for use. The tax authorized by this
article shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the retailer who provides
such taxable services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the
same manner as the original charge for such taxable services. If the retailer
fails to collect the tax from the taxpayer, then the taxpayer shall be required
to pay the tax direct to the village.
   (B)   Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this article shall, when
collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross
charge for telecommunications.
(Ord. 93-10-90, passed 10-12-1993)
§ 5-4.1-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of the taxes authorized by this article, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   AMOUNT PAID. The amount charged to the taxpayer’s service address in the
village regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
   GROSS CHARGE. The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications in the village and for all services rendered in
connection therewith, valued in money whether paid in money or otherwise,
including cash, credits, services and property of every kind or nature, and
shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of such
telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs or
any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the amount thereof
shall be included only as and when paid. However, GROSS CHARGE shall not
include:
      (1)   Any amounts added to a purchaser’s bill because of a charge made
pursuant to the tax imposed by this article, additional charges added to a
purchaser’s bill pursuant to the Public Utilities Act, 220 ILCS 5/9-222, the
tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act, 35 ILCS 630/1 et seq., or
the tax imposed by the Internal Revenue Code at 26 U.S.C. § 4251;
      (2)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of
the village;
      (3)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of
data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a timesharing agreement;
      (4)   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is
leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
      (5)   Charges to business enterprises certified under the Public
Utilities Act, 220 ILCS 5/9-222.1, to the extent of such exemption and during
the period of time specified by the Department of Commerce and Community
Affairs;
      (6)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed
under this section has already been paid to a retailer and only to the extent
that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries
or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering
such service;
      (7)   Bad debts ( BAD DEBT means any portion of a debt that is related to
a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made); or
      (8)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunication
devices.
   INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS. All telecommunications that either originate
or terminate outside the state.
   INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS. All telecommunications that originate and
terminate within the state.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation or a receiver,
trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court, the
federal and state governments, including state universities created by statute,
or any city, town, county or other political subdivision of the state.
   PURCHASE AT RETAIL. The acquisition, consumption or use of
telecommunications through a sale at retail.
   RETAILER. Every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail as
defined in this section. A municipality may, in its discretion, upon
application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any retailer
not maintaining a place of business within the state, who to the satisfaction
of the village, furnishes adequate security to insure collection and payment of
the tax. Such RETAILER shall be issued, without charge, a permit to collect
such tax. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such RETAILER to collect
the tax upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in such
municipality in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a
retailer maintaining a place of business within such municipality.
   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE. This phrase, or any
like term or phrase, means and includes any retailer having or maintaining
within the state, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution
facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse or other place of
business, or any agent or other representative operating within the state under
the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such
place of business or agent or other representative is located here permanently
or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do
business in the state.
   SALE AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of
telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for a
consideration, to persons other than the federal and state governments, and
state universities created by statute and other than between a parent
corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries, when the tax has already been paid to a retailer and the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for resale.
   SERVICE ADDRESS. The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received by a taxpayer. If this is not a defined location, as in
the case of mobile phones, paging systems, maritime systems, air-to-ground
systems and the like, SERVICE ADDRESS shall mean the location of a taxpayer’s
primary use of the telecommunication equipment as defined by telephone number,
authorization code or location in the state where bills are sent.
   TAXPAYER. A person who individually or through his or her agents, employees
or permittees engages in the act of privilege of originating in the village
receiving telecommunications and who incurs a tax liability under this article.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. In addition to the usual and popular meaning, includes,
but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of
local, toll and wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph
services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange services, cellular mobile
telecommunications service, specialized mobile radio services, paging service
or any other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or
any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar
means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave,
radio, satellite or similar facilities. The definition of TELECOMMUNICATIONS
shall not include value added services in which computer processing
applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the
information for purposes other than transmission. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not
include the purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service
provider for use as a component part of the service provided by him or her to
the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end-to-
end communications. Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges
for use of inter-company facilities and all telecommunications resold in the
subsequent provision used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end
telecommunications service shall be non-taxable as sales for resale.
(Ord. 93-10-90, passed 10-12-1993)
§ 5-4.1-4 RESALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS.
   (A)   If a person who originates or receives telecommunications in the
village claims to be a reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall
apply to the village for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts
which will show the village why such applicant is not liable for tax under any
ordinance authorized by this article on any of such purchases and shall furnish
such additional information as the village may reasonably require.
   (B)   Upon approval of the application, the village shall assign a resale
number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant. The
village may cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation, or
which is used to send or receive such telecommunication tax-free when such
actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the
person’s having discontinued the making of resales.
   (C)   Except as provided above in this section, the act or privilege of
sending or receiving telecommunications in the state shall not be made tax-free
on the ground of being a sale for resale unless the person has an active resale
number from the village and furnishes that number to the retailer in connection
with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such person is non-taxable
because at being a sale for resale.
(Ord. 93-10-90, passed 10-12-1993)
§ 5-4.1-5 TAX RETURN.
   (A)   Each taxpayer shall make a tax return as required by this article to
the Village Treasurer on or before the first day of each month, stating:
      (1)   The name of the taxpayer;
      (2)   The principal place of business of the taxpayer;
      (3)   The gross receipts during the prior month upon the basis of which
the tax is imposed;
      (4)   Amount of tax; and
      (5)   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
   (B)   The taxpayer making the return shall, at the time of making such
return, pay to the Village Treasurer the amount of tax herein imposed. In
connection with any return the taxpayer may, if taxpayer so elects, report and
pay an amount based upon total billings of business subject to the tax during
the period for which the return is made (exclusive of any amounts previously
billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based upon any differences
between such billings and the taxable gross receipts.
(Ord. 93-10-90, passed 10-12-1993)
§ 5-4.1-6 OVERPAYMENT OF TAX.
   If it shall appear that an amount of tax due under this article has been
paid which was not in fact due, whether as the result of a mistake of face or
an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to
become due, under this article from the taxpayer who made the erroneous
payment. However, no amount erroneously paid more than three years prior to the
filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited.
(Ord. 93-10-90, passed 10-12-1993)
§ 5-4.1-7 LIMITATION ON ACTIONS TO RECOVER TAX DUE.
   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this
article shall be commenced more than three years after the due date of such
amount.
(Ord. 93-10-90, passed 10-12-1993)
ARTICLE 5: MUNICIPAL AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION AND USE TAX
Section
   
5-5-1   Automobile renting occupation tax imposed
   
5-5-2   Automobile renting use tax imposed
§ 5-5-1 AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED.
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
renting automobiles in this village at the rate of 1% of the gross receipts
from such sales made in the course of such business while this article is in
effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-7.
   (B)   Every such person engaged in such business in the village shall file
on or before the last day of each calendar month the report to the State
Department of Revenue required by 35 ILCS 120/3, as amended.
   (C)   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State
Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the
renting of automobiles during the preceding month.
§ 5-5-2 AUTOMOBILE RENTING USE TAX IMPOSED.
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using in this village an
automobile which is rented from a renter outside the state and which is titled
or registered with an agency of the state’s government in this village at the
rate of 1% of the rental price of such automobile while this article is in
effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-8.
   (B)   Every such person engaged in such business in the village shall file
on or before the last day of each calendar month the report to the State
Department of Revenue required by 35 ILCS 120/3, as amended.
   (C)   The tax provided for in this article shall be collected from the
persons whose state address for titling or registration purposes is given as
being in the village.
   (D)   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State
Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the
renting of automobiles during the preceding month.
ARTICLE 6: ATHLETIC CONTESTS AND EXHIBITIONS FOR GAIN
Section
   
5-6-1   License required
   
5-6-2   Gross receipt tax imposed
   
5-6-3   Manner of payment
   
5-6-4   Records required
§ 5-6-1 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person, firm or corporation shall conduct an athletic contest or
exhibition for gain without first obtaining a license as required in
Ch. 10, Art. 2, of this code.
§ 5-6-2 GROSS RECEIPT TAX IMPOSED.
   A tax is imposed upon all persons conducting an athletic contest or
exhibition for gain based on the gross receipts derived from the sale of
admission tickets at a rate of 3% of the gross receipts.
§ 5-6-3 MANNER OF PAYMENT.
   Any person conducting an athletic contest or exhibition shall submit to the
Village Clerk a statement, verified under oath, of the gross receipts of each
such contest or exhibition, within one week after such contest or exhibition
has occurred. The statement shall be accompanied by the payment of a sum equal
to 3% of the gross receipts.
§ 5-6-4 RECORDS REQUIRED.
   For the purpose of enabling the village to inform itself of such gross
receipts, the person liable for the tax shall keep complete and accurate books,
records and accounts in detail of all such gross receipts. The Village Clerk,
or his or her designated agent, may examine on demand all such books, records
and accounts pertaining to such contest or exhibition so held.
ARTICLE 7: MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSE
Section
   
5-7-1   Definitions
   
5-7-2   License required
   
5-7-3   New vehicles or new residents
   
5-7-4   Partial year licenses
   
5-7-5   Late charges
   
5-7-6   Applications; issuance of license
   
5-7-7   License fees
   
5-7-8   Attaching license
   
5-7-9   Transfer of license
   
5-7-10   Replacement licenses
   
5-7-11   Payment of accrued fees required
Editor’s note: Effective on April 30, 2021, the provisions of Chapter 5,
Article 7 are hereby suspended, as set forth in Ordinance No. 2020-11-42,
passed November 16, 2020, to include the motor vehicle license registration
period beginning July 1, 2021 and ending June 30, 2023.
§ 5-7-1 DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions shall apply to all vehicle licensing unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. Any person or his or her agent applying for a license hereunder.
   LATE APPLICATION. Application for a license as set forth herein on or after
July 1 of any odd numbered year by a person who was otherwise subject to this
article on the preceding June 30.
   LEASE. To have the right to use and possess a vehicle through a leasehold
interest.
   LICENSE PERIOD. The two year period beginning July 1 of any odd numbered
year and ending June 30 of the following odd numbered year.
   OWN. To have title to any vehicle as evidenced by a state certificate of
title.
   PARTIAL YEAR. The period between July 1 of any even numbered year and the
following June 30, both dates inclusive.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, business or corporation residing in, or conducting
business or operations at a fixed location within the village boundaries of the
village as they now exist or may be altered hereafter.
   VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle or motorcycle for which license plates are
required and issued by the state and as defined by state statute.
(Ord. 92-04-39, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2001-03-12, passed 3-5-2001; Ord. 2016-
12-49, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 2019-02-04, passed 2-19-2019)
§ 5-7-2 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   The following provisions shall be applicable to all vehicle licensing.
   (A)   Every person who owns or leases a vehicle shall license said vehicle
with the village as provided herein.
   (B)   Every person who owns or leases a vehicle registered with the Illinois
Secretary of State to an address within the village shall license said vehicle
with the village as provide herein.
   (C)   Any person who is obligated to license a vehicle under the terms of
this article shall display the current license sticker on such vehicle.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to license a vehicle or to
display a current vehicle sticker as required under the terms of this article.
(Ord. 92-04-39, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2001-03-12, passed 3-5-2001; Ord. 2016-
12-49, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 2019-02-04, passed 2-19-2019)
§ 5-7-3 NEW VEHICLES OR NEW RESIDENTS.
   (A)   Any person who owns or leases a specific vehicle for the first time,
or shall for the first time, as to that vehicle, become subject to the
provisions of this article through a change in residence, shall have 60 days
after such acquisition or event to apply for a license or license transfer as
otherwise set forth herein. If such application is made after more than 60
days, the late charge set forth herein shall apply beginning on the sixty-first
day.
   (B)   A vehicle required to be licensed under the terms of this article but
licensed under the ordinances of another municipality shall be allowed to
continue to be licensed under the ordinances of the other municipality until
the license from that other municipality expires, but in no case more than a
period of one year. After such period, the vehicle shall become subject to the
provisions of this article and shall be required to be licensed with the
village.
(Ord. 92-04-39, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2001-03-12, passed 3-5-2001; Ord. 2016-
12-49, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 2019-02-04, passed 2-19-2019)
§ 5-7-4 PARTIAL YEAR LICENSES.
   Any person who is required to purchase a vehicle license under the
provisions of this article after June 30 of any even numbered year shall
purchase a partial year license. The fees for a partial year license shall be
50% of the fees set forth in this article.
(Ord. 92-04-39, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2001-03-12, passed 3-5-2001; Ord. 2016-
12-49, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 2019-02-04, passed 2-19-2019)
§ 5-7-5 LATE CHARGES.
   (A)   Any person who becomes obligated to purchase a vehicle license under
the provisions of the ordinances of the village, and does not purchase that
license within the time established by ordinance, shall be obligated to pay an
amount for such license which shall be 150% of the amount which would have
otherwise been paid if the license had been promptly purchased.
   (B)   In addition to payment of any other fees specified in this section,
any person who fails to properly display a current village vehicle sticker
shall be fined $20 for violations that occur between July 1, 2008 and July 31,
2008 and $100 for violations that occur after July 31, 2008. Every year
thereafter, any person who fails to properly display a current village vehicle
sticker by July 1 shall be fined $100.
(Ord. 92-04-39, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 94-03-23, passed 3-8-1994; Ord. 2001-03-
12, passed 3-5-2001; Ord. 2003-12-87, passed 12-15-2003; Ord. 2008-06-27,
passed 6-2-2008; Ord. 2016-12-49, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 2019-02-04, passed 2-
19-2019)
§ 5-7-6 APPLICATIONS; ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   Any person desiring a license for any vehicle shall sign a written
application upon a form provided by the village, setting forth the name and
address of the applicant and a description of the vehicle for which the license
is desired. Such application shall be filed with the village, and upon the
payment of the license fee hereinafter provided, the village shall issue a
license authorizing the licensee to use such vehicle within the village until
the expiration of such license.
(Ord. 92-04-39, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2001-03-12, passed 3-5-2001; Ord. 2016-
12-49, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 2019-02-04, passed 2-19-2019)
§ 5-7-7 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   Biennial fee. Except for the provisions set forth in divisions (B)
through (E) of this section, the biennial fees to be paid for vehicle licenses
shall be as follows:
Buses designed to carry more than ten  $1 per passenger seat, but not less than
passengers                             $65 each vehicle
Freight carrying vehicles, or vehicles designed to carry goods or merchandise
or other articles of a gross weight (including weight of vehicle and maximum
load) of:
   “B” Truck and Recreational Ve$65les
   “D” Truck                    $110
   “F” Truck                    $185
   “H - Z” Truck                $260
Motorcycles (this category shall
include all two-wheeled motor driven   $30 each
vehicles for which a state license
plate is required)
Private passenger automobiles designed $50 each
to carry less than ten passengers
 
   (B)   Persons over 65 years of age. Any person 65 years of age at the time
of application shall pay a biennial license fee of $10 for his or her passenger
automobile, as defined herein, subject to the following:
      (1)   Only one vehicle sticker per senior shall be allowed to be licensed
under this provision.
      (2)   The vehicle so licensed must be for the personal use of the
applicant or spouse.
      (3)   A state certificate of title must be registered in the name of the
applicant and spouse.
      (4)   The village may require such evidence as deemed necessary for the
issuance of such license, in keeping with the above restrictions.
   (C)   Active duty military personnel. All active duty military personnel for
whom a license would otherwise be required shall receive a vehicle license
without charge for each vehicle owned by such military personnel.
   (D)   Taxing bodies. The village’s Park District and the village’s Fire
Protection District shall receive a vehicle license without charge for each
vehicle owned by such taxing body.
(Ord. 92-04-39, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 92-07-83, passed 7-14-1992; Ord. 2001-
03-12, passed 3-5-2001; Ord. 2016-12-49, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 2019-02-04,
passed 2-19-2019)
§ 5-7-8 ATTACHING LICENSE.
   (A)   Passenger vehicles, freight carrying vehicles, buses. Upon application
for a vehicle license and proper payment therefor, the village shall deliver to
the licensee of a passenger automobile, a bus or a freight carrying vehicle a
self-voiding adhesive sticker. It shall be the duty of the licensee to affix
the sticker in the lower right-hand comer, on the inside of the glass part of
the windshield approximately one inch from the right and lower sections of the
frame of such windshield.
   (B)   Motorcycles. Upon application for a motorcycle license, and proper
payment therefor, the village shall deliver to the licensee of such motorcycle
a metal tag which shall be affixed to the real' state license plate.
   (C)   Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any motorized vehicle, although
duly licensed, to be used upon the streets, avenues or alleys of the village
unless such license is attached thereto as set forth herein.
(Ord. 92-04-39, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2001-03-12, passed 3-5-2001; Ord. 2016-
12-49, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 2019-02-04, passed 2-19-2019)
§ 5-7-9 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Any person who has owned or operated a vehicle for which a license has
been purchased, pursuant to this article, and who trades, sells or otherwise
disposes of the licensed vehicle and subsequently comes to own or operate a
substitute vehicle, shall deliver to the village sufficient proof of the former
registration (or the physical destruction of same) and complete an application
for license for the substitute vehicle. A $5 transfer fee shall be charged for
such transfer of village vehicle license.
   (B)   Any license issued hereunder is not transferable upon a change in
ownership of the subject vehicle, and must be removed or destroyed. Purchasers,
subject to this article, shall apply for a new license as set forth herein.
(Ord. 92-04-39, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2001-03-12, passed 3-5-2001; Ord. 2016-
12-49, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 2019-02-04, passed 2-19-2019)
§ 5-7-10 REPLACEMENT LICENSES.
   If a vehicle license becomes lost before affixing such license to the
vehicle, or if such license is damaged or destroyed because of an accident or
broken windshield, such license shall be replaced by the village for a fee of
$5; provided that, the owner of such vehicle shall deliver to the village
sufficient proof of registration and proof of the loss or damage to such
license.
(Ord. 92-04-39, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2001-03-12, passed 3-5-2001; Ord. 2016-
12-49, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 2019-02-04, passed 2-19-2019)
§ 5-7-11 PAYMENT OF ACCRUED FEES REQUIRED.
   All owners or operators of vehicles required to be licensed under this
article who have not paid license fees for previous required years shall not be
entitled to a license for the license period applied for until the license fees
for previous license periods have been paid.
(Ord. 92-04-39, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2001-03-12, passed 3-5-2001; Ord. 2016-
12-49, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 2019-02-04, passed 2-19-2019)
ARTICLE 8: PURCHASES AND CONTRACTS
Section
   
5-8-1   Purchasing agent
   
5-8-2   Contractual liabilities; limitations
   
5-8-3   Purchasing, contracts, soliciting bids and change orders
   
5-8-4   Bidder’s list and pre-qualification
   
5-8-5   Bid opening procedure
   
5-8-6   Award of bid
   
5-8-7   Rejection of bids
   
5-8-8   Bid deposits
   
5-8-9   Tie bids
   
5-8-10   Independent contractors agreement
   
5-8-11   Labor and material bond required for public works contract
   
5-8-12   Performance bond required
   
5-8-13   Execution of contract
   
5-8-14   Contracts or purchases without bid
   
5-8-15   Disposition of village property
   
5-8-16   Records
   
5-8-17   Emergency purchases
   
5-8-18   Joint purchase agreements
Cross-reference:
   Village Manager, see
Ch. 2, Art. 1
§ 5-8-1 PURCHASING AGENT.
   The Village Manager, or such person designated by him or her, shall have
among his or her duties the purchasing of all supplies, materials, fuel,
equipment and services for use by all departments, commissions and agencies of
the village, except where provisions to the contrary are made by the corporate
authorities. Such purchases shall be made in accordance with the provisions of
this article.
§ 5-8-2 CONTRACTUAL LIABILITIES; LIMITATIONS.
   No contract shall be made by the corporate authorities, or by any committee
or member thereof, and no expense shall be incurred by any of the officers,
employees or departments of the village, whether the object of the expenditure
has been ordered by the corporate authorities or not, unless the expenditure is
consistent with the budget ordinance as amended concerning that contract or
expense. Any contract made, or any expense otherwise incurred, in violation of
the provisions of this section shall be null and void as to the village, and no
money belonging thereto shall be paid on account thereof. However, pending the
passage of the annual budget for any fiscal year, the corporate authorities may
authorize the Village Manager to make necessary expenditures for the support
thereof upon the basis of the budget ordinance of the preceding fiscal year.
However, if it is determined by two-thirds vote of the corporate authorities
then holding office, at a regularly scheduled meeting of the corporate
authorities, that it is expedient and in the best public interest to begin
proceedings for the construction of a needed public work, then the provisions
of this section shall not apply to the extent that the corporate authorities
may employ or contract for professional services necessary for the planning and
financing of such public work.
§ 5-8-3 PURCHASING, CONTRACTS, SOLICITING BIDS AND CHANGE ORDERS.
   The procedures of the village regarding purchasing of goods and services,
letting of contracts, soliciting bids for those goods and services and change
orders shall be as follows:
   (A)   (1)   The Purchasing Agent shall develop administrative procedures for
purchases of up to and including $25,000 by contract or otherwise for public
works construction projects, and any Motor Fuel Tax funded expenditures, and
$25,000 for supplies, materials, fuel, equipment and services and other items
utilized by all departments, commissions and boards of the village. The
Purchasing Agent shall have the authority to make purchases of personal
property, acquire interests in real property, and contract for services of up
to and including $25,000, to the extent authorized in accordance with §
5-8-2 herein.
      (2)   All vendors or contractors who sell goods or perform services to
the village shall conform with the requirements of this article as shall govern
the furnishing of goods and services to the village. The Purchasing Agent will
promptly report to the Board all financial transactions other than matters
handled through the petty cash fund. The Board shall consider and, where
appropriate, approve the transactions entered into under the procedures
developed by the Purchasing Agent. Contracts entered into by the Purchasing
Agent where all funds have not been paid can be canceled by the Board of
Trustees.
   (B)   Except as provided in §
5-8-14, contracts for public works construction projects or Motor Fuel Tax
funded expenditures for more than $25,000 and purchases of goods or services
for more than $25,000, except those for professional services, shall be made on
the basis of awarding of contracts to the lowest responsible bidder after
advertising for bids has taken place. By a two-thirds vote of the trustees
elected, this requirement of bidding may be waived.
   (C)   (1)   Notice inviting bids shall be published at least once in a
newspaper generally circulated within the village at least five days prior to
the date set for receiving such proposals; provided, however, that, where the
goods to be purchased are of a specialized nature, the notice may be published
in a publication pertaining to those particular goods. Such notice shall
include a general description of the articles to be purchased or the services
to be performed, shall state where bid blanks and specifications may be
secured, including the cost, if any, of the specifications, the amount of bid
deposit required, and the time and location for opening bids.
      (2)   In calling for bids of public works projects, the notice shall
provide that the general prevailing rate of wages shall be paid for each craft
or type of worker needed to perform such work, as provided by statute.
      (3)   The notice shall be placed in a prominent place in the village
building.
   (D)   The Purchasing Agent may approve increases in public works
construction contract amounts due to change orders not to exceed in total 5% of
the awarded contract amount and change orders extending the time of completion
of public works construction contracts for not more than 30 days without prior
Village Board approval. However, no single change order shall exceed $10,000,
except where a delay in approving such change order would result in a financial
penalty or would create a serious emergency within the village which would
endanger the health or safety of its citizens. In such event, the provisions of
§
5-8-17 shall be used. The Purchasing Agent shall report his or her actions in
making such approvals at the next regular scheduled Village Board meeting.
(Ord. 91-09-65, passed 9-10-1991; Ord. 2005-11-61, passed 11-21-2005; Ord.
2016-07-34, passed 7-18-2016; Ord. 2017-09-55, passed 9-18- 2017; Ord. 2024-02-
06, passed 2-5-2024)
§ 5-8-4 BIDDERS’ LIST AND PRE-QUALIFICATION.
   (A)   The Purchasing Agent shall also solicit sealed bids from all
responsible prospective suppliers who have requested their names to be added to
a “Bidders’ List”, which the Agent shall maintain, by sending them a copy of
such newspaper notice or such other notice as will acquaint them with the
proposed purchase or sale.
   (B)   In any case, invitations sent to the vendors on the bidders’ list
shall be limited to commodities or services typically provided by them.
   (C)   The Purchasing Agent may establish pre-qualification standards and
procedures and may require prospective bidders to pre-qualify themselves for
bidding on village contracts. The purpose of such pre-qualification shall be to
save the time of bidders who would be found unqualified before they prepare
individual bids. Another purpose for such pre-qualification shall be to save
the time of the village in reviewing the bids of unqualified entities and to
allow for a more expeditious bidding procedure. The standards for such pre-
qualification shall be the same as those used to award a bid, except for the
absence of any bid price. If a bidder participates in a pre-qualification
process and is found to be unqualified, the bidder shall be notified in writing
of this determination and shall be given an opportunity to respond in writing
and may be accorded a hearing. The Purchasing Agent may determine that for any
purchase or class of purchases, only bidders which have been pre-qualified
shall be permitted to submit bids.
§ 5-8-5 BID OPENING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Bids shall be submitted sealed to the Purchasing Agent and shall be
identified as bids for the specific proposal or project submitted.
   (B)   Bids shall be opened in public at the time and location stated in the
notice inviting bids.
   (C)   A tabulation of all bids received shall be made by the Purchasing
Agent and forwarded to the corporate authorities.
§ 5-8-6 AWARD OF BID.
   (A)   The corporate authorities shall award the bid to the lowest
responsible bidder.
   (B)   In determining “lowest responsible bidder”, in addition to price, the
corporate authorities shall consider the following:
      (1)   The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract or provide the service required;
      (2)   Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service
promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference;
      (3)   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and
efficiency of the bidder;
      (4)   The quality of performance of previous contracts or services;
      (5)   The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and
ordinances relating to the contract or service;
      (6)   The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the
bidder to perform the contract or provide the service;
      (7)   The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies, or
contractual services to the particular use required;
      (8)   The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service
for the use of the subject of the contract; and
      (9)   The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid.
§ 5-8-7 REJECTION OF BIDS.
   The corporate authorities shall have the authority to reject all bids, parts
of bids or all bids for any one or more supplies or contractual services
included in the proposed contract, when the public interest will be served
thereby.
§ 5-8-8 BID DEPOSITS.
   Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to the return of bid deposits
immediately after action is taken on the bids by the corporate authorities or
sooner if authorized by the Purchasing Agent. The corporate authorities may
hold the bid deposit of a bidder chosen as the alternate successful bidder
until the successful bidder has signed the contract, but no longer than 30 days
after the award of the bid. A successful bidder shall forfeit any bid deposit
upon failure on his or her part to enter into a contract with the village
within ten days after the award of the bid.
§ 5-8-9 TIE BIDS.
   If any bids are received for the same total amount or unit price, quality,
service and all other pertinent facts being equal, the contract may be awarded
by drawing lots in public.
§ 5-8-10 INDEPENDENT CONTRACTORS AGREEMENT.
   All contracts by independent contractors shall either contain therein
approximately the following terms and conditions or shall, as a result of their
enactment, have such terms and conditions made a part thereof as if they were
contained therein:
   “The independent contractor hereby agrees:
   (A)   To comply with all laws, regulations and rules promulgated by any
federal, state, county, municipal and/or other governmental unit or regulatory
body now in effect, or which may be in effect during the performance of the
work to which reference is made above. Included within the scope of the laws,
regulations and rules referred to in this paragraph, but in nowise to operate
as a limitation, are all forms of traffic regulations, public utility and
Intrastate and Interstate Commerce Commission regulations, Workers’
Compensation Laws, the Social Security Act of the Federal Government and any of
its titles, FEPC or FEOC statutory provisions and rules and regulations.
   (B)   To protect, indemnify, hold and save harmless and defend the village
against any and all claims, costs, causes, actions and expenses, including but
not limited to attorney’s fees incurred by reason of a lawsuit or claim for
compensation arising in favor of any person, including the employees or
officers of independent contractors or subcontractors of the first and second
parties, on account of personal injuries or death, or damages to property
occurring, growing out of, incident to, or resulting directly or indirectly
from the performance by the independent contractor hereunder, whether such
loss, damage, injury or liability is contributed to by the negligence of the
village or by premises themselves or any equipment thereon whether latent or
patent, or from other causes whatsoever, except that the independent contractor
shall have no liability or damages or the costs incident thereto caused by the
sole negligence of the village.
   (C)   To keep in force, to the satisfaction of the village, at all times
during the performance of the work referred to above, public liability
insurance and automobile liability insurance with bodily injury limits of not
less than $500,000, and property damage insurance with limits of not less than
$300,000. The independent contractor shall furnish proof of such insurance
coverage and may be required to cause the village to be named as an additional
insured prior to execution of any contract. The village may, in specific bid
documents, require higher levels of insurance coverage. The independent
contractor may seek to have the village waive this requirement of conventional
insurance if it has established a self-insurance program supported by
reasonable reserves.
   (D)   To furnish any affidavit or certificate, in connection with the work
covered by this agreement as provided by law.
   (E)   To indemnify the village for any loss it may sustain by theft or other
cause from the acts of negligence of the employees of the independent
contractor or of the subcontractors.”
§ 5-8-11 LABOR AND MATERIAL BOND REQUIRED FOR PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACT.
   (A)   In making contracts for public work of any kind to be performed in the
village, the contractor for such work shall furnish, supply and deliver a bond
with good and sufficient sureties to the village in the amount determined by
the corporate authorities. Such bond shall be conditioned for the completion of
the contract, for the payment of material used in such work and for all labor
performed in such work, whether by subcontractor or otherwise.
   (B)   Each bond is deemed to contain the following provisions whether such
provisions are inserted in such bond or not:
      “The principal and sureties on this bond agree that all the undertakings,
covenants, terms, conditions and agreements of the principal and the village
will be performed and fulfilled and to pay all persons, firms and corporations
having contracts with the principal or with sub-contractors, all just claims
due them under the provisions of such contracts for labor performed or
materials furnished in the performance of the contract on account of which this
bond is given, when such claims are not satisfied out of the contract price of
the contract on account of which this bond is given, after final settlement
between the village and the principal has been made.”
   (C)   The bond required by this section may be acquired from the company,
agent or broker of the contractor’s choice, subject to the right of reasonable
approval or disapproval by the corporate authorities.
§ 5-8-12 PERFORMANCE BOND REQUIRED.
   (A)   In making contracts for public work of any kind to be performed in the
village, the contractor for such work shall furnish, supply and deliver a
performance bond in the full amount of the contract to the corporate
authorities.
   (B)   Such bond may be required to further stipulate such provisions as will
guarantee the faithful performance that the general prevailing rate of wages
will be paid to all laborers, workers and mechanics employed by or on behalf of
the village engaged in the construction of public works, as provided by
statute.
§ 5-8-13 EXECUTION OF CONTRACT.
   The Village President and the Village Clerk, or any other person designated
and authorized by the corporate authorities, may execute any contract on behalf
of the village.
§ 5-8-14 CONTRACTS OR PURCHASES WITHOUT BID.
   The provisions of §
5-8-3(B) and (C), and §§
5-8-4 through
5-8-9 and any requirement to contract for goods or services based upon bids
shall not apply to the following:
   (A)   Contracts for professional services, including but not limited to
contracts with architects, attorneys, engineers, physicians, psychologists, and
surveyors;
   (B)   Contracts for services with individuals possessing a high degree of
skill where the ability or fitness of the person is an important requirement,
such as construction manager;
   (C)   Purchases which may only be made economically from a single source;
   (D)   Contracts for the maintenance or servicing of, or the provision of
repair parts for equipment where the provision of such parts, maintenance or
servicing can best or must be performed by the manufacturer or an authorized
service agent;
   (E)   Purchases of personal property which must be compatible with the
existing equipment or systems owned by the village;
   (F)   Purchases and contracts for the use, purchase, movement, or
installation of data processing equipment, software, hardware, or tele-
communications and interconnect equipment, software and services;
   (G)   Contracts for the purchase and servicing of duplicating machines and
supplies;
   (H)   Purchases made through a public auction, close-out sale, bankruptcy
sale or other similar sale at a cost below the market cost in the community;
   (I)   Purchases made through the use of a trade in of village property;
   (J)   Contracts for the printing of bonds, tax warrants and other evidences
of indebtedness;
   (K)   Contracts for services through job order contract created or
established by the village or another governmental unit and which is determined
would result in an equal or better opportunity for the furnishing of such
services than through competitive bid by the village;
   (L)   Contracts for the purchase of personal property or services though a
joint purchase agreement with or through other governmental units, when
determined that the intergovernmental purchase, whether accomplished with or
without bid, would result in an equal or better opportunity for the furnishing
of such goods or services than through competitive bid by the village;
   (M)   Purchases, which because of the unique characteristics of the personal
property or the needs of the village are not susceptible to competitive
bidding;
   (N)   Contracts extended pursuant to options to renew for additional periods
of time at a fixed price; and
   (O)   Extension of contracts that have originally been bid and can be
renewed for an additional period of time at a competitive fixed price.
(Ord. 2016-07-34, passed 7-18-2016)
§ 5-8-15 DISPOSITION OF VILLAGE PROPERTY.
   (A)   Disposition of village property under $1,000 in value.
      (1)   The Village Manager is authorized to dispose of any personal
property of the village with an original purchase value under $1,000, when in
his or her opinion such personal property is no longer necessary or useful to
the village. The disposition of such property may be completed by any of the
following methods:
         (a)   Sale of the personal property in such a manner as the Village
Manager may designate including, but not limited to auction, internet auction,
direct sale, internet direct sale, or sale through an agent or broker. Such
sale may be made with or without advertising the sale.
         (b)   Conversion of the personal property into some other form that is
useful to the village by using materials or parts from the personal property.
         (c)   A trade-in or conveyance of the personal property as part of the
purchase price on the purchase of any similar new article, provided however,
that no property shall be used as a trade-in for any purchase of an article
over $25,000 in value except upon the receipt of a competitive bid unless such
competitive bidding is waived or not applicable, as provided by ordinance.
      (2)   When the original purchase value of the personal property is less
than $500, approved by resolution passed by a simple majority of the corporate
authorities then holding office, or when the Village Manager has attempted to
dispose of the personal property as provided herein and has been unable to do
so, the Village Manager is authorized to donate such personal property to
another governmental agency, not-for-profit or charitable organization.
      (3)   The Village Manager is authorized to dispose of any village
personal property that is no longer necessary or useful to the village and has
a value under $100.
      (4)   Whenever any personal property is disposed of under divisions (A)
(1), (2) or (3) above, the Village Manager shall report such disposition to the
corporate authorities in writing within seven days of disposition. The Village
Clerk shall maintain a list of all surplus property disposed of pursuant to
this section.
   (B)   Disposition of village property over $1,000 in value.
      (1)   When, in the opinion of the Village Board of Trustees, any village-
owned personal property with an original purchase value over $1,000 is no
longer necessary or useful to the village, such personal property may be
disposed of by resolution passed by a simple majority of the Village Board then
holding office.
      (2)   The disposition of such personal property may be completed in any
of the following ways:
         (a)   Sale of the personal property in such a manner as the Village
Board may designate including, but not limited to auction, internet auction,
direct sale, internet direct sale, or sale through an agent or broker. Such
sale may be made with or without advertising the sale as the Village Board may
direct.
         (b)   Conversion of the personal property into some other form that is
useful to the village by using materials or parts from the personal property.
         (c)   A trade-in or conveyance of the personal property as part of the
purchase price on the purchase of any similar new article, provided however,
that no property shall be used as a trade-in for any purchase of an article
over $25,000 in value except upon the receipt of a competitive bid unless such
competitive bidding is waived or not applicable, as provided by ordinance.
         (d)   Donation of such personal property to another governmental
agency, not-for-profit or charitable organization or to otherwise dispose of
such property and determined by the Village Board to be in the best interests
of the village.
   (C)   Disposition of village property to Village of Carol Stream employees.
Disposition of village personal property to Village of Carol Stream employees
is prohibited.
(Ord. 2019-02-06, passed 2-19-2019)
§ 5-8-16 RECORDS.
   The Purchasing Agent shall keep a record of all bids submitted to the
village and such records shall be open to public inspection.
§ 5-8-17 EMERGENCY PURCHASES.
   Where, in the opinion of the Purchasing Agent, a serious emergency exists
within the village which will endanger the health or safety of its citizens,
the Purchasing Agent may make emergency purchases which exceed $20,000. Prior
to making such a purchase, the Purchasing Agent shall attempt to notify the
members of the Village Board regarding the pending purchase. The Purchasing
Agent may not undertake such a contract or purchase if a majority of the
members of the Village Board whom he or she is able to contact indicate that
they would not confirm and ratify the action of the Purchasing Agent in making
this purchase under emergency circumstances. The Purchasing Agent shall report
his or her actions in making such an emergency purchase at the next regular
scheduled Village Board meeting and provide full details as to the purchase and
the circumstances under which the purchase was made.
(Ord. 2005-11-61, passed 11-21-2005)
§ 5-8-18 JOINT PURCHASE AGREEMENTS.
   The Purchasing Agent may enter into joint purchasing agreements for the
purchase of supplies, personal property and services with other governmental
units, as provided by statute, when authorized by the corporate authorities,
without individually undertaking the competitive bidding requirement set forth
within this article, provided that the mechanism for the intergovernmental
purchase provides for an equal or better opportunity for providers of goods and
services to competitively bid for the furnishing of such goods or services to
the governmental bodies.
ARTICLE 9: HOTEL/MOTEL USE TAX
Section
   
5-9-1   Definitions
   
5-9-2   Tax; incidence; payment; collection
   
5-9-3   Books and records; inspections; contents
   
5-9-4   Reporting; transmittal; penalty
   
5-9-5   Proceeds
   
5-9-6   Exemption
   
5-9-7   Penalties
   
5-9-8   Severability
§ 5-9-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following words as used herein shall be
construed to have the meanings herein ascribed.
   HOTEL OR MOTEL. Any building or buildings in which the public may, for rent,
obtain living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations. The term
includes inns, motels, tourist homes or courts, lodging houses, rooming houses
and apartment houses.
   HOTEL OR MOTEL ROOM. A room within a structure offered for rental on a daily
basis and containing facilities for sleeping.
   OWNER. Any person having an ownership interest in or conducting the
operation of a hotel or motel or receiving the consideration for the rental of
such hotel or motel room.
   PERMANENT RESIDENT. Any person who occupies or has rented any hotel or motel
room for at least 30 consecutive days.
   RESIDENT EMPLOYEE. Any person who works and lives in the same hotel or
motel.
(Ord. 2008-08-37, passed 8-4-2008; Ord. 2018-06-22, passed 6-18-2018)
§ 5-9-2 TAX; INCIDENCE; PAYMENT; COLLECTION.
   (A)   Tax imposed. A tax is hereby levied and imposed upon the use and
privilege of renting, leasing, or letting a hotel or motel room within the
village at a rate of 5% of the room rental rate (not including taxes or other
non-room rental charges added to the hotel or motel bill), for each such hotel
or motel room rented for every 24-hour period or fraction thereof.
   (B)   Incidence of tax. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment
of the tax is to be borne by the person who seeks the privilege of occupying
the hotel or motel room, such person hereinafter referred as to as renter.
   (C)   Payment of tax. The tax herein levied shall be paid in addition to any
and all other taxes and charges. It shall be the duty of the owner of every
hotel or motel to secure the tax from the renter of the hotel or motel room and
to pay the tax over to the village under the procedures prescribed in this
article.
   (D)   Collection. Every person required to collect the tax levied by this
article shall secure the tax from the renter at the time he or she collects the
rental payment for the hotel or motel room. The amount due under the tax
provided in this article shall be stated separately upon the invoice, receipt
or other statement or memorandum given to the renter at the time of payment.
(Ord. 2008-08-37, passed 8-4-2008; Ord. 2018-06-22, passed 6-18-2018)
§ 5-9-3 BOOKS AND RECORDS; INSPECTIONS; CONTENTS.
   (A)   The Village Finance Director, or any person certified by him or her as
his or her deputy or representative, may enter the premises of any hotel or
motel for inspection of books and records in order to effectuate the proper
administration of this article and to assure the enforcement of the collection
of the tax imposed.
   (B)   No person shall prevent, hinder or interfere with the Finance Director
or his or her duly authorized deputy or representative in the discharge of his
or her duties under this article.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of every owner to keep accurate and complete
books and records to which the Finance Director or his or her duly authorized
deputy or representative shall at all times have full access, which records
shall include a daily sheet showing:
      (1)   The number of hotel or motel rooms rented during the 24-hour
period, including multiple rental of the same hotel or motel room where such
shall occur; and
      (2)   The actual hotel or motel receipts collected for the date in
question.
(Ord. 2018-06-22, passed 6-18-2018)
§ 5-9-4 REPORTING; TRANSMITTAL; PENALTY.
   (A)   Monthly reporting. The owner or owners of each hotel or motel within
the village shall file monthly tax returns, on a form approved by the village,
showing tax receipts received with respect to each hotel or motel during each
reporting period. The returns shall be due on or before the last day of the
calendar month next following the end of the monthly filing period. All returns
shall be for full calendar months as provided herein.
   (B)   Transmittal of tax. The tax shall be due on the day the monthly return
is due as provided herein. At the time of filing such returns, the owner shall
pay to the Finance Director all taxes, interest and penalties, if any, due for
the period to which the return applies.
   (C)   Penalty. If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty at
the rate of 1% of total taxes due per 30-day period, or any portion thereof,
shall be added and collected.
(Ord. 2018-06-22, passed 6-18-2018)
§ 5-9-5 PROCEEDS.
   All proceeds resulting from the collection of the tax under this article,
including interest and penalties, shall be paid into the Treasury of the
village and shall be credited to and deposited in the General Fund of the
village.
(Ord. 2008-08-37, passed 8-4-2008; Ord. 2018-06-22, passed 6-18-2018)
§ 5-9-6 EXEMPTION.
   The tax imposed by § 5-9-2 of this article shall not apply to permanent
residents or resident employees.
(Ord. 2018-06-22, passed 6-18-2018)
§ 5-9-7 PENALTIES.
   Any owner or person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this article
shall be punished, upon conviction thereof, by a fine of not less than $25 nor
more than $500 for the first offense, and not less than $50 nor more than $500
for the second and each subsequent offense in any 180-day period. A separate
and distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day upon which said
violation shall continue.
(Ord. 2018-06-22, passed 6-18-2018)
§ 5-9-8 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this article and the application
thereof to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
(Ord. 2018-06-22, passed 6-18-2018)
ARTICLE 10: REAL ESTATE TRANSFER TAX
Section
   
5-10-1   Tax imposed
   
5-10-2   Liability for tax
   
5-10-3   Lien: enforcement
   
5-10-4   Purchase of stamps
   
5-10-5   Filing of declaration
   
5-10-6   Exemptions
   
5-10-7   Real estate transfer tax stamps
   
5-10-8   Recordation of deeds
   
5-10-9   Definitions
   
5-10-10   Proceeds of tax
   
5-10-11   Interest and penalties
   
5-10-12   Civil liability for tax
   
5-10-13   Fine for violation
   
5-10-14   Other sum due the village
   
5-10-15   Refund of tax
   
5-10-16   Severability
   
5-10-17   Lost or destroyed stamp
§ 5-10-1 TAX IMPOSED.
   A tax is imposed on the privilege of transferring title to real estate
within the corporate limits of the village, on the privilege of transferring a
beneficial interest in real property which is the subject of a trust, and on
the privilege of transferring a controlling interest in a real estate entity
owning property located in the village, at the rate of $3 for each $1,000 of
value or fraction thereof stated in the declaration provided for in this
article. REAL ESTATE shall mean both land and any structures permanently
affixed to the land. The tax herein levied shall be in addition to any and all
other taxes. The tax is due if the transfer is made by one or more related
transactions or involves one or more persons or entities and whether or not a
document is recorded. The fee to obtain an exempt stamp is $25.
(Ord. 92-04-41, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2004-06-33, passed 6-7-2004; Ord. 2005-
08-45, passed 8-15-2005; Ord. 2009-11-62, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 5-10-2 LIABILITY FOR TAX.
   The ultimate incidence, and liability for payment, of the tax imposed by
this article shall be borne by the grantor of any deed and the grantor,
assignor or transferor of any instrument conveying the beneficial interest in
real property which is the subject of a land trust, or the controlling interest
in a real estate entity subject to this article or, in the case of a Sheriff’s
sale, or a sale by tax deed the tax imposed by the article shall be borne by
the buyer. Where the buyer receives the property by Sheriff’s sale or a tax
deed, the village shall make a reasonable determination of the liability for
the tax based upon the rate of $3 for each $1,000 of value or fraction thereof
received by the buyer in the transaction. The value states by the buyer shall
be considered.
(Ord. 92-04-41, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2004-06-33, passed 6-7-2004; Ord. 2005-
08-45, passed 8-15-2005; Ord. 2009-11-62, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 5-10-3 LIEN: ENFORCEMENT.
   In the event a deed or trust document is filed for recordation without the
revenue stamps provided for by this article, a lien is declared against the
real property conveyed or transferred in the amount of the tax. The fact that
the deed or trust document does not contain a village revenue stamp in an
amount equal to the transfer tax imposed pursuant to this article shall
constitute constructive notice of the lien. The village may record a lien for
the non-payment of the tax. The lien may be enforced by proceedings to
foreclose pursuant to the Illinois Compiled Statutes. Nothing contained in this
article shall be interpreted as preventing the village from collecting the tax
imposed herein pursuant to a civil cause of action, including interest and
penalties as provided for in this article.
(Ord. 92-04-41, passed 4-14-1992)
§ 5-10-4 PURCHASE OF STAMPS.
   The tax levied by this article shall be paid by the purchase of tax stamps,
or other designation determined by the village through the Director of Finance
or his or her agent. The payment of the tax shall be denoted by an adhesive
stamp or stamps affixed to the face of the deed or trust document, or as
otherwise determined and designated by the village.
(Ord. 92-04-41, passed 4-14-1992)
§ 5-10-5 FILING OF DECLARATION.
   (A)   At such time as the tax levied by this article is paid, there shall be
filed with the Director of Finance a declaration, on a form prescribed by the
Director of Finance. The declaration shall be signed by at least one of the
sellers and also by at least one of the buyers in the transaction or by the
attorneys or agents for the sellers and buyers. The declaration shall state
information including, but not limited to:
      (1)   The value of the real property or beneficial interest in real
property located in the village so transferred;
      (2)   The parcel identifying number of the property;
      (3)   The legal description of the property;
      (4)   The date of the deed, the date the transfer was effected, or the
date of the trust document;
      (5)   The type of deed, transfer or trust document;
      (6)   The common address of the property;
      (7)   The type of improvement, if any, on the property;
      (8)   Information as to whether the transfer is between related
individuals or corporate affiliates or is a compulsory transaction;
      (9)   The lot size or acreage;
      (10)   The value of personal property sold with the real estate;
      (11)   The year the contract was initiated if an installment sale; and
      (12)   The name, address, telephone number of the person preparing the
declaration.
   (B)   A deed, a document transferring a controlling interest in real
property, or a trust document shall not be accepted for recordation unless it
is accompanied by a declaration containing all the information requested in the
declaration. A copy of the State of Illinois Real Estate Transfer Tax
Declaration form may be filed with the village in satisfaction of this
requirement.
(Ord. 92-04-41, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 93-02-18, passed 2-23-1993; Ord. 2004-
06-33, passed 6-7-2004)
§ 5-10-6 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The following shall be exempt from the tax levied by this article:
      (1)   Deed or trust documents involving the exchange of real estate from
one spouse to another as a result of a duly executed divorce;
      (2)   Deed or trust documents which secure debt or other obligation and
through which no transfer of possession or use occurs;
      (3)   Deeds or trust documents which, without additional consideration,
confirm, correct, modify or supplement, a deed or trustee document previously
recorded;
      (4)   Deed or trust documents where the actual consideration is less than
$100;
      (5)   Tax deeds;
      (6)   Deeds or trust documents of release of property, which is security
for a debt or other obligation and deeds in the case of a foreclosure or in
lieu of a foreclosure in which the buyer does not receive actual consideration
in addition to the release of the debt;
      (7)   Deeds of partition;
      (8)   Deeds or trust documents made pursuant to mergers, consolidations
or transfers or sales of substantially all of the assets of corporations
pursuant to plans of reorganization;
      (9)   Deed or trust documents made by a subsidiary corporation to its
parent corporation for no consideration other than the cancellation or
surrender of the subsidiary’s stock;
      (10)   Deeds wherein there is an actual trade or exchange or real estate
and trust documents wherein there is an actual trade or exchange of beneficial
interests; except that, the money difference or money’s worth paid from one to
the other shall not be exempt from the tax;
      (11)   Deeds representing transfers subject to the imposition of a
documentary stamp tax imposed by the government of the United States; except
that, such deeds shall not be exempt from filing the declaration; and
      (12)   Deeds or trust documents involving real estate acquired by or from
any governmental body, but not including transfers made in Sheriff’s sales or
sales by Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac. This exemption, however, shall not be
granted where the transfer is made to or from a governmental body which leases
or expresses an intent to lease to a majority of the land, or in the case of a
building, the structure, to a non-governmental body.
   (B)   Every deed or trust document which is tax exempt pursuant to this
section shall be presented to the Director of Finance so as to be appropriately
marked by the Director to be eligible for recordation without the payment of
tax. At such time as a deed or trust document is presented to the Director,
pursuant to this section, there shall be filed with the Director a certificate
setting forth the facts which justify the exemption of the deed or trust
document presented. The certificate shall be executed on behalf of either the
grantor or grantee and shall be on a form provided by the Director.
(Ord. 92-04-41, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 93-02-18, passed 2-23-1993; Ord. 98-06-
39, passed 6-1-1998; Ord. 2009-11-62, passed 11-16-2009)
§ 5-10-7 REAL ESTATE TRANSFER TAX STAMPS.
   (A)   The tax herein levied and imposed shall be collected by the Director
of Finance through the sale of real estate transfer tax stamps, which shall be
caused to be prepared by the Director in such quantities as the Director may
from time to time prescribe. Such stamps shall be available for the sale at,
and during the regular business hours of, the village offices and the offices
of such agents as the village may designate. For the purpose of reviewing the
request for the stamps, the village shall process a request within two working
days. Upon payment of the tax herein levied and imposed, the stamps so
purchased shall be affixed to the deed or trust document or other instrument of
conveyance as required by this article. Any person so using and affixing a
stamp shall cancel it and so deface it as to render it unfit for re-use by
marking it with his initials and the day, month and year when the affixing
occurs. Such markings shall be made by writing or stamping in indelible ink or
by perforating with a machine or punch; however, the stamp(s) shall not be so
defaced as to prevent ready determination of its denomination and genuineness.
The Carol Stream Real Estate Transfer Tax Stamp shall be of a design determined
by the Village Manager.
   (B)   The village hereby determines to establish an administrative fee upon
the issuance of exempt stamps under its real estate transfer tax ordinance. The
village has determined that there are substantial administrative costs in
determining whether an individual seeking an exempt stamp under the village’s
real estate transfer tax ordinance is entitled to such a stamp. Because the
amount of the tax due under the village’s real estate transfer tax ordinance
may be quite substantial, individuals understandably may make an application
for an exempt stamp when there is a serious question as to whether the
applicant is entitled to the tax exemption. The village has not previously made
a charge for evaluating and processing such applications for tax exemptions,
and the cost of such services has been substantial, and no fee has been charged
previously for such service. The fee payable with an application for a real
estate tax exemption stamp shall be $25.
(Ord. 92-04-41, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2009-04-14, passed 4-6-2009)
§ 5-10-8 RECORDATION OF DEEDS.
   After the effective date of this article, no deed conveying real property,
no document transferring a controlling interest in a real estate entity, and no
trust document transferring any beneficial interest in real property which is
the subject of a land trust within the corporate limits of the village shall be
entitled to recordation by the Recorder of Deeds, DuPage County, Illinois,
unless such deed shall bear either a village real estate transfer tax stamp in
the amount required by this article, or an exemption mark from the Village
Director of Finance.
(Ord. 92-04-41, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2004-06-33, passed 6-7-2004)
§ 5-10-9 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BENEFICIAL INTEREST. Includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   The beneficial interest in an Illinois land trust;
      (2)   The lessee interest in a ground lease (including any interest of
the lessee in the related improvements) that provides for a term of 30 or more
years when all options to renew or extend are included, whether or not any
portion of the term has expired; or
      (3)   The indirect interest in real property as reflected by a
controlling interest in a real estate entity.
   CONTROLLING INTEREST. More than 50% of the fair market value of all
ownership interests or beneficial interests in a real estate entity.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock
company, joint venture, public or private corporation, or a receiver, executor,
trustee, conservator, or other representative appointed by order of any court.
   REAL ESTATE ENTITY. Any person, including, but not limited to, any
partnership, corporation, limited liability company, trust, other entity, or
multi-tiered entity, that exists or acts substantially for the purpose of
holding directly or indirectly title to or beneficial interest in real
property. There is a rebuttable presumption that an entity is a real estate
entity if it owns, directly or indirectly, real property having a fair market
value greater than 75% of the total fair market value of all of the entity’s
assets, determined without deduction for any mortgage, lien or encumbrance.
   RECORDATION. The recording of deeds or trust documents by the Recorder of
Deeds, DuPage County, Illinois.
   TRUST DOCUMENT. A document required to be recorded pursuant to the Illinois
Land Trust Recordation Act.
   VALUE. The amount of the full actual consideration for the real property,
including the amount of any lien or liens on the real property assumed by the
grantee or purchaser. VALUE also includes the estimated purchase price of any
new construction and/or remodeling the effectuation of which is a term or
condition of the sale of the real estate, whether expressed or implied, for
which a real estate transfer declaration, as defined in §
5-10-5, has been filed. The new construction and/or remodeling will be
performed by the seller or under the direction of the seller, or by an entity
under the control of the seller or the seller’s heirs, executors,
administrators, beneficiaries, representatives, successors and assigns and will
be paid for by the seller, or at the direction of the seller, or by an entity
under the control of the seller or the seller’s heirs, executors,
administrators, beneficiaries, successors and assigns and wherein said
residential new construction and/or residential remodeling does commence within
two years of the closing date of the transaction for which the aforementioned
real estate transfer declaration was filed. In the event that the construction
does not commence within this time period, a refund for the tax paid for the
contemplated construction or remodeling will, upon application, be made.
(Ord. 92-04-41, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2004-06-33, passed 6-7-2004; Ord. 2005-
08-45, passed 8-15-2005)
§ 5-10-10 PROCEEDS OF TAX.
   All proceeds resulting from the collection of the tax imposed by this
article, including interest and penalties, shall be paid into the treasury of
the village and shall be credited to and deposited in the general fund of the
village.
(Ord. 92-04-41, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2004-06-33, passed 6-7-2004)
§ 5-10-11 INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   In the event that any person fails to pay the tax required by this article
or reports an amount of tax due, then in addition to the amount of the tax,
interest shall accumulate and be due and payable by that person upon the tax at
the rate of 1% per month commencing as of the first day following the day when
the deed or trust deed was recorded or the trust document was accepted by the
Trustee. In addition, a penalty of 25% of the tax and interest due shall be
assessed and collected against any person or entity who fails to pay the tax
imposed by this article or conspires to cause the payment of less than the tax
due.
(Ord. 92-04-41, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2005-08-45, passed 8-15-2005)
§ 5-10-12 CIVIL LIABILITY FOR TAX.
   In the event that any person fails to pay to the Finance Director the tax
required hereunder when the tax shall be due, or reports an amount of tax due
which is less than the amount actually due, or conspires to or takes action to
cause or permit a false or incomplete payment to be made, said person shall be
liable to the village for such tax, together with interest and penalties. The
village may bring an action to collect such tax, interest, and penalties in any
court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 92-04-41, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2005-08-45, passed 8-15-2005)
§ 5-10-13 FINE FOR VIOLATION.
   In addition to the other provisions of this article, any person found guilty
in a court of competent jurisdiction of violating, disobeying, providing false
or incomplete information, omitting, neglecting or refusing to pay the tax
provided for in this article or any amendment to this article, or conspiring to
violate or evade this article or any amendment to this article, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $750 for each separate
and distinct offense and may be required to pay the amount of tax, interest,
and penalty due.
(Ord. 92-04-41, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2005-08-45, passed 8-15-2005)
§ 5-10-14 OTHER SUM DUE THE VILLAGE.
   The Director of Finance shall issue no real estate transfer tax stamps to
any person or entity unless the most current billing including the final
billing for water and sewer assessments for the real estate or beneficial
interest in real estate which is the subject of the proposed transfer is paid
in full. In addition, the Director of Finance shall issue no real estate
transfer tax stamps to any person or entity unless all outstanding amounts due
the village by the grantor or relating to the property to be transferred and
arising from any unpaid or due account, charge or liquidated claim of any kind
are paid in full. Payment for any outstanding balances due to the village shall
be in the form of cash, personal check, money orders or a cashier’s check. The
applicant shall also, if requested, certify that any recycling or garbage
collection container issued shall remain on the property.
(Ord. 92-04-41, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 97-11-79, passed 11-3-1997)
§ 5-10-15 REFUND OF TAX.
   A grantor, seller, assignor or transferor who has paid the tax provided for
in this article shall be entitled to a refund of such tax in the event such
grantor, seller, assignor or transferor satisfies all of the following
requirements:
   (A)   He or she was the grantor or occupier of a property, including
residential, commercial or industrial property within the corporate limits of
the village as to which taxes were paid pursuant to this article;
   (B)   He or she did not rent or lease any portion of the previously owned
dwelling or real estate to another person or persons and must have resided in
the house being sold for a period of one year within the last three years prior
to sale;
   (C)   He or she has purchased and occupies at the date of the application
for refund another property within the village as a replacement for the
property sold; and
   (D)   He or she makes the application for refund not later than one year
after the tax payment has been made and provides adequate evidence of the
fulfillment of each requirement of a refund.
(Ord. 92-04-41, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 93-02-18, passed 2-23-1993; Ord. 2005-
08-45, passed 8-15-2005)
§ 5-10-16 SEVERABILITY.
   If any clause, sentence, section, provision or part of this article or the
application thereof to persons or circumstance shall be adjusted to be
unconstitutional, the remainder of this article or its application to person or
circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid shall not be
affected thereby. The village specifically intends that if an exemption
contained in §
5-10-6 or the refund contained in §
5-10-15 is held to be invalid that the tax should be collected from the exempt
class or the refund shall not apply and the article without the exemption shall
remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. 92-04-41, passed 4-14-1992)
§ 5-10-17 LOST OR DESTROYED STAMP.
   In the event a real estate transfer stamp issued under this article is lost
or destroyed, a replacement stamp may be issued upon the payment of a $25
administration fee and the filing of a statement upon oath or affirmation
stating that the stamp was lost or destroyed and an explanation of the
circumstances surrounding the loss or destruction. The affidavit shall be on a
form provided by the village.
(Ord. 93-02-18, passed 2-23-1993)
ARTICLE 11: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS OF CH. 5
Section
   
5-11-1   Violations and penalties
§ 5-11-1 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   Any person who violates any provision of this
Ch. 5, in addition to the provisions of §
1-1-9 of this code, shall be subject to the following penalties.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not
less than $10, nor more than $750.
   (B)   The village shall also seek as a cause of action for the violation of
any provision of this chapter the payment of all taxes owed and not paid, plus
interest at the maximum amount allowed by law, to be charged for the failure to
pay taxes in the correct amount when due.
   (C)   In addition to seeking the penalties set out above, the village may
also seek other appropriate judicial action, such as mandatory injunction.
(Ord. 92-04-41, passed 4-14-1992)
ARTICLE 12: MUNICIPAL GAS USE TAX
Section
   
5-12-1   Short title
   
5-12-2   Definitions
   
5-12-3   Tax imposed
   
5-12-4   Collection of tax
   
5-12-5   Books and records
Cross-reference:
   Municipal Utility Act, see
Ch. 5, Art. 4
§ 5-12-1 SHORT TITLE.
   The tax imposed by this article shall be known as the “Municipal Gas Use
Tax” and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by the Village of
Carol Stream, the State of Illinois, or any other municipal corporation or
political subdivision thereof.
(Ord. 2003-04-17, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 5-12-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the content clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint
stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, municipal
corporation or political subdivision of the state, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
   PUBLIC UTILITIES ACT. The Public Utilities Act, as amended (220 ILCS 5/1-101
et seq.).
   PUBLIC UTILITY. A public utility as defined in § 3-105 of the Public
Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/3-105).
   RETAIL PURCHASER. Any person who purchases gas in a sale at retail.
   SALE AT RETAIL. Any sale of gas by a retailer to a person for use or
consumption, and not for resale. For this purpose, the term RETAILER means any
person engaged in the business of distribution, supplying or furnishing or
selling gas.
(Ord. 2003-04-17, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 5-12-3 TAX IMPOSED.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, a tax is imposed on the
privilege of using or consuming gas in the village that is purchased in a sale
at retail at the rate of 2.5 cents ($0.025) per therm.
   (B)   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is on
the retail purchaser, and nothing in this article shall be construed to impose
a tax on the occupation of distributing, supplying, furnishing, selling or
transporting gas.
   (C)   The retail purchaser shall pay the tax, measured by therms of gas
delivered to the retail purchaser’s premises:
      (1)   To the public utility designated to collect the tax pursuant to §
5-12-2 of this article on or before the payment due date of the public
utility’s bill first reflecting the tax; or
      (2)   Directly to the village on or before the fifteenth day of the
second month following the month in which the gas is delivered to the retail
purchaser, if no public utility has been designated to collect the tax pursuant
to §
5-12-2, or if the gas is delivered by a person other than a public utility so
designated.
   (D)   A purchaser who purchases gas for resale and therefore does not pay
the tax imposed by this article with respect to the use or consumption of the
gas, but who later uses or consumes part or all of the gas, shall pay the tax
directly to the Village Treasurer on or before the fifteenth day of the second
month following the month in which the gas is used or consumed.
   (E)   The tax shall apply to gas for which the delivery to the retail
purchaser is billed by a public utility on or after 5-1-2003.
(Ord. 2003-04-17, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 5-12-4 COLLECTION OF TAX.
   (A)   The Finance Director is authorized to enter into a contract for
collection of the tax imposed by this article with any public utility providing
gas service in the village. The contract shall include and subsequently conform
with the following provisions:
      (1)   The public utility will collect the tax with respect to gas
delivered by it to its customers as an independent contractor;
      (2)   The public utility will remit collected taxes to the Village
Treasurer no more often than once each month;
      (3)   The public utility will be entitled to withhold from tax
collections a service fee equal to 3% of the amounts collected and timely
remitted to the Village Treasurer;
      (4)   The public utility shall not be liable to the village for any tax
not actually collected from a retail purchaser; and
      (5)   Such additional terms as the parties may agree upon.
   (B)   A public utility designated to collect the tax imposed by this article
from its customers shall bill each customer for the tax on all gas delivered to
the customer unless:
      (1)   The customer’s use or consumption is exempt from the tax pursuant
to a duly passed and authorized ordinance of the village; or
      (2)   The public utility has received written notification from the
village that the customer is exempt from the tax.
(Ord. 2003-04-17, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 5-12-5 BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   (A)   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records, including
original source documents and books of entry, denoting the activities or
transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise to any tax liability or
exemption under this article.
   (B)   All such books and records shall, at all times during business hours,
be subject to and available for inspection by the village.
(Ord. 2003-04-17, passed 4-21-2003)
ARTICLE 13: MUNICIPAL MOTOR FUEL TAX
Section
   
5-13-1   Short title
   
5-13-2   Definitions
   
5-13-3   Tax imposed
   
5-13-4   Collection of tax
   
5-13-5   Registration and maintenance of records
   
5-13-6   Late payment penalty
   
5-13-7   Penalty
   
5-13-8   Enforcement
§ 5-13-1   SHORT TITLE.
   The tax imposed by this article shall be known as the "Municipal Motor Fuel
Tax" and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by the Village of
Carol Stream, the State of Illinois, or any other municipal corporation or
political subdivision thereof.
(Ord. 2018-04-12, passed 4-2-2018)
§ 5-13-2   DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOTOR FUEL. Any volatile and inflammable liquid or gas produced, blended or
compounded for the purpose of or which is suitable for operating motor
vehicles, as defined herein.
   MOTOR FUEL RETAILER OR RETAIL DEALER. Any person who is engaged in the
business of selling motor fuel in the Village of Carol Stream to a purchaser
for the purchaser's use or consumption, and not for resale in any form.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
corporation, joint venture, joint stock company, limited liability company,
municipal corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver,
trustee, conservator, legal representative, or other legally recognized entity.
   SALE AT RETAIL. Any sale to a person for that person's use or consumption
and not for resale to another.
   SALE, RESALE OR PURCHASE. Any transfer of ownership or title or both, any
exchange or any barter, whether conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by
any means whatsoever for consideration.
   USE. The exercise of any right to, or power over, motor fuel incident to the
ownership thereof, including, but not limited to, the receipt of vehicle fuel
by any person into a fuel supply tank of a vehicle.
   VEHICLE. Any machine or device in, upon or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a rail, street, road, highway or
otherwise upon land, in or upon water. VEHICLE shall include, but not be
limited to, automobiles, trucks, buses, trains, motorcycles, and boats.
(Ord. 2018-04-12, passed 4-2-2018)
§ 5-13-3 TAX IMPOSED.
   Commencing on June 1, 2018, a tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of
purchasing or using motor fuel at retail within the village. The tax shall be
at a rate of $0.04 per gallon of motor fuel. The ultimate incidence of and
liability for payment of the tax shall be upon the purchaser or user of the
vehicle fuel, and nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impose a tax
upon the occupation of selling or distributing motor fuel. It shall be a
violation of this chapter for any retail dealer to fail to add this tax to the
retail price of motor fuel or to absorb the tax. The tax shall be in addition
to any and all other taxes.
(Ord. 2018-04-12, passed 4-2-2018)
§ 5-13-4 COLLECTION OF TAX.
   The owner and operator of each motor fuel retailer within the village shall
jointly and severally have the duty to cause to be filed a sworn motor fuel tax
return with the Village of Carol Stream Director of Finance for each such
licensed premises located in the village. Said return shall be prepared and
submitted on forms prescribed by the village and shall be filed with the
village by the twentieth day of the month following the month in which such
motor fuel was sold. Said return shall also be accompanied by payment to the
village of all taxes imposed by this article which are due and owing for the
period covered by the return. The return shall also be accompanied with a copy
of the Illinois Department of Revenue Sales and Use Tax Return (ST-1) for each
motor fuel retailer.
(Ord. 2018-04-12, passed 4-2-2018)
§ 5-13-5 REGISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS.
   Every motor fuel retailer shall register with the village within 30 days
after the commencement of such business on forms provided by the Finance
Director. Each motor fuel retailer shall have the duty to maintain complete and
accurate books, records and accounts showing the gross receipts for the sale of
motor fuel and the taxes collected from the purchaser thereof, which shall be
available in the Village of Carol Stream for examination and for audit by the
village upon reasonable notice during customary business hours.
(Ord. 2018-04-12, passed 4-2-2018)
§ 5-13-6 LATE PAYMENT PENALTY.
   If any tax imposed by this article is not paid over to the village when due,
a late payment penalty equal to 1% of the unpaid tax is added for each month or
any portion thereof, that such tax remains unpaid and the total of such late
payment penalty shall be paid along with the tax imposed hereby. The village
may bring an action to collect any unpaid tax or penalty.
(Ord. 2018-04-12, passed 4-2-2018)
§ 5-13-7 PENALTY.
   In addition to any other penalty, any person or licensee violating any
provision of this article upon conviction thereof shall be fined not less than
$500 nor more than $1,000 for each such offense. Each failure to collect the
tax imposed hereby or each failure to pay such tax over to the Village of Carol
Stream shall constitute a separate violation hereof.
(Ord. 2018-04-12, passed 4-2-2018)
§ 5-13-8 ENFORCEMENT.
   Payment and collection of the municipal motor fuel tax and any payment
penalty may be enforced by the village by action in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2018-04-12, passed 4-2-2018)
ARTICLE 14: MUNICIPAL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE TAX
Section
   
5-14-1   Short title
   
5-14-2   Definitions
   
5-14-3   Tax imposed
   
5-14-4   Liability for payment
   
5-14-5   Collection of tax
   
5-14-6   Rules and regulations
   
5-14-7   Filing of return and payment of tax
   
5-14-8   Failure to file return or pay tax when due
   
5-14-9   Records
   
5-14-10   Exemptions
   
5-14-11   Suspension or revocation of licenses for failure to comply
   
5-14-12   Disposition of proceeds of tax
   
5-14-13   Penalty
§ 5-14-1 SHORT TITLE.
   The tax imposed by this article shall be known as the “Municipal Alcoholic
Beverage Tax” and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by the
Village of Carol Stream, the State of Illinois, or any other municipal
corporation or political subdivision thereof.
(Ord. 2019-04-11, passed 4-1-2019)
§ 5-14-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this article, whenever any of the following words, terms
or definitions are used herein, they shall have the meanings ascribed to them
in this section.
   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Shall have the meaning ascribed to it as the term is
defined in §
11-2-1 of this code.
   CONSUMER. The person who seeks the privilege of purchasing alcoholic liquor
at retail at any liquor establishment.
   FINANCE DEPARTMENT. The Finance Department of the Village of Carol Stream.
   LIQUOR ESTABLISHMENT. Any premises required to obtain a retail liquor
license pursuant to
Chapter 11, Article 2 of this code.
   OWNER. Any person or persons having a sufficient proprietary interest in
conducting the operation of a liquor establishment so as to entitle such a
person or persons to all or a portion of the net receipts thereof.
   PERSON. Any natural person, receiver, administrator, executor, conservator,
assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm, co-partnership, joint
venture, club, company, business trust, domestic or foreign corporation,
association, syndicate, society or any group of individuals acting as a unit,
whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal nonprofit, or otherwise; whenever the
term PERSON is used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term
as applied to associations shall mean that the owners or part owners thereof
and, as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
   RETAIL SALE OR PURCHASE. Any transfer of the ownership, exchange or barter
or any transfer for a valuable consideration.
(Ord. 2019-04-11, passed 4-1-2019)
§ 5-14-3 TAX IMPOSED.
   (A)   Beginning on July 1, 2019, there is hereby levied and imposed upon the
privilege of purchasing alcoholic liquor at any liquor establishment in the
village a tax of 2% of the purchase price, exclusive of any other tax charged
for such alcoholic liquor.
(Ord. 2019-04-11, passed 4-1-2019)
§ 5-14-4 LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT.
   (A)   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax imposed
by this article shall be borne by the consumer.
   (B)   The tax herein levied shall be paid in addition to any and all other
taxes and charges. It shall be the duty of the owner, manager or operator of
every liquor establishment to collect said tax from the consumer and remit to
the village said tax under the rules and regulations prescribed by the local
Liquor Control Commissioner and as otherwise provided in this article.
(Ord. 2019-04-11, passed 4-1-2019)
§ 5-14-5 COLLECTION OF TAX.
   Every person required to collect the tax levied by this article shall
collect said tax from the consumer at the time he or she collects payment for
the sale of alcoholic liquor at retail. The amount due under the tax provided
in this article shall be separately stated on the invoice receipt or other
statement or memorandum of the payment given to the consumer at the time of
payment, unless the person required to collect the tax does not have a cash
register that separately states such tax. In any event, the person required to
collect the tax shall keep records that clearly support total liquor sales and
liquor taxes due hereunder. It shall be unlawful for the owner, manager or
operator of a liquor establishment to fail to include the tax imposed herein in
the sale price of the alcoholic beverage or to otherwise absorb such tax.
(Ord. 2019-04-11, passed 4-1-2019)
§ 5-14-6 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The local Liquor Control Commissioner may promulgate rules and regulations
not inconsistent with the provisions of this article concerning the enforcement
and application of this article. The term "rules and regulations" includes, but
is not limited to, a case by case determination whether or not the tax imposed
by this article applies.
(Ord. 2019-04-11, passed 4-1-2019)
§ 5-14-7 FILING OF RETURN AND PAYMENT OF TAX.
   The owner(s) of each liquor establishment within the village shall file with
the Finance Department, sworn tax returns showing tax receipts received during
each calendar month reporting period on forms prescribed by the local Liquor
Control Commissioner. The returns and related payment of taxes collected shall
be due on or before the last calendar day of the month following the month for
which the sales of alcoholic liquor occurred.At the time of filing such
returns, the owner shall pay to the village all taxes due for the period to
which the tax return applies, less a commission of 1 of the amount of the tax,
which is allowed to reimburse the owner for the expenses incurred in keeping
records, billing, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying
data to the village upon request. No commission may be claimed by an owner for
taxes not timely remitted to the village. Payment of the tax imposed shall be
made to the Finance Department.
(Ord. 2019-04-11, passed 4-1-2019)
§ 5-14-8 FAILURE TO FILE RETURN OR PAY TAX WHEN DUE.
   (A)   If for any reason a tax imposed under this article is not paid when
due, a late fee of $50 shall be added and collected. An additional $50 shall be
added and collected for each additional month or portion thereof in which the
taxes due remain unpaid.
   (B)   Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax as provided in this
article, the village may bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the
payment of the tax on behalf of the village and reasonable attorney's fees
incurred in bringing such action in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2019-04-11, passed 4-1-2019; Ord. 2024-10- 42, passed 10-7-2024)
§ 5-14-9 RECORDS.
   (A)   Every owner, manager or operator of a liquor establishment in the
village shall keep books and records for a period of at least 48 months, which,
at a minimum should include a daily sheet showing:
      (1)   The amount of taxable receipts within the 24-hour period; and
      (2)   The actual liquor establishment tax receipts collected for the date
in question.
   (B)   The local Liquor Control Commissioner or his or her designee shall at
all reasonable times have full access to said books and records.
   (C)   The financial records of any liquor establishment submitted pursuant
to this article or any rule and regulation promulgated thereunder shall not be
available for public inspection in order to protect the owner's right to
privacy, except when necessary in any action to enforce collection of tax under
this article or as otherwise provided by law.
(Ord. 2019-04-11, passed 4-1-2019)
§ 5-14-10 EXEMPTIONS.
   The tax imposed under this article shall not apply or be imposed upon a
person organized and operated exclusively for charitable, religious or
educational purposes to the extent alcoholic liquor is purchased by such person
and used solely for the charitable, religious or educational purposes of such
person and is not resold for profit.
(Ord. 2019-04-11, passed 4-1-2019)
§ 5-14-11 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSES FOR FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   The Liquor Control Commissioner may, in accordance with law, revoke or
suspend any license issued by him or her if he or she determines that the owner
of a licensed establishment has violated any of the provisions of this article.
No suspension or revocation hereunder shall release or discharge said person
from his or her civil liability for the payment or collection and remittance of
the tax, nor from prosecution for such offense. Any suspension or revocation of
a liquor license shall follow the procedures set forth in, and otherwise comply
with, the provisions of
Chapter 11, Article 1 of this code.
(Ord. 2019-04-11, passed 4-1-2019)
§ 5-14-12 DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS OF TAX.
   All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this article,
including penalties, shall be revenues of the general corporate fund of the
village and shall be paid into the treasury of the village and shall be
credited to and deposited in the general corporate fund of the village.
(Ord. 2019-04-11, passed 4-1-2019)
§ 5-14-13 PENALTY.
   In addition to the suspension or revocation of licenses as hereinabove
provided, any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting, or refusing to comply with or resisting or opposing the enforcement
of any of the provisions of this article, except when otherwise specifically
provided, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $1,500. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense.
(Ord. 2019-04-11, passed 4-1-2019)
ARTICLE 15: MUNICIPAL AMUSEMENT TAX
Section
   
5-15-1   Applicability
   
5-15-2   Definitions
   
5-15-3   Amusement push tax
   
5-15-4   Registration
   
5-15-5   Collection, payment and accounting
   
5-15-6   Rules and regulations
   
5-15-7   Violations and penalties
§ 5-15-1 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise provided, shall apply to
all amusements (as defined below), whether specifically licensed or regulated
under other provisions of this village code or other ordinances, or not.
(Ord. 2021-10-51, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 5-15-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this article, whenever any of the following words, terms
or definitions are used herein, they shall have the meanings ascribed to them
in this section, whether capitalized or not.
   AMUSEMENT.
      (1)   Any theatrical, dramatic, musical or spectacular performance,
motion picture show, flower, poultry or animal show, animal act, circus, rodeo,
athletic contest, sport, game or similar exhibition for public entertainment,
including, without being limited to, boxing, wrestling, skating, dancing,
swimming, racing, or riding on animals or vehicles, baseball, basketball,
softball, football, tennis, golf, hockey, track and field games, bowling,
billiard and pool games; and
      (2)   Any entertainment offered for public participation, including,
without being limited to, dancing, carnival, amusement park rides and games,
bowling, billiard and pool games, or any video gaming terminal (as defined
below).
   PERSON. Any natural individual that participates in an amusement within the
village, including a firm, organization, society, foundation, institution,
partnership, association, joint stock company, joint venture, limited liability
company, public or private corporation, receiver, executor, trustee or other
representative appointed by order of any court, or any other entity recognized
by law.
   PLAY. Each individual push of the video gaming terminal which initiates the
simulation provided by the video gaming terminal. Play shall not include the
push of individual wager amounts, selection of types of games on the video
gaming terminal or entry of any information or printing of winning receipts.
   TERMINAL OPERATOR. Any individual, partnership, corporation, or limited
liability company that is licensed under the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230
ILCS 40/1 et seq., as amended, and that owns, services, and maintains video
gaming terminals within the village.
   VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL. Any electronic video game machine that, upon
insertion of cash, electronic cards or vouchers, or any combination thereof, is
available to play or simulate the play of a video game, including but not
limited to video poker, line up, and blackjack, as authorized by the Illinois
Gaming Board utilizing a video display and  microprocessors in which the player
may receive free games or credits that can be redeemed for cash. The term does
not include a machine that directly dispenses coins, cash, or tokens or is for
amusement purposes only.
(Ord. 2021-10-51, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 5-15-3 AMUSEMENT PUSH TAX.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this article, an amusement tax is
imposed upon any person who participates in the play of a video gaming terminal
that takes place within the jurisdictional boundaries of the village.
   (B)   The rate of the tax shall be equal to one cent per play on a video
gaming terminal.
   (C)   The terminal operator of a video gaming terminal may separately
itemize and charge the tax imposed in this article each person who plays a
video gaming terminal.
   (D)   The tax imposed in this article is in addition to all other taxes
imposed by the State of Illinois or any municipal corporation or political
subdivision thereof.
(Ord. 2021-10-51, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 5-15-4 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Every terminal operator of a video gaming terminal(s) located in the
village shall apply for registration as a tax collector with the village within
the later of 30 days after commencing such business or 30 days after the
effective date of the ordinance imposing the tax.
   (B)   The application shall be submitted to the village on the forms
provided by the village and contain such information as reasonably required by
the village to impose, collect, and audit all amounts related to the tax
imposed in this article.
(Ord. 2021-10-51, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 5-15-5 COLLECTION, PAYMENT AND ACCOUNTING.
   (A)   It shall be the joint and several duty of every terminal operator of a
video gaming terminal(s) to secure from each person participating in the play
of a video gaming terminal the tax imposed in this article.
   (B)   For purposes of this article, it shall be presumed that the amount of
the tax imposed on each person, unless the taxpayer or tax collector provides
otherwise with books, records, or other documentary evidence, has been
collected from the person by the terminal operator.
   (C)   Tax payments accompanied by tax returns prescribed by the village
shall be remitted to the village on or before the twentieth day of the month
following the month in which payment for the tax is made.
   (D)   Every terminal operator of a video gaming terminal who is required to
collect the tax imposed in this article shall be considered a tax collector for
the village. All tax amounts collected shall be held by the terminal operator
as trustee for and on behalf of the village. The failure of the terminal
operator to collect the tax shall not excuse or release the person from the
obligation to pay the tax.
   (E)   The ultimate incidence of the tax imposed in this article shall remain
on the person and shall never be shifted to the terminal operator.
   (F)   Notwithstanding any other provision of the village code, in order to
permit sound fiscal planning and budgeting by the village, no person shall be
entitled to a refund of, or credit for, the tax imposed in this article unless
the person files a claim for a refund or credit within one year after the date
on which the tax was paid or remitted to the village.
   (G)   The terminal operator of any video gaming terminal(s) shall be subject
to audit, inspection, and record keeping provisions in this village code.
   (H)   It shall be unlawful for any terminal operator and/or person to
prevent, hinder, or interfere with the village's officials, employees,
contractors and/or agents designated to discharge their respective duties in
the performance and enforcement of the provisions of this article.
   (I)   It is the duty of every terminal operator of a video gaming terminal
(s) to keep accurate and complete books and records to which the village's
officials, employees, contractors and/or agents shall at all times have full
access.
(Ord. 2021-10-51, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 5-15-6 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Village Manager is authorized to adopt, promulgate, and enforce any
additional rules and regulations pertaining to the interpretation, collection,
administration, and enforcement of this article.
(Ord. 2021-10-51, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 5-15-7 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   It shall be a violation of this article for a terminal operator to
fail to file a report within the time prescribed by this article.
   (B)   If a terminal operator fails to pay to the village the tax imposed by
this article by the date the same shall be due, interest shall accumulate at a
rate of one and one-half percent per month until paid.
   (C)   A terminal operator who falsely reports, or who fails to report, the
amount of tax due as required by this article shall be in violation of this
article.
   (D)   It shall a violation of this article for any person to knowingly
furnish false or inaccurate information regarding the tax imposed in this
article to the village.
   (E)   Whenever any terminal operator falsely reports to the village
information regarding the tax levied in this article, or fails to pay the tax
levied in this article, the Village Attorney shall, upon the request of the
Village Mayor and Board of Trustees, bring or cause to be brought an action to
enforce the payment of said tax on behalf of the village in any court of
competent jurisdiction.
   (F)   If the Mayor or their designee, after holding a hearing, shall find
that a terminal operator violated any of the provisions of this article, any
statutes of the state or any other ordinance or resolution enacted by the
corporate authorities of the village, the Mayor may suspend or revoke any or
all village licenses held by such terminal operator. The terminal operator may
have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, which shall be held not less
than ten days after notice of the time and place of the hearing, with said
notice, addressed to the terminal operator at their last known place of
business. Pending notice, hearing and finding, any license which the terminal
operator may possess may be temporarily suspended by the Mayor. Any suspension
or revocation of any license as provided for hereunder shall not release or
discharge the terminal operator from their civil liability for the payment of
the tax nor from prosecution for such offense.
   (G)   Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be subject
to a fine of not less than $500 for the first offense and not less than $1,000
nor more than $2,500 for the second or subsequent offense and subject to a
revocation of any license to operate a video gaming terminal license for a
second or any subsequent offense.
   (H)   Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation
and offense.
(Ord. 2021-10-51, passed 10-18-2021)
ARTICLE 16: MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX
Section
   
5-16-1   Tax imposed; rate
   
5-16-2   Collection of tax by retailers
§ 5-16-1 TAX IMPOSED; RATE.
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling cannabis, other than cannabis purchased under the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Program Act, at retail in the Village of Carol Stream at the
rate of 3% of the gross receipts from such cannabis sales made in the course of
that business. The tax levied in this section shall be paid in addition to any
and all other taxes and charges.
   (B)   The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the
provisions of § 8-11-23 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-23) in
force now or as hereafter amended.
(Ord. 2023-02-05, passed 2-6-2023)
§ 5-16-2 COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS.
   (A)   The tax imposed by this article shall be remitted by retailers in the
business of selling cannabis (retailers) to the Illinois Department of Revenue
(Department). Any tax required to be collected pursuant to or as authorized by
this article and any such tax collected by such retailer and required to be
remitted to the Illinois Department of Revenue shall constitute a debt owed by
the retailer to the State of Illinois. Retailers may reimburse themselves for
their seller’s tax liability hereunder by separately stating that tax as an
additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in a single
amount, with any state tax that sellers are required to collect.
   (B)   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed
as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Illinois
Department of Revenue in accordance with the provisions of § 8-11-23 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-23). The Illinois Department of Revenue
shall have full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this article.
   (C)   The failure of a retailer to timely collect or remit all taxes due
pursuant to this article is a violation of the Carol Stream Code of Ordinances
and may be subject to those penalties imposed by the Illinois’ Department of
Revenue applicable under the Illinois Municipal Cannabis Retailers Occupation
Tax Law.
   (D)   The record requirements and audit procedures shall be as provided in
and authorized by the Retailers Occupation Tax Act (35 ILCS 120/7 and
implemented by the Illinois Department of Revenue.
(Ord. 2023-02-05, passed 2-6-2023)
ARTICLE 17: MUNICIPAL GROCERY TAXES
Section
   
5-17-1   Municipal grocery retailers’ occupation tax imposed; rate
   
5-17-2   Municipal grocery service occupation tax imposed
   
5-17-3   Illinois Department of Revenue to administer both taxes
   
5-17-4   Violations
§ 5-17-1 MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED; RATE.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
groceries at retail in the village at the rate of 1% of the gross receipts from
such sales made in the course of such business while this article is in effect.
The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the provisions
of § 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24).
(Ord. 2025-04-15, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 5-17-2 MUNICIPAL GROCERY SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the village in the
business of making sales of service, who, as an incident to making those sales
of service, transfer groceries as an incident to a sale of service. The rate of
this tax shall be the same rate identified in §
5-17-1 above. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to
the provisions of § 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24).
(Ord. 2025-04-15, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 5-17-3 ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE TO ADMINISTER BOTH TAXES.
   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois in accordance with the provisions of § 8-11-24 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24), as amended. The Illinois
Department of Revenue shall have full power to administer and enforce the
provisions of this article.
(Ord. 2025-04-15, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 5-17-4 VIOLATIONS.
   The failure to timely collect or remit all taxes due under §§
5-17-2 and
5-17-3, or to otherwise fail to comply with state law, is a violation of this
code and is subject to penalty and may be subject to suspension and/or
revocation of any business license issued by the village. Each failure to
collect or remit the taxes imposed hereby shall constitute a separate
violation.
(Ord. 2025-04-15, passed 4-21-2025)
CHAPTER 6: BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE CODES
      Article
         
1.   BASIC BUILDING CODE
         
2.   ELECTRICAL CODE
         
3.   PLUMBING CODE
         
4.   MECHANICAL CODE
         
5.   FIRE CODE
         
6.   RESIDENTIAL CODE
         
7.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
         
8.   ANTI-MONOTONY CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
         
9.   FLOOD PRONE AREAS
         
10.   SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE
         
11.   (RESERVED)
         
12.   (RESERVED)
         
13.   FEES AND SECURITIES FOR CONSTRUCTION AND NEW DEVELOPMENT
         
14.   COUNTYWIDE STORM WATER AND FLOOD PLAIN CODE
         
15.   CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL SYSTEM
         
16.   FUEL GAS CODE
         
17.   ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
         
18.   EXISTING BUILDING CODE
         
19.   SOLAR ENERGY PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1: BASIC BUILDING CODE
Section
   
6-1-1   Adoption of Basic Building Code
§ 6-1-1 ADOPTION OF BASIC BUILDING CODE.
   The ICC International Building Code, 2024 Edition, as published by the
International Code Council Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code
of the village for the control of buildings and structures as therein provided,
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions, terms of offenses
thereunder of the ICC International Building Code, 2024 Edition, are hereby
referred to, adopted and made part hereof as if fully set out in this article,
with additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in other
village ordinances which contain local amendments to national codes. Three
document copies of said Code, in accordance with 50 ILCS 220/2 and 65 ILCS 5/1-
3-2, have been available for public use, inspection and examination for 30 days
and one copy for permanent public use in the office of the Village Clerk.
(Ord. 2004-06-37, passed 6-21-2004; Ord. 2009-05-20, passed 5-4-2009; Ord.
2014-02-07, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 2014-06-21, passed 6-2- 2014; Ord. 2019-05-
16, passed 5-6-2019; Ord. 25-09-38, passed 9-2-2025)
ARTICLE 2: ELECTRICAL CODE
Section
   
6-2-1   Adoption of Electrical Code
§ 6-2-1 ADOPTION OF ELECTRICAL CODE.
   The NFPA 70, National Electrical Code, 2023 Edition, as published by the
National Fire Protection Association, be and is hereby adopted as the
Electrical Code of the village for the control and regulation of the
installation of electrical equipment within the village; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, conditions, terms and offenses thereunder of NFPA
70, National Electrical Code, 2023 Edition, are hereby referred to, adopted and
made part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in other village
ordinances which contain local amendments to national codes. Three document
copies of said Code, in accordance with 50 ILCS 220/2 and 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2, have
been available for public use, inspection and examination for 30 days and one
copy for permanent public use in the office of the Village Clerk.
(Ord. 2004-06-37, passed 6-21-2004; Ord. 2009-05-20, passed 5-4-2009; Ord.
2014-02-07, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 2014-06-21, passed 6-2- 2014; Ord. 2019-05-
16, passed 5-6-2019; Ord. 25-09-38, passed 9-2-2025)
ARTICLE 3: PLUMBING CODE
Section
   
6-3-1   Adoption of Plumbing Code
§ 6-3-1 ADOPTION OF PLUMBING CODE.
   Three document copies, in accordance with 50 ILCS 220/2, and 65 ILCS 5/1-3-
2, have been available for public use, inspection and examination for 30 days
and one copy for permanent public use in the office of the Village Clerk, being
marked and designated as the Illinois Plumbing Code, Current Edition, as
published by the Illinois Department of Public Health, be and is hereby adopted
as the Plumbing Code of the village for the control of buildings and structures
as therein provided, and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
conditions, terms and offenses thereunder of the Illinois Plumbing Code,
Current Edition, are hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof, as if
fully set out in this article, with additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in other village ordinances which contain local
amendments to national codes.
(Ord. 2004-06-37, passed 6-21-2004; Ord. 2009-05-20, passed 5-4-2009; Ord.
2014-02-07, passed 2-18-2014)
ARTICLE 4: MECHANICAL CODE
Section
   
6-4-1   Adoption of Mechanical Code
§ 6-4-1 ADOPTION OF MECHANICAL CODE.
   The ICC International Mechanical Code, 2024 Edition, as published by the
International Code Council Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Mechanical
Code of the village; for the control of buildings and structures as therein
provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions, terms or
offenses thereunder of the ICC International Mechanical Code, 2024 Edition, are
hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof as if fully set out in this
article, with additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed
in other village ordinances which contain local amendments to national codes.
Three document copies of said Code, in accordance with 50 ILCS 220/2 and 65
ILCS 5/1-3-2, have been available for public use, inspection and examination
for 30 days and one copy for permanent public use in the office of the Village
Clerk.
(Ord. 2004-06-37, passed 6-21-2004; Ord. 2009-05-20, passed 5-4-2009; Ord.
2014-02-07, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 2014-06-21, passed 6-2- 2014; Ord. 2019-05-
16, passed 5-6-2019; Ord. 25-09-38, passed 9-2-2025)
ARTICLE 5: FIRE CODE
Section
   
6-5-1   Adoption of Fire Code
§ 6-5-1 ADOPTION OF FIRE CODE.
   The ICC International Fire Code, 2024 Edition, as published by the
International Code Council Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of
the village, for the control of buildings and structures as therein provided;
and each and all regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of offenses
thereunder of the ICC International Fire Code, 2024 Edition, are hereby adopted
and made part hereof as if fully set out in this article, with additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in other village
ordinances which contain local amendments to national codes. Three document
copies of said Code, in accordance with 50 ILCS 220/2 and 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2, have
been available for public use, inspection and examination for 30 days and one
copy for permanent public use in the office of the Village Clerk.
(Ord. 2004-06-37, passed 6-21-2004; Ord. 2009-05-20, passed 5-4-2009; Ord.
2014-02-07, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 2014-06-21, passed 6-2- 2014; Ord. 2019-05-
16, passed 5-6-2019; Ord. 25-09-38, passed 9-2-2025)
ARTICLE 6: RESIDENTIAL CODE
Section
   
6-6-1   Adoption of Residential Code
§ 6-6-1 ADOPTION OF RESIDENTIAL CODE.
   The ICC International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings,
2024 Edition, as published by the International Code Council Inc., be and is
hereby adopted as the Residential Code of the village, for the control of
buildings and structures as therein provided; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, conditions, terms of offenses thereunder of the ICC
International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2024 Edition,
are hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof as if fully set out in
this article, with additions, insertions deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in other village ordinances which contain local amendments to
national codes. Three document copies of said Code, in accordance with 50 ILCS
220/2 and 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2, have been available for public use, inspection and
examination for 30 days and one copy for permanent public use in the office of
the Village Clerk.
(Ord. 2004-06-37, passed 6-21-2004; Ord. 2009-05-20, passed 5-4-2009; Ord.
2014-02-07, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 2014-06-21, passed 6-2- 2014; Ord. 2019-05-
16, passed 5-6-2019; Ord. 25-09-38, passed 9-2-2025)
ARTICLE 7: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Section
   
6-7-1   Adoption of Property Maintenance Code
§ 6-7-1 ADOPTION OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
   The ICC International Property Maintenance Code, 2024 Edition, as published
by the International Code Council Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the
Property Maintenance Code of the village for the control of buildings and
structures as therein provided, and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, conditions, terms and offenses thereunder of the ICC International
Property Maintenance Code, 2024 Edition, are hereby referred to, adopted and
made part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in other village
ordinances which contain local amendments to national codes. Three document
copies of said Code, in accordance with 50 ILCS 220/2 and 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2, have
been available for public use, inspection and examination for 30 days and one
copy for permanent public use in the office of the Village Clerk.
(Ord. 2004-06-37, passed 6-21-2004; Ord. 2009-05-20, passed 5-4-2009; Ord.
2014-02-07, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 2014-06-21, passed 6-2- 2014; Ord. 2019-05-
16, passed 5-6-2019; Ord. 25-09-38, passed 9-2-2025)
ARTICLE 8: ANTI-MONOTONY CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
Section
   
6-8-1   Definitions
   
6-8-2   Anti-monotony construction standards for one-family dwelling units
   
6-8-3   Administration
   
6-8-4   Variances and appeals
§ 6-8-1 DEFINITIONS.
   The words contained in this article shall have the common meaning ascribed
to them or such meanings as are contained within other sections of the code of
ordinances of the village; provided, however, that, the following words shall
be interpreted to mean as follows.
   ADJACENT LOTS. Lots which adjoin or share side property lines or lots in
which, although separated by a street, front property lines overlap another by
more than 30%.
   STREETSCAPE. The facades of single-family dwellings on both sides of a
street. The length of a STREETSCAPE shall be limited to no more than 20 lots
per side of street. When more than 20 lots per street side exist without an
intervening cross street, the village shall, through one of its officers or
employees, establish those lots which shall constitute a separate STREETSCAPE.
In making that determination, the official shall consider that configuration of
lots which shall be most influenced and affected by adjacent lots. Where
possible, physical demarcations such as topography, road configuration or
landscaping shall be utilized in establishing the appropriate STREETSCAPES. In
general, the front orientation of the residence will determine the applicable
STREETSCAPE.
§ 6-8-2 ANTI-MONOTONY CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS FOR ONE-FAMILY DWELLING UNITS.
   (A)   Generally. No two single-family dwellings of similar front elevation
or facade shall be constructed or located on adjacent lots; nor shall there be
constructed or located single-family dwellings of similar front elevation or
facade constituting more than 20% of the single-family dwellings in any
streetscape. Front elevations or facades shall be deemed to be similar when
there is no substantial difference in roof lines; and no substantial change in
windows of either size, location or type; and either no change in the color of
materials used (rather than a change in shade), or no substantial change in the
kind of materials.
   (B)   Roof lines.
      (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following differences in the
roof lines of single-family dwellings as seen from the front of the dwelling
shall be deemed sufficient to render buildings containing such changes and
built on adjacent lots to be dissimilar:
         (a)   Changing gable roofs to hip roofs;
         (b)   Changing hip roofs to gable roofs;
         (c)   Providing an intersecting gable roof on the main gable roof,
provided that the height of the intersection roof is at least 50% of the height
of the main roof;
         (d)   Providing an intersecting hip roof on the main hip roof;
provided that, the height of the intersecting hip roof is at least 50% of the
height of the main roof;
         (e)   Subject to review by the Building Official, a shed roof, when
used as a front porch roof for a minimum of 50% of the entire width of the
house, excluding area of garage;
         (f)   Subject to review by the Building Official, a substantial
difference in roof line shall be deemed to exist if the front soffit is
increased significantly and is combined with columns at least six inches in
width or other architectural features of a similar magnitude which reach the
roof line of the highest story;
         (g)   Rotating gable roofs 90 degrees on the building; and
         (h)   On a tri-level residence or other building type which has three
independent major roof areas, the changing of two out of three roof lines shall
be acceptable as a substantial change. Acknowledging certain design elements
may prevent the changing of all three roof lines, it is desired that the roofs
with the greatest impact on the streetscape be changed.
      (2)   The following changes shall not be deemed sufficient to make
adjacent structures dissimilar:
         (a)   Gable roof atop hip roof;
         (b)   Hip roof atop gable roof;
         (c)   Small gable or hip projections above windows;
         (d)   Window dormers;
         (e)   Change in soffit overhang or minor variation in eave height; and
         (f)   Skylight and cupola.
   (C)   Windows.
      (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following differences in the
size, location or type of windows shall be deemed sufficient to render
buildings containing such changes and built on adjacent lots to be dissimilar:
         (a)   Changing from single windows to a multiple window arrangement
(ganged units);
         (b)   Changing from multiple window arrangement to single window;
         (c)   Changing the type of windows (e.g., casement to double hung);
and
         (d)   Providing a bay or bow window in the area of the predominant
window.
      (2)   The following change shall not be deemed sufficient to constitute a
substantial change in windows: the addition or subtraction of muntin bars
(dividing lights).
      (3)   Where, because of its size, location or design, one window is the
predominant window on the front elevation or facade, if the size, location or
type of that window is changed to render the dwelling dissimilar, then no other
window need be changed.
   (D)   Construction material or color.
      (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following differences in
construction material between adjacent single-family dwellings as seen from the
front of the dwellings shall be deemed sufficient to render buildings
containing such changes and built on adjacent lots to be dissimilar.
         (a)   Four-inch exposure horizontal siding;
         (b)   Eight-inch exposure horizontal siding;
         (c)   Brick facing;
         (d)   Vertical siding;
         (e)   Stone facing; and
         (f)   Stucco/staccato board and trim.
      (2)   When materials are changed, the change must occur throughout the
front facade or elevation for a minimum of one story in height.
      (3)   Color change shall be made by significant changes in adjacent
colors. The change must be one of color rather than merely of the shade.
§ 6-8-3 ADMINISTRATION.
   The provisions of this article shall initially be administered by the
Building Official of the village. The Building Official shall find single-
family dwellings to be similar or dissimilar utilizing the general standards
established herein. The examples of similarity or dissimilarity set forth in
this article are not intended to categorize all dwelling designs which may be
presented to the Building Official. To aid the Building Official and applicants
in the interpretation of the provisions of this article, the Building Official
may prepare illustrative drawings and written descriptions of the manner in
which those provisions have or will be administered.
§ 6-8-4 VARIANCES AND APPEALS.
   (A)   In the event a building permit is denied to any applicant by reason of
this article, he or she shall have the right to appeal to the President and
Board of Trustees of the village seeking either to overrule the decision of the
official who denied the permit or to seek a variance to the provisions of this
article. Upon such appeal being made, and after reasonable notice to the
applicant, a public hearing shall be held by the President and Board of
Trustees where evidence shall be received from both the applicant and any other
interested parties. After receiving and carefully considering such evidence,
the President and Board of Trustees may:
      (1)   Order the permit to be issued;
      (2)   Order the permit to be issued if modifications are made in the
design of the building to bring it into conformity with the provisions of this
article;
      (3)   Order the permit to be issued after granting a variance to the
provisions of this article; provided that, such variance shall be limited to
those deviations from that section as shall not affect the general intent of
providing streetscapes without monotonous architectural design; or
      (4)   Deny the petition of the applicant.
   (B)   Along with other factors to be considered by the Village Board shall
be whether or not the applicant only desires a variance for a single structure
where the request for the variance is filed or concurred in by an individual
who will actually reside within the single-family home for which the variance
is sought.
ARTICLE 9: FLOOD PRONE AREAS
Section
   
6-9-1   Purpose
   
6-9-2   Definitions
   
6-9-3   Duties of the Village Engineer and Community Development Director
   
6-9-4   Building regulation permits
   
6-9-5   Design criteria
   
6-9-6   Administration; responsibility
   
6-9-7   Appeals of administrative decisions
   
6-9-8   Variances
   
6-9-9   Interpretation
   
6-9-10   Disclaimer of liability
   
6-9-11   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Flood Plain Ordinance, see
Ch. 6, Art. 14
   Land management regulations, see
Ch. 7, Art. 5
   Storm water detention, see
Ch. 7, Art. 9
   Subdivisions, see
Ch. 7, Art. 7
§ 6-9-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to establish certain special building
regulations regarding the development of areas prone to flooding. The
regulations set forth hereafter are intended to protect new buildings and major
improvements to existing buildings from flood damage and to protect human life
and health from the hazards of flooding.
(Ord 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)
§ 6-9-2 DEFINITIONS.
   This article shall utilize words in the manner defined in
Chapter 7 of this code (Subdivision Code).
(Ord 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)
§ 6-9-3 DUTIES OF THE VILLAGE ENGINEER AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR.
   (A)   Village Engineer. The Village Engineer shall be responsible for the
general administration and enforcement of this article, including, but not
limited to, the following duties:
      (1)   Ensure that all development activities within the special flood
hazard areas (SFHAs) of the jurisdiction of the village meet the requirements
of this article.
      (2)   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about
permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques.
      (3)   Ensure that construction authorization has been granted by the
Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water Resources (IDNR-OWR),
for all development projects subject to §
7-7-6 of this code and maintain a record of such authorization.
      (4)   Obtain from the landowner a record of the “as-built” elevation of
the lowest floor (including basement) of all buildings subject to §
6-9-5 of this article.
      (5)   Obtain from the landowner a record of the engineer's certificate
and the “as-built” floodproofed elevation of all buildings subject to §
6-9-5 of this article.
      (6)   Maintain a record of the “as-built” elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all non-residential buildings subject to §
6-9-5 of this article.
      (7)   Maintain a record of the engineer's certificate and the “as-built”
floodproofed elevation of all non-residential buildings subject to §
6-9-5 of this article.
      (8)   Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request “as-built”
elevation and floodproofing data for all non-residential buildings constructed
subject to this article.
      (9)   Inspect all development projects to ensure they comply with the
provisions of this article.
      (10)   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
improve base flood and floodway data and to improve the administration of this
article. Submit reports as required for the National Flood Insurance Program.
      (11)   Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request base flood
data, SFHA maps, copies of federal or state permit documents and floodproofing
data for all buildings and “as-built” elevation data of all non-residential
buildings constructed subject to this article.
   (B)   Community Development Director. The Community Development Director
shall be responsible for the following duties including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Maintain a record of the “as-built” elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all residential buildings subject to §
6-9-5 of this article.
      (2)   Maintain a record of the engineer's certificate and the “as-built”
floodproofed elevation of all residential buildings subject to §
6-9-5 of this article.
      (3)   Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request “as-built”
elevation and floodproofing data for all residential buildings constructed
subject to this article.
(Ord 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)
§ 6-9-4 BUILDING REGULATION PERMITS.
   (A)   Development permits. Development permits, including but not limited to
land movement, storage of materials, mining, drilling, stream crossings,
bridges, roads, sanitary sewers, water mains, storm sewers, street lights,
sidewalks, subdivisions, etc, and stormwater management certifications.
      (1)   No person, firm or corporation shall commence any development in
the SFHA without first obtaining a development permit or stormwater management
certification from the Village Engineer. The Village Engineer shall not issue a
development permit or stormwater management certification if the proposed
development does not meet the requirements of this article and of
Ch. 6, Art. 14 of this code.
      (2)   Application for a development permit or stormwater management
certification shall be made on a form provided by the Village Engineer.
      (3)   The Village Engineer shall inform the applicant of any and all
other local, county, state and federal permits or stormwater management
certifications that may be required for this type of development activity. The
Building Official shall not issue the development permit or stormwater
management certification unless all required federal, state and county permits
or stormwater management certifications have been obtained.
      (4)   No development in the SFHA shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation (FPE)
unless such materials are stored in a storage tank or floodproofed building
constructed according to the requirements of this article.
   (B)   Building permits. Building permits are required for all proposed
construction, substantial improvements, or other development within floodplain
areas having special flood hazards. Such permits shall ensure that all other
necessary permits or stormwater management certifications have been received
from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal,
state or county law. The building permit applications will be reviewed to
ensure that any proposed construction is:
      (1)   Designed and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure.
      (2)   Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage, and
      (3)   Constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. At
the time of issuing a building permit, the following information will be noted
and recorded by the village:
         (a)   Elevation of the lowest floor (including basement).
         (b)   Where the elevation of the lowest floor is below grade on one or
more sides, the elevation of the floor immediately above.
         (c)   Where a structure has been floodproofed, the elevation to which
the structure was floodproofed.
(Ord 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)
§ 6-9-5 DESIGN CRITERIA.
   The following general design criteria shall apply to all new construction
and substantial improvements which may be authorized in floodplains:
   (A)   Building protection. All buildings to be located in the SFHA shall be
protected from flood damage below the FPE in accordance with the damage
prevention requirements of
Ch. 6, Art. 14  of this code.
   (B)   Building protection methods. This building protection requirement may
be met by any of the methods stipulated in
Ch. 6, Art. 14  of this code.
   (C)   As built elevation record. The Building Official shall maintain a
record of the “as built” elevation in USGS datum of a FEMA referenced bench
mark of the lowest floor of residential buildings as provided by the landowner
and certified by a registered surveyor. The Building Official shall maintain
the engineer's certificate and a record of the “as built” elevation in USGS
datum of a FEMA referenced bench mark to which a residential building was
floodproofed as provided by the landowner and certified by a registered
surveyor. Likewise the Village Engineer shall maintain these aforementioned
records for all non-residential buildings.
(Ord 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)
§ 6-9-6 ADMINISTRATION; RESPONSIBILITY.
   The administration of this article shall be the responsibility of the
Village Engineer. Wherever specific provisions of this article fall within the
purview of any other commission or agency of this village, responsibility is
hereby transferred, provided that:
   (A)   Variances. No variance shall be issued without the prior concurrence
of the Village Board.
   (B)   Special Use Permit. No special use permit shall be issued without
meeting all the provisions in
Ch. 6, Art. 14  of this code and without prior concurrence of the Village
Board.
   (C)   Official maps and profiles. Responsibility for all changes to official
maps and profiles remains with the Village Board.
(Ord 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)
§ 6-9-7 APPEALS OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS.
   Appeals to the decisions of any administrative body or official of this
village in the interpretation of this article may be made in writing to the
Village Board by any aggrieved person or governmental unit within 30 days of
approval or rejection. The decision of the Village Board shall be final.
(Ord 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)
§ 6-9-8 VARIANCES.
   The Village Board may grant variances from the regulatory standards of this
article in accordance with the following requirements:
   (A)   All variance requests. No variance shall be granted unless the
applicant for the variance can demonstrate that:
      (1)   The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA;
      (2)   A substantial economic hardship would result if the variance were
not granted;
      (3)   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
      (4)   There will be no additional threat to public health or safety or
creation of a nuisance;
      (5)   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing or repairs to roads, utilities or other
public facilities; and
      (6)   The variance shall not prevent the issuance of any permits or
stormwater management certifications required by another governmental body.
      (7)   The variance shall be in conformance with all requirements of
Article XVI Variances of the DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Flood
Plain Ordinance as adopted in
Ch. 6, Art. 14 of this code.
   (B)   Variances to lower protection levels. In addition to the requirements
of division (A) above, a variance from the requirements of this article that
would result in a structure not being protected to the elevation of the base
flood shall also meet the following requirements:
      (1)   The Village Board, by a notation on the application, notifies the
applicant in writing that such construction below the base flood level will
increase the risks to life and property and that the applicant proceeds with
full knowledge of these risks;
      (2)   The Village Board notifies the applicant that if the variance is
issued, it is contingent upon the applicant obtaining approval from other
agencies having jurisdiction, when the variance violates the requirements of
such agencies;
      (3)   Require that the applicant proceed with full knowledge of these
risks and that he or she will acknowledge in writing that he or she assumes all
risks and complete liability.
   (C)   “Wet floodproofed” building. A variance from the requirements of this
article may be granted to permit a “wet floodproofed” building, that is, a
building to be intentionally flooded during a flood, provided:
      (1)   No part of such a building below the FPE may be subject to flood
damage;
      (2)   The variance shall be conditioned on the contents being:
         (a)   Of materials resistant to flood damage; or
         (b)   Items declared “property not covered” by a standard flood
insurance policy of the National Flood Insurance Program.
      (3)   Any future alteration of the area below the FPE that violates the
conditions of the variance shall be deemed a violation of this article. The
applicant shall be informed by a notation on the application or otherwise that
any such alteration is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and
therefore will cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be
suspended.
   (D)   Historical structures. Variances requested in connection with the
reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed on the
National Register of Historical Places or documented as worthy of preservation
by the state Department of Conservation may be granted using criteria more
permissive than the requirements of division (A) above.
(Ord 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)
§ 6-9-9 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this article, the provisions
expressed herein shall be held to be the minimum requirements and shall be
liberally construed in favor of the village, and shall not be deemed a
limitation or repeal of any other powers by state statutes.
(Ord 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)
§ 6-9-10 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may
occur or flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This
article does not imply that development either inside or outside of the SFHA
will be free from flooding or damage. This article nor any other provisions of
this code relating to flood prone areas does not create liability on the part
of the village or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that
results from reliance on this code or any administrative decision made lawfully
thereunder.
(Ord 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)
§ 6-9-11 PENALTY.
   Failure to obtain a permit or certification for development in the SFHA or
failure to comply with the requirements of this article or conditions of a
variance granted under this article shall be deemed to be a violation of this
article. The Building Official or Village Engineer may determine upon due
investigation that a violation of the minimum standards of this article exist,
and after such owner fails, after ten days notice, to correct his or her
property, the village may make application to the circuit court for an
injunction requiring conformance with this article or make such other order as
the court sees necessary to secure compliance with the article. Any person who
violates this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than
$75 nor more than $750. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. Failure to comply with
the requirements of a permit, certification or conditions of a variance
resolution shall be deemed to be a violation of this article. The Building
Official or Village Engineer shall inform the owner that any such violation is
considered a willful act to increase flood damages and, therefore, may cause
coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended. Nothing herein
shall prevent the village from taking such other lawful action to prevent or
remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall accrue to the person
or persons responsible.
(Ord 2012-07-27, passed 7-16-2012)
ARTICLE 10: SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE
Section
   
6-10-1    Adoption of Swimming Pool and Spa Code
§ 6-10-1 ADOPTION OF SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE.
   The ICC International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2024 Edition, as published
by the International Code Council Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the
Swimming Pool and Spa Code of the village for the control of buildings and
structures as therein provided, and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, conditions, terms and offenses thereunder of the ICC International
Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2024 Edition, are hereby referred to, adopted and
made part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in other village
ordinances which contain local amendments to national codes. Three document
copies of said Code, in accordance with 50 ILCS 220/2 and 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2, have
been available for public use, inspection and examination for 30 days and one
copy for permanent public use in the office of the Village Clerk.
(Ord. 2014-06-21, passed 6-2-2014; Ord. 2019- 05-16, passed 5-6-2019; Ord. 25-
09-38, passed 9-2-2025)
ARTICLE 11: (RESERVED)
 
ARTICLE 12: (RESERVED)
 
ARTICLE 13: FEES AND SECURITIES FOR CONSTRUCTION AND NEW DEVELOPMENT
Section
   
6-13-1   Precedence of fees
   
6-13-2   Payment of fees
   
6-13-3   Building permit and inspection fees for one- and two-family
residential construction
   
6-13-4   Building permit and inspection fees for commercial, industrial,
institutional and multiple-family residential construction
   
6-13-5   Development services fee
   
6-13-6   Consultant and agency fees
   
6-13-7   Fire prevention fees
   
6-13-8   Water and sewer fees
   
6-13-9   Engineering fees and deposits
   
6-13-10   Occupancy variance, performance guarantee deposits, and temporary
certificate of occupancy
   
6-13-11   Elevator inspection fees
   
6-13-12   Unified Development Ordinance and plat approval fees
   
6-13-13   Annexation fees
   
6-13-14   Land and cash donations
   
6-13-15   Code appeal fees
   
6-13-16   Document sales and reproduction costs
   
6-13-17   Penalty
   
6-13-18   Waiver of permit fees for governmental agencies
   
6-13-19   Property maintenance code fees
§ 6-13-1 PRECEDENCE OF FEES.
   The fees set forth in this article shall supersede and take precedence over
fees contained within other articles of this chapter or other chapters of the
code which are of a different amount than set forth herein.
(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013)
§ 6-13-2 PAYMENT OF FEES.
   A permit application for new construction, alteration, demolition or other
building operation shall not be accepted until the fees prescribed in this
section shall have been paid to the village, nor shall an application for an
amendment to a permit necessitating an additional fee be accepted until the
additional fee shall have been paid.
(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013)
§ 6-13-3 BUILDING PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES FOR ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Type A - new construction. All plan review and clerical fees shall be
due and payable at the time an application for permit is submitted. The
development services fee and inspection fees shall be due and payable at the
time of issuance of a permit.
      (1)   Clerical fee. $80.
      (2)   Plan review fees. Plan review fees for new one- and two-family
residential construction shall be in accordance with
Table 6-13-3(A)(1), based on the types of reviews required.
 
                                  Table 6-13-3(A)(1)
                                  1&2-Family Residential Plan Review Fees
Building Size, incl. basement and Type A - New Construction
garage (sq. ft.)                  (cost per square foot or minimum fee)
                                  Building, Plumbing, Mechanical, Zoning
                                  Electrical, and Energy
Up to 3,200                       $800                            $80
Over 3,200                        $0.25/s.f.                      $0.03/s.f.
 
      (3)   Fees for additional reviews. Review fees are based on up to two
review cycles. If additional review is required, and if it is determined by the
building official that the need for additional review is owing to non-
responsiveness to review comments on the part of the permit applicant, then an
additional plan review fee in the amount of 25% of the total initial plan
review fees shall be charged for each additional review cycle, and payment
shall be required at time of resubmittal for review.
      (4)   Development services fee. The development services fee for new one-
and two-family residential construction shall be based on the estimated
valuation of the cost of construction provided by the permit applicant. The fee
shall be $6.70 per $1,000 of valuation, with a minimum fee of $50. See §
6-13-5.
      (5)   Inspection fees. Inspection fees for new one- and two-family
residential construction shall be in accordance with
Table 6-13-3(A)(2), based on the types of inspections required.
 
                              Table 6-13-3(A)(2) 1&2-Family Residential
Building Size, incl. basement Inspection Fees Type A - New Construction (cost
and garage (sq. ft.)          per square foot or minimum fee)
                              Building, Plumbing, Mechanical, Zoning
                              Electrical, and Energy
Up to 3,200                   $930                            $80
Over 3,200                    $0.31/s.f.                      $0.03/s.f.
 
      (6)   Fees for additional inspections. Inspection fees are based on up to
two of each type of required inspection. The fees for additional inspections
shall be $80 per each, and payment shall be required at time of scheduling the
inspection.
      (7)   Supplemental fees. If the scope of work includes work of the types
listed in §
6-13-3(C), and such work is not, in the judgment of the building official, a
customary part of new 1&2-family residential construction, then the fees for
such work as listed in §
6-13-3(C) shall be required, as applicable, in addition to those listed in this
section.
      (8)   Water and sewer fees. Fees for connection to the Carol Stream water
distribution system and/or sanitary sewer system shall be in accordance with §
6-13-8.
      (9)   Engineering fees and securities. If engineering plans are required,
fees shall be in accordance with §
6-13-9. A Public Improvement Preservation Bond shall be required in accordance
with §
12-3-17.
      (10)   Expedited review fee. Expedited review is offered for permits for
which the plan review is conducted solely by the village's building codes
consultant. The fee for expedited review shall be in accordance with §
6-13-6(B).
   (B)   Type B - additions, alterations and accessory structures. All plan
review and clerical fees shall be due and payable at the time an application
for permit is submitted. The development services fee and inspection fees shall
be due and payable at the time of issuance of a permit. Fees as specified in
this section shall pertain to the following types of building permits:
      Garage, attached1
      Garage, detached1
      Porch1
      Remodel (includes finished basement)
      Restoration
      Room addition1
      Seasonal room1
      Work not listed herein but similar to one of the above, as directed by
the building official
      1 Public Improvement Preservation Bond required. See §
12-3-17.
      (1)   Clerical fee. $80.00
      (2)   Plan review fees. Plan review fees for one- and two-family
residential additions, alterations and accessory structures shall be in
accordance with
Table 6-13-3(B)(1), based on the types of reviews required.
 
Size of   Table 6-13-3(B)(1)
Structure 1&2-Family Residential Plan Review Fees
or Work   Type B – Additions, Alterations and Accessory Structures (cost per
Area,     square foot or minimum fee)
incl.
basement  Building Zoning    Plumbing Mechanical Electrical Energy
(sq. ft.)
Up to 400 $80      $20       $20      $20        $40        $40
Over 400  $0.20/   $0.05/s.f $0.05/   $0.05/s.f. $0.10/s.f. $0.10/s.f .
          s.f.     .         s.f.
 
      (3)   Fees for additional reviews. Review fees are based on up to two
review cycles. If additional review is required, and if it is determined by the
building official that the need for additional review is owing to non-
responsiveness to review comments on the part of the permit applicant, then an
additional plan review fee in the amount of 25% of the total initial plan
review fees shall be charged for each additional review cycle, and payment
shall be required at time of resubmittal for review.
      (4)   Development services fee. The development services fee for one- and
two-family residential additions, alterations and accessory structures shall be
based on the estimated valuation of the cost of construction provided by the
permit applicant. The fee shall be $6.70 per $1,000 of valuation, with a
minimum fee of $50. See §
6-13-5.
      (5)   Inspection fees. Inspection fees for new one- and two-family
residential construction shall be in accordance with Table 6-13-3(D), based on
the types of inspections required.
 
Size of   Table 6-13-3(B)(2)
Structure 1&2-Family Residential Inspection Fees Type B – Additions,
or Work   Alterations and Accessory Structures (cost per square foot or
Area,     minimum fee)
incl.
basement  Building Zoning Plumbing  Mechanical Electrical Energy    Occupancy
(sq. ft.)
Up to 400 $80      $40    $90       $20        $40        $40       $40
Over 400  $0.20/   $0.10/ $0.23/s.f $0.05/s.f. $0.10/s.f  $0.10/s.f $0.10/s.f
          s.f .    s.f .  .                    .          .         .
 
      (6)   Fees for additional inspections. Inspection fees are based on up to
two of each type of required inspection. The fees for additional inspections
shall be $80 per each, and payment shall be required at time of scheduling the
inspection.
      (7)   Supplemental fees. If the scope of work includes work of the types
listed in §
6-13-3(C), and such work is not, in the judgment of the building official, a
customary part of the construction of 1&2-family residential additions,
alterations or accessory structures, then the fees for such work as listed in §
6-13-3(C) shall be required, as applicable, in addition to those listed in this
section.
      (8)   Engineering securities. A Public Improvement Preservation Bond, if
required, shall be in accordance with §
12-3-17.
      (9)   Expedited review fee. Expedited review is offered for permits for
which the plan review is conducted solely by the village's building codes
consultant. The fee for expedited review shall be in accordance with §
6-13-6(B).
   (C)   Type C - miscellaneous residential construction. All plan review,
clerical and inspection fees are included in the permit fees as listed in this
section, below. There is no development services fee for miscellaneous
residential construction. Permit fees shall be due and payable at the time an
application for permit is submitted.
Air conditioner                          $48
Construction and sales trailers,         See §
temporary                                6-13-4(B)
Deck                                     $96
Demolition, minor or emergency           $48
Demolition, primary structure 1          $400
Driveway 1                               $96
Electrical, minor (includes service      $64
upgrade)
Electrical vehicle charging station      $64
Fence, including dog run                 $64
Fireplace, masonry                       $128
Fireplace, prefab                        $96
Fire sprinkler, residential 3            $450
Flagpole                                 $64
Foundation (preliminary work for a       $120
principal project)
Furnace, heat pump and other heating     $48
systems
Garage floor1                            $64
Gazebo                                   $96
Hot tub or spa                           $96
Landscape structures 1                   $64
Lawn irrigation system                   $96
Mechanical                               $64
Patio 1                                  $64
Plumbing                                 $96
Shed (no greater than 168 square feet in $64
area) 1
Sidewalk (greater than 4 feet in width)  $64
1
Signs                                    See §
                                         6-13-4(B)
Solar panels, residential 3              $128
Stoop 1                                  $64
Structural modification, minor 1         $96
Swimming pool, above-ground              $96
Swimming pool, in-ground 1               $256
Utility service connection or repair 1,  $64
2
Water heater                             $48
Window and/or door replacement (with     $64
change in size or location)
Wireless communications dish/antenna/    See §
tower                                    6-13-4(B)
Work not listed herein but similar to
one of the above, as directed by the     As determined by the building official
building official
1 Public Improvement Preservation Bond required unless waived by the building
official. See §
12-3-17
2 In the case of an additional connection to the water distribution system or
sewer system of the village, or an increase in the size of an existing
connection, water and/or sewer fees will be required. See §
6-13-8.
3 Fire Prevention Plan Review and Inspection fees required. See §
6-13-7(B).
 
      (1)   Fees for additional reviews. Review fees are based on up to two
review cycles. If additional review is required, and if it is determined by the
building official that the need for additional review is owing to non-
responsiveness to review comments on the part of the permit applicant, then an
additional plan review fee in the amount of 25% of the total initial plan
review fees shall be charged for each additional review cycle, and payment
shall be required at time of resubmittal for review.
      (2)   Fees for additional inspections. Inspection fees are based on up to
two of each type of required inspection. The fees for additional inspections
shall be $80 per each, and payment shall be required at time of scheduling the
inspection.
      (3)   Engineering securities. A Public Improvement Preservation Bond, if
required, shall be in accordance with §
12-3-17.
   (D)   Permit not required. Building permits shall not be required for the
following one- and two-family residential work. Nonetheless, all work must
comply with applicable village codes and ordinances.
      (1)   Decorative landscape features.
      (2)   Dish antenna no greater than three feet in diameter.
      (3)   Fire pit.
      (4)   Low voltage system.
      (5)   Mailbox. (Must comply with Public Works Department installation
requirements.)
      (6)   Remodeling with no addition, alteration or relocation of walls or
utilities (plumbing, heating or electrical).
      (7)   Replacement of existing electrical fixtures, switches, receptacles
and circuit breakers.
      (8)   Replacement of existing plumbing fixtures with no alteration of
existing piping.
      (9)   Recreational apparatus, such as a swing set or basketball hoop.
      (10)   Roof (not including structural repair or modification).
      (11)   Routine maintenance.
      (12)   Security alarm system.
      (13)   Sidewalk (four feet or less in width and located entirely on the
private lot).
      (14)   Shed equal to or less than 64 square feet in area.
      (15)   Siding.
      (16)   Tent or canopy (temporary, residential).
      (17)   Window or door replacement with no change in the size or location
of opening.
(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013; Ord.
2017-02-06, passed 2-21-2017; Ord. 2019-02-05, passed 2-19-2019; Ord. 2020-04-
11, passed 4-6-2020; Ord. 2023-04-17, passed 4-17-2023; Ord. 2025- 04-14,
passed 4-21-2025)
§ 6-13-4 BUILDING PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES FOR COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL,
INSTITUTIONAL AND MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Type D - new construction, additions, alterations and accessory
structures. All plan review and clerical fees shall be due and payable at the
time an application for permit is submitted. The development services fee and
inspection fees shall be due and payable at the time of issuance of a permit.
Fees as specified in this section shall pertain to the following types of
building permits:
      Accessory structure, miscellaneous1
      Building addition1
      Interior remodeling
      New principal building1
      Restoration
      Work not listed herein but similar to one of the above, as directed by
the building official
      (1)   Clerical fee. $160.
      (2)   Plan review fees. Plan review fees for commercial, industrial,
institutional and multiple-family residential new construction, additions,
alterations and accessory structures shall be in accordance with
Table 6-13-4(A)(1), based on the types of reviews required.
         Table 6-13-4(A)(1)
Volume   Commercial, Industrial, Institutional and Multiple-Family Residential Plan
of       Review Fees
Building Type D - New Construction, Additions, Alterations and Accessory Structures
or Work                                                                      Fire
Area                                                                         Code,
(cubic   Building Zoning Plumbing Mechanical Electrical Energy Accessibility High
ft.)                                                                         Hazard,
                                                                             NFPA
                                                                             Reviews
         Table 6-13-4(A)(1)
Volume   Commercial, Industrial, Institutional and Multiple-Family Residential Plan
of       Review Fees
Building Type D - New Construction, Additions, Alterations and Accessory Structures
or Work                                                                          Fire
Area                                                                             Code,
(cubic   Building   Zoning Plumbing Mechanical Electrical Energy   Accessibility High
ft.)                                                                             Hazard,
                                                                                 NFPA
                                                                                 Reviews
Up to    $380       $80    $152     $152       $190       $215     $100
30,000
30,001
to       $490       $80    $196     $196       $245       $245     $123
60,000
60,001
to       $530       $80    $212     $212       $265       $265     $133
80,000
80,001
to       $610       $80    $244     $244       $305       $305     $153
100,000                                                                           
100,001                                                                          See §
to       $780       $80    $312     $312       $390       $390     $195          6-13-7
150,000
150,001
to       $880       $80    $352     $352       $440       $440     $220
200,000
         $910 plus
         $10 per           40% of   40% of     50% of     50% of
Over     each       $80    Building Building   Building   Building 25% of
200,000  additional        Fee      Fee        Fee        Fee      Building Fee
         10,000
         c.f.
 
      (3)   Fees for additional reviews. Review fees are based on up to two
review cycles. If additional review is required, and if it is determined by the
building official that the need for additional review is owing to non-
responsiveness to review comments on the part of the permit applicant, then an
additional plan review fee in the amount of 25% of the total initial plan
review fees shall be charged for each additional review cycle, and payment
shall be required at time of resubmittal for review.
      (4)   Development services fee. The development services fee for
commercial, industrial, institutional and multiple-family residential
construction shall be based on the estimated valuation of the cost of
construction provided by the permit applicant. The fee shall be $6.70 per
$1,000 of valuation, with a minimum fee of $50. See §
6-13-5.
      (5)   Inspection fees. Inspection fees for commercial, industrial,
institutional and multiple-family residential construction shall be in
accordance with
Table 6-13-4(A)(2), based on the types of inspections required.
Volume   Table 6-13-4(A)(2)
of       Commercial, Industrial, Institutional and Multiple-Family
Building Residential Inspection Fees
or Work  Type D – New Construction, Additions, Alterations and Accessory
Area     Structures
(cubic   Building Zoning Plumbing Mechanical Electrical Energy Fire Occupancy
ft.)                                                           Code
Volume   Table 6-13-4(A)(2)
of       Commercial, Industrial, Institutional and Multiple-Family Residential
Building Inspection Fees
or Work  Type D – New Construction, Additions, Alterations and Accessory
Area     Structures
(cubic   Building Zoning Plumbing Mechanical Electrical Energy Fire    Occupancy
ft.)                                                           Code
Up to    $420     $80    $240     $100       $180       $100           $80
60,000
60,001
to       $525     $100   $300     $125       $225       $125           $100
80,000
80,001
to       $630     $120   $360     $150       $270       $150          $120
100,000                                                        See §
100,001                                                        6-13-7
to       $735     $140   $420     $175       $315       $175           $140
150,000
150,001
to       $840     $160   $480     $200       $360       $200           $160
200,000
Over     $945     $180   $540     $225       $405       $225           $180
200,000
 
      (6)   Fees for additional inspections.  Inspection fees are based on up
to two of each type of required inspection. The fees for additional inspections
shall be $80 per each, and payment shall be required at time of scheduling the
inspection.
      (7)   Supplemental fees. If the scope of work includes work of the types
listed in §
6-13-4(B), and such work is not, in the judgment of the building official, a
customary and ancillary part of the construction, then the fees for such work
as listed in §
6-13-4(B) shall be required, as applicable, in addition to those listed in this
section.
      (8)   Fire prevention fees. If the scope of work includes work regulated
by the adopted Fire Code of the Village of Carol Stream, then the fees for plan
review and inspection of such work as listed in §
6-13-7(A) shall be required, as applicable, in addition to the fees listed in
this section.
      (9)   Water and sewer fees. If connection to the Carol Stream water
distribution system and/or sanitary sewer system is required, fees shall be in
accordance with §
6-13-8.
      (10)   Engineering fees and securities. If engineering plans are
required, fees shall be in accordance with §
6-13-9. A public improvement preservation bond, if required, shall be in
accordance with §
12-3-17.
      (11)   Expedited review fee. Expedited review is offered for permits for
which the plan review is conducted solely by the village’s building codes
consultant. The fee for expedited review shall be in accordance with §
6-13-6(B).
   (B)   Type E - miscellaneous commercial industrial, institutional and
multiple-family residential. All plan review, clerical and inspection fees are
included in the fees as listed in this section, below. The development services
fee shall be as prescribed in §
6-13-4(B)(2). All fees for miscellaneous commercial industrial, institutional
and multiple-family residential construction shall be due and payable at the
time an application for permit is submitted.
      (1)   Plan review, clerical and inspection fees.
Accessory structure, minor2                    $200
Construction and sales trailers, temporary     $200
Conveyor system1                               $240 per level
Demolition, major2                             $540
Demolition, minor, nonstructural or emergency  $80
Driveway (per each)2                           $120
Electrical, major (includes service upgrade)   $240
Electrical, minor (includes fixture            $160
replacement)
Electrical vehicle charging station            $580
Elevator1                                      $600 per elevator bank
Equipment (includes removal, installation,     $140 plus $20 per additional
relocation)1                                   piece plus $80 for special
                                               permit process
Fence, exterior (includes trash enclosure)     $200
Fence, interior                                $120
Fire alarm system1                             $80
Fire pump test1                                $40
Fire suppression system1                       $80
Flagpole                                       $120
Foundation (preliminary work for a principal   $480
project)
Furniture panels, with electrical work         $120
Hood and duct (type 1 w/o suppression)1        $80
Hood and duct (type 1 w/suppression, 15 flow   $80
points or less)1
Hood and duct (type 1 w/suppression, 16-29     $80
flow points)1
Hood and duct (type 1 w/suppression, 30 or     $80
more flow points)1
Hood suppression only, 15 flow points or less1 $80
Hood suppression only, 16-29 flow points1      $80
Hood suppression only, 30 or more flow points1 $80
Hood and duct (type 2)1                        $80
HVAC equipment, new or replacement             $140 plus $20 per additional
   (boiler, furnace, heat pump, a/c, etc.)1 unit
HVAC system, new1                              $240
Lawn irrigation system                         $160
Low voltage wiring                             $120
Mechanical                                     $120
Parking lot maintenance (sealcoating and       $120
striping)
Parking lot patching, overlay, expansion or    $120
reconstruction2
Parking lot, temporary2                        $120
Patio, floor, slab, or stoop (per each)2       $120
Plumbing                                       $300
Racking system (does not include sprinkler      
system)1                                       No permit required
   Less than 5.75 feet in height            $580
   5.75 feet or greater
Roofing and siding                             $160
Security alarm system                          No permit required
Sidewalk2                                      $120
Sign, face change                              $40 plus $10 per additional sign
                                               of the same type
                                                
Sign, permanent, no electrical                 $120 plus $20 per additional
   Ground                                   sign of the same type
   Wall                                     $80 plus $20 per additional sign
                                               of the same type
                                                
Sign, permanent with electrical                $160 plus $20 per additional
   Ground                                   sign of the same type
   Wall                                     $120 plus $20 per additional
                                               sign of the same type
                                               $40 plus $10 per additional sign
Sign, temporary                                of the same type
   Sign, temporary, special event           $40 plus $10 per additional sign
                                               of the same type
Solar panels, commercial1                      $580
Spray booth1                                   $530 per booth
Storage tank, fuel tank, propane tank1         $140 plus $20 per additional
                                               piece
Structural modification, minor2                $200
Swimming pool, commercial or public1, 2        $780
Tent, temporary                                $160
Utility service connection or repair2, 3       $200
Window and doors                               $160
Wireless communications                        $300 plus $100 per each
   dish/antenna/tower4                      additional review
Work not listed herein, but similar to one of  As determined by the building
the above, as directed by the building         official
official
1 Fire Prevention Plan Review and Inspection fees required. See §
6-13-7(B).
2 Engineering fees and/or securities required unless waived by the building
official. See §
6-13-9 and §
12-3-17.
3 Water and sewer fees required. See §
6-13-8.
4 Water Tower Plan Review and Inspection fees required. See §
6-13-6(A).
 
      (2)   Fees for additional reviews. Review fees are based on up to two
review cycles. If additional review is required, and if it is determined by the
building official that the need for additional review is owing to non-
responsiveness to review comments on the part of the permit applicant, then an
additional plan review fee in the amount of 25% of the total initial plan
review fees shall be charged for each additional review cycle, and payment
shall be required at time of resubmittal for review.
      (3)   Development services fee. The development services fee for
miscellaneous commercial, industrial, institutional and multiple-family
residential construction shall be based on the estimated valuation of the cost
of construction provided by the permit applicant. The fee shall be $6.70 per
$1,000 of valuation, with a minimum fee of $50. See §
6-13-5.
      (4)   Fees for additional inspections.  Inspection fees for miscellaneous
commercial industrial, institutional and multiple-family residential permits
are based on up to two of each type of required inspection. Additional
inspections shall be compensated at $80 per each, and such payment shall be
required at time of scheduling the inspection.
      (5)   Expedited review fee. Expedited review is offered for permits for
which the plan review is conducted solely by the village's building codes
consultant. The fee for expedited review shall be in accordance with §
6-13-6(B).
(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2011-04-11, passed 4-18-2011; Ord.
2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013; Ord. 2017-02-06, passed 2- 21-2017; Ord. 2019-02-
05, passed 2-19-2019; Ord. 2020-04-11, passed 4-6-2020; Ord. 2023-04-17, passed
4-17-2023; Ord. 2024-04-15, passed 4-1-2024; Ord. 2025-04-14, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 6-13-5 DEVELOPMENT SERVICES FEE.
   For every type of permit requiring a development services fee, the applicant
shall provide an estimated building valuation at the time of application for
permit. Building valuations shall include the total cost of construction
materials and labor for the types of work associated with the permit, such as
foundation work; structural and nonstructural building components; permanent
systems such as electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing; and interior finish
material. The building valuation does not include such items as appliances,
decorations, furnishings or non-building-related items. The development
services fee shall be based on the estimated building valuation as approved by
the Building Official. If, in the opinion of the Building Official, the
building valuation is underestimated on the permit application, the application
shall be denied, unless the applicant is able to provide detailed information
in support of the estimate to meet the approval of the Building Official. In
the event of a dispute, the Building Official shall use the latest version of
the Building Valuation Data published in the International Code Council's
Building Safety Journal or other similar cost-per-square-foot resource to
determine the minimum acceptable valuation. The final building permit valuation
shall be set by the Building Official.
(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013)
§ 6-13-6 CONSULTANT AND AGENCY FEES.
   (A)   Consultant services. The village's costs of legal review, structural
engineering review, and other special reviews required by the Community
Development Director to be performed by means of outside consultant services
shall be paid for at the billed rate as charged to the village by the
consultant. This shall not include consultant fees for plan review or
inspections performed by the village's building codes consultant. Payment for
consultant services fees shall be due and payable at the time of issuance of a
permit.
   (B)   Expedited consultant review fee. The cost of expedited consultant
review shall be paid for at the billed rate as charged to the village by the
consultant plus a 10% administrative fee, and shall be paid at the time of
permit application.
   (C)   Recording fees. Fees incurred by the village for the recording of
documents with DuPage County by the Village Clerk shall be reimbursed by the
applicant at a cost of 100% of the actual recording cost.
   (D)   DuPage County impact fees. It shall be the responsibility of the
permit applicant to comply with the requirements of the DuPage County Fair
Share Road Improvement Impact Fee Program. Evidence of such compliance shall be
required prior to issuance of a building permit.
   (E)   Other agency fees. It shall be the responsibility of the permit
applicant to comply with the requirements of all applicable regulatory
agencies, including but not limited to the DuPage County Health Department, the
Illinois State Fire Marshal and the Illinois Department of Public Health.
(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013)
§ 6-13-7 FIRE PREVENTION FEES.
   Fees for plan review and inspection of commercial, industrial, institutional
and multiple-family residential construction in accordance with the
requirements of the adopted Fire Code of the Village of Carol Stream shall be
as prescribed herein.
   (A)   Type D - New construction, additions, alterations and accessory
structures. All fees for fire prevention plan review shall be as prescribed in
this section, shall be required in addition to the fees given in Tables 6-13-4
(A)(1) and 6-13-4(A)(2), and shall be due and payable at the time an
application for permit is submitted. Fees as specified in this section shall
pertain to the following types of building permits:
      Accessory structure, miscellaneous
      Building addition
      Interior remodeling
      New principal building
      Restoration
      Work not listed herein but similar to one of the above, as directed by
the building official.
      (1)   Plan review fees. Fees for fire prevention plan review for
commercial, industrial, institutional and multiple-family residential new
construction, additions, alterations and accessory structures shall be in
accordance with
Table 6-13-7(A)(1), based on the types of reviews required.
Volume   Table 6-13-7(A)(1)
of       Fire Prevention Plan Review Fees
Building Type D – New Construction, Additions, Alterations and Accessory
or Work  Structures
Area     Fire
(cubic   Code High Hazard
ft.)
Volume of   Table 6-13-7(A)(1)
Building    Fire Prevention Plan Review Fees
or Work     Type D – New Construction, Additions, Alterations and Accessory
Area        Structures
(cubic ft.) Fire Code High Hazard
Up to       $215      $570
30,000
30,001 to   $245      $735
60,000
60,001 to   $265      $795
80,000
80,001 to   $305      $915
100,000
100,001 to  $390      $1,170
150,000
150,001 to  $440      $1,320
200,000
Over        50% of
200,000     Building  150% of Building Fee
            Fee
 
      (2)   Fees for additional reviews. Review fees are based on up to two
review cycles. If additional review is required, and if it is determined by the
building official that the need for additional review is owing to non-
responsiveness to review comments on the part of the permit applicant, then an
additional plan review fee in the amount of 25% of the total initial plan
review fees shall be charged for each additional review cycle, and payment
shall be required at time of resubmittal for review.
      (3)   Inspection fees. Fire prevention inspection fees for commercial,
industrial, institutional and multiple-family residential new construction,
additions, alterations and accessory structures shall be in accordance with
Table 6-13-7(A)(2), based on the types of inspections required.
Volume   Table 6-13-7(A)(2)
of       Fire Prevention Inspection Fees
Building Type D – New Construction, Additions, Alterations and Accessory
or Work  Structures
Area     Fire High
(cubic   Code Hazard Final Occupancy
ft.)
Volume   Table 6-13-7(A)(2)
of       Fire Prevention Inspection Fees
Building Type D – New Construction, Additions, Alterations and Accessory
or Work  Structures
Area     Fire High
(cubic   Code Hazard Final Occupancy
ft.)
Up to    $80  $80    $80
60,000
60,001
to       $100 $100   $100
80,000
80,001
to       $120 $120   $120
100,000
100,001
to       $140 $140   $140
150,000
150,001
to       $160 $160   $160
200,000
Over     $180 $180   $180
200,000
 
      (4)   Fees for additional inspections. Inspection fees are based on up to
two of each type of required inspection. The fees for additional inspections
shall be $80 per each, and payment shall be required at time of scheduling the
inspection.
      (5)   Supplemental fees. If the scope of work includes work of the types
listed in §
6-13-7(B), and such work is not, in the judgment of the building official, a
customary and ancillary part of the construction, then the fees for such work
as listed in §
6-13-4(B) shall be required, as applicable, in addition to those listed in this
section.
   (B)   Type E - Miscellaneous commercial industrial, institutional and
multiple-family residential. All fees for fire prevention plan review and
inspection shall be as prescribed in this section, and shall be required in
addition to the fees given in §
6-13-4(B).
      (1)   Plan Review Fees.
Fire alarm system  
Fire alarm system                                 
   1-20 devices                               $220
   21-40 devices                              $430
   41-60 devices                              $710
   61-80 devices                              $810
   81-100 devices                             $910
   101 + devices                              $1,000 + $5 per device over
                                                 100
Fire suppression system                           
                                                  
   Carbon dioxide or clean agent system       $180
      Up to 105 pounds                     $1.50 per each additional
                                                 pound
   Dry chemical system                        $420 plus alarm fees
   Standpipe or hydrant                       $25/valve ($300 min)
   Sprinkler system (dry, wet, pre-action, etc 
      Technical submittal (required for all$125 for initial design area
      Up to 10 heads                       $180
      11 to 19 heads                       $240
      20 to 100 heads                      $530
      101 to 200 heads                     $580
      201 to 300 heads                     $710
      301 to 500 heads                     $910
      Over 500 heads                       $910 plus $1.00 each over 500
Hood and duct (type 1 w/o suppression)           $275 per system
Hood and duct (type 1 w/suppression, 15 flow     $375 per system
points or less)
Hood and duct (type 1 w/suppression, 16-29 flow  $410 per system
points)
Hood and duct (type 1 w/suppression, 30 or more  $430 per system
flow points)
Hood suppression only, 15 flow points or less    $225 per system
Hood suppression only, 16-29 flow points         $275 per system
Hood suppression only, 30 or more flow points    $325 per system
Hood and duct (type 2)                           $225 per system
Work not listed herein, but similar to one of    As determined by the building
the above, as directed by the building official  official
 
      (2)   Inspection fees.
Conveyor system                                    $80 per level
Elevator                                           $40 per elevator bank
Equipment (includes removal, installation,         $40
relocation)
Fence, interior                                    $80
Fire alarm system                                   
   Up to 5,000 sf                               $80
   5,000 sf or greater                          $160
Fire pump test                                     $160
Fire suppression system                             
   Carbon dioxide or clean agent system          
      Up to 105 pounds                       $80
      Dry chemical system                    $80
Standpipe or dedicated hydrant                     $80
Sprinkler system (dry, wet, pre-action, etc.)       
   Residential                                  $40
   Up to 10 heads                               $80
   11 to 19 heads (does not include hydro test) $160
   20 to 100 heads (includes hydro test)        $240
   101 to 200 heads (includes hydro test)       $240
   201 to 300 heads (includes hydro test)       $240
   301 to 500 heads (includes hydro test)       $240
   Over 500 heads (includes hydro test)         $240
Hood and duct (type 1 w/o suppression)             $80
Hood suppression only, 15 flow points or less      $80
Hood suppression only, 16-29 flow points           $80
Hood suppression only, 30 or more flow points      $80
Hood and duct (type 2)                             $80
HVAC equipment, new or replacement (boiler,        $40
furnace, heat pump, a/c, etc.)
HVAC system, new                                   $80
Racking system (does not include sprinkler system)  
   Less than 5.75 feet in height                No permit required
   5.75 feet or greater                         $80
Solar panels, commercial                           $80
Solar panels, residential                          $40
Spray booth                                        $80 per booth
Storage tank, fuel tank, propane tank              $40
Swimming pool, commercial or public                $40
Work not listed herein, but similar to one of the  As determined by the
above, as directed by the building official        building official
 
(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013; Ord.
2017-02-06, passed 2-21-2017; Ord. 2019-02-05, passed 2-19-2019; Ord. 2020-04-
11, passed 4-6-2020; Ord. 2023-04-17, passed 4-17-2023; Ord. 2024-04-15, passed
4-1-2024; Ord. 2025-04-14, passed 4-21-2025)
§ 6-13-8 WATER AND SEWER FEES.
   Permit fees for connection to the water distribution system and sewer system
of the village shall be as prescribed in §§
6-13-3 and
6-13-4. Water and sewer fees shall be due and payable at the time of issuance
of a permit.
   (A)   Water meter fee. Water meter fee shall be based on the current cost to
the village of the water meter, as determined by the Director of Public Works
and given on the current schedule of costs produced by the Public Works
Department.
   (B)   Water connection tap-on fee, potable water. The potable water
connection tap-on fee shall be based upon the size of each service connection
tap made into the water system, as follows:
Size of Tap Tap-On Fee*
Size of Tap Tap-On Fee*
3/4-inch    $150
1-inch      $200
1-1/2-inch  $250
2-inch      $300
3-inch      $600
4-inch      $1,000
6-inch      $1,500
8-inch      $2,000
10-inch     $2,500
NOTES TO TABLE:
* In the event any building or premises contains more than one dwelling or
commercial unit, an additional fee of $150 per each additional unit shall be
required.
   (C)   Water connection tap-on fee, fire suppression. The fire suppression
system water connection tap-on fee shall be based upon the size of each service
connection tap made into the water system, as follows:
Size of Tap Tap-On Fee
Size of Tap Tap-On Fee
3/4-inch    $50
1-inch      $50
1-1/2-inch  $50
2-inch      $50
3-inch      $60
4-inch      $100
6-inch      $150
8-inch      $200
10-inch     $250
   (D)   Water connection tap-on fee, combined system. If a connection to the
water system shall be of a size sufficient to provide potable water to the
facility as well as water for a fire suppression system, the water connection
tap-on fee shall be based upon the size of the water tap made into the water
system, as prescribed in §
6-13-8(B).
   (E)   Sanitary sewer connection tap-on fee. The sanitary sewer connection
tap-on fee shall be based upon the size of each separate service connection tap
made into the sanitary sewer system, as follows:
 
Size of Tap Tap-On Fee *
6-inch      $200
8-inch      $700
10-inch     $1,200
12-inch     $1,800
15-inch     $2,500
* In the event any building or premises contains more than one dwelling or
commercial unit, an additional fee of $150 per each additional unit shall be
required.
   (F)   Water and sewer expansion connection fee, residential. The water and
sewer expansion connection fee for residential units shall be based upon the
number and type of residential units, as follows:
 
Type of Property                              Fee per Unit
Multiple-family residential building
   Efficiency or studio apartment          $865
   1-bedroom apartment                     $1,297
   2-bedroom apartment                     $1,730
   3-bedroom apartment                     $2,162
Single-family residence, attached or detached $2,595
   (G)   Water and sewer expansion connection fee, commercial/industrial/
institutional. The water and sewer expansion connection fee for commercial,
industrial and institutional users shall be $865 per 100 gallons of estimated
average daily water consumption, with a minimum fee of $865. The estimate must
be submitted by the party in responsible charge of the design and approved by
the Building Official or his or her designee.
   (H)   Water and sewer expansion connection fee, water connection only. The
water and sewer expansion connection fee for a user who seeks a connection only
to the water system of the village shall be 28% of the water and sewer
expansion connection fee otherwise applicable to the property. The water and
sewer expansion connection fee for a user who seeks a connection only to the
sanitary sewer system of the village shall be 72% of the water and sewer
expansion connection fee otherwise applicable to the property.
   (I)   Water and sewer service connection repair permit fee. The permit fee
for the repair of service connections to the village’s water and sewer systems
shall be as prescribed in §
6-13-3(C) and §
6-13-4(B).
   (J)   Insurance and performance bond requirements. No permit for a water or
sewer connection shall be issued unless the person applying therefor, or the
contractor, shall have first procured public liability insurance meeting the
requirements of §
13-2-7, and have filed with the village a performance bond meeting the
requirements of §
13-2-8.
(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013)
§ 6-13-9 ENGINEERING FEES AND DEPOSITS.
   (A)   Engineering plan review fee and deposit. Except as otherwise provided
herein, the engineering fee for the review of plans by the Village Engineer, or
his or her designee, shall be based on the design engineer's estimated probable
cost of construction which has been approved by the Village Engineer. A plan
review deposit is payable at the time of permit application. Plan reviews shall
not be performed until the deposit has been paid. This plan review deposit
amount may be amended by the Village Engineer, but only upon approval of a
preliminary probable cost of construction estimate. This deposit will be
utilized for payment of the required plan review fee. If the plan review fee
exceeds the deposit amount, then the required additional amount shall be
payable at the time of approval of final engineering plans. If a reimbursement
of deposited funds is due the permit applicant, then remittance will be made
upon approval of the final estimated probable cost of construction.
      (1)   Engineering plan review deposit. The engineering plan review
deposit shall be $2,500.
      (2)   Engineering plan review fee, subdivision improvement plans. The
engineering fee for the review of subdivision improvement plans by the Village
Engineer, or his or her designee, shall be ½% of the design engineer's
estimated probable cost of construction which has been approved by the Village
Engineer.
      (3)   Engineering plan review fee, all other improvement plans. The
engineering fee for the review of plans by the Village Engineer, or his or her
designee, shall be 1% of the design engineer's estimated probable cost of
construction which has been approved by the Village Engineer. The engineering
fee for the review of plans by the Village Engineer, or his or her designee,
for minor parking lot maintenance repairs such as resurfacing or patching as
determined by the Village Engineer, or his or her designee, shall be $175 per
application.
   (B)   Engineering inspection fee. The engineering fee for inspections
performed during the course of construction by the Village Engineer, or his or
her designee, shall be 2% of the probable cost of construction as estimated by
the design engineer and approved by the Village Engineer, such fee to be
payable at the time of approval of final engineering plans. The engineering fee
for inspections performed during the course of construction by the Village
Engineer, or his or her designee, for minor parking lot maintenance repairs
such as resurfacing or patching as determined by the Village Engineer, or his
or her designee, shall be 1% of the probable cost of the repairs or
construction, as estimated by the design engineer and approved by the Village
Engineer.
   (C)   Stormwater management plan review and inspection fees and deposit. The
village's costs of stormwater management plan review and inspections, performed
by means of outside consultant services, shall be paid for at the billed rate
as charged to the village by the consultant. A stormwater management deposit in
an amount as determined by the Village Engineer, in accordance with the
village's schedule of stormwater management deposits, plus a non-refundable
processing fee of $120, shall be payable at the time of permit application.
Plan reviews shall not be performed until this stormwater management deposit
and processing fee have been paid. The stormwater management deposit shall be
remitted to the permit applicant only at such time as all village invoices for
consultant services and the processing fee have been paid.
   (D)   Land movement permit fee. Engineering review and inspection fees and
deposits for issuance of a permit for any land movement within the jurisdiction
of the village shall be in accordance with §§
6-13-9(A),
6-13-9(B) and
6-13-9(C).
   (E)   Excavation or street cut permit fee. Engineering review and inspection
fees and deposits for issuance of a permit for any street cut or excavation
within public right-of-way under the jurisdiction of the village shall be in
accordance with §§
6-13-9(A) and
6-13-9(B).
   (F)   Grading guarantee deposit for new one- and two-family residential
construction. In addition to any other permit fees payable for new one- and
two-family residential construction, there shall be deposited with the village
cash, or adequate security, in the amount of $500 per lot, which shall be known
as the grading guarantee deposit. This deposit shall be in addition to any
project performance bond or letter of credit previously established with regard
to the property. The purpose of this grading guarantee deposit shall be to
ensure that the individual lot has been properly graded so as to provide
acceptable drainage, and that a minimum of four inches of topsoil has been
spread across the lot.
      (1)   The village shall return the amount of the deposit or release the
amount of the security once the grading conditions of the lot have been tested
by usage, settling, rainfall and other conditions. The amount of the grading
guarantee deposit shall be held or shall remain available for the benefit of
the village for a period of no more than one year after the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy or occupancy variance, unless the village notifies the
party responsible for the grading guarantee deposit of the specific defect
existing in the grading and drainage of the lot.
      (2)   In the event that the grading defect is determined, but not
corrected after reasonable notice, the village may utilize the funds to correct
the defect. However, the utilization of this grading guarantee deposit shall
not prevent the village from taking other action against the party responsible
for the defect. Without regard to any other provision of this section, the
grading guarantee deposit shall not be released by the village until the entire
area immediately affected by the drainage characteristics of the individual lot
shall have also been found to comply with the ordinances of the village
relating to drainage.
   (G)   Security for subdivision improvements. For the requirements of
securities for subdivision improvements, see §
7-2-8.
   (H)   Public improvement preservation bond. For the requirements of public
improvement preservation bonds, see §
12-3-17.
(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2010-11-53, passed 11-15-2010; Ord.
2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013)
§ 6-13-10 OCCUPANCY VARIANCE, PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE DEPOSITS, AND TEMPORARY
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Occupancy variance deposit. A variance from the requirements for
occupancy may be granted by the building official, or his or her designee, in
light of an inability of the builder to complete such requirements due to
inclement weather or upon other good cause shown as being beyond the control of
the builder. Such requirements for occupancy shall include completion of all
work items associated with the approved building permit or permits for the
occupied space within the premises. A variance shall not be granted from health
or life safety code requirements.
      (1)   When a variance is so issued, there shall be submitted to the
village a cash deposit in the amount of 125% of the estimated probable cost of
construction of the incomplete work, including the cost of completion of as-
built plans if so required by the Village Engineer. The estimated probable cost
of construction shall be approved by the building official or his or her
designee.
      (2)   The purpose of the occupancy variance deposit shall be to ensure
that the items not completed at time of occupancy will be completed within 60
days after the weather, soil conditions or other impediment to completion
allows for the incomplete work to be finished. Upon granting of an occupancy
variance, occupancy of the premises shall be permitted. The amount of the
deposit shall be held by the village, and the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy shall be withheld until such time as the work has been completed.
      (3)   If the specific defects pertaining to the occupancy variance
deposit are not corrected within the 60-day period set forth above, the village
shall notify the party which submitted the occupancy variance deposit of the
specific defect still preventing the issuance of a final certificate of
occupancy and the release of the deposit. The village may, after reasonable
notice, utilize the funds to correct the defect. The utilization of this
occupancy variance deposit shall not prevent the village from taking other
action against the person responsible for the defect preventing the issuance of
the certificate of occupancy, including but not limited to the filing of a
lawsuit for injunction, ordinance violation or the withdrawal of the occupancy
permit.
      (4)   Without regard to any provision contained within this Code, the
occupancy variance deposit shall not be released by the village until the
entire area immediately affected by the incomplete work items shall have also
been found to comply with the ordinances of the village.
   (B)   Performance guarantee deposit. A temporary postponement of the
requirements for completion of landscaping or landscape appurtenances may be
granted by the building official, or his or her designee, in light of an
inability of the builder to complete such work due to inclement weather or upon
other good cause shown as being beyond the control of the builder. Such
requirements shall include completion of all landscaping or landscape
appurtenance work items associated with the approved building permit or permits
for a premises or common area adjacent thereto, if applicable. Approval of such
postponement shall not be granted unless the premises has otherwise been deemed
ready for occupancy and all health and life safety code requirements have been
completed.
      (1)   When a temporary postponement of the requirements for completion of
landscaping or landscape appurtenances is approved by the building official,
there shall be submitted to the village a cash deposit in the amount of 125% of
the estimated probable cost of construction of the incomplete work. The
estimated probable cost of construction shall be approved by the building
official or his or her designee. Such cash deposit shall be known as the
performance guarantee deposit.
      (2)   The purpose of the performance guarantee deposit shall be to ensure
that the items not completed at time of occupancy will be completed within 60
days after the weather, soil conditions or other impediment to completion
allows for the incomplete work to be finished. Upon granting of a temporary
postponement of the requirements for completion of landscaping or landscape
appurtenances, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued and occupancy of the
premises shall be permitted. The amount of the deposit shall be held by the
village until such time as the work has been completed.
      (3)   If the specific defects pertaining to the performance guarantee
deposit are not corrected within the 60-day period set forth above, the village
shall notify the party which submitted the performance guarantee deposit of the
specific defect still preventing the release of the deposit. The village may,
after reasonable notice, utilize the funds to correct the defect. The
utilization of this performance guarantee deposit shall not prevent the village
from taking other action against the person responsible for the defect
preventing the release of the deposit, including but not limited to the filing
of a lawsuit for injunction or ordinance violation.
      (4)   Without regard to any provision contained within this Code, the
performance guarantee deposit shall not be released by the village until the
entire area immediately affected by the incomplete work items shall have also
been found to comply with the ordinances of the village.
   (C)   Temporary certificate of occupancy. A temporary certificate of
occupancy may be granted by the building official, or his or her designee, to
allow occupancy of all or a portion of a building provided certain requirements
are satisfied, but when all of the requirements that would allow for the
issuance of a full certificate of occupancy have not been satisfied. A
temporary certificate of occupancy shall not be issued when there are
incomplete health or life safety code requirements in the space for which
temporary occupancy is being requested.
      (1)   In making a request for a temporary certificate of occupancy, the
permit applicant shall submit the following:
         (a)   A written summary detailing the nature of and reason for the
request, the intended schedule for full project completion, and a list of the
remaining incomplete work as required under the approved building permit;
         (b)   The clerical fee in the amount of $80 for one- and two-family
residential construction permits, and $160 for commercial, industrial,
institutional, and multi-family residential construction permits; and
         (c)   Payment in the amount of $80 for each additional required
inspection.
      (2)   A temporary certificate of occupancy shall be valid for a time
period as established by the building official, or his or her designee.
(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013; Ord.
2020-04-11, passed 4-6-2020)
§ 6-13-11 ELEVATOR INSPECTION FEES.
   As the local permitting authority, the village is responsible for the
permitting of new elevator construction and elevator alterations. The building
permit and inspection fees for such work shall be as indicated in §
6-13-4(B). However, the authority to regulate and inspect public elevators lies
within the jurisdiction of the Office of the State Fire Marshal, and so the
requirements of that office shall also apply.
(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013)
§ 6-13-12 UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE AND PLAT APPROVAL FEES.
   The following fees shall be due and payable at the time of application for
any requested action provided for by the Unified Development Ordinance (UDO) or
request for plat approval. No application will be acted on by staff or
forwarded to the Plan Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals or Village Board for
review or action without full payment of the required fee. Payment of the fee
is no way contingent on whether the application is approved or disapproved.
Annexation approvals
   New development                                                  $2,000
   Other                                                            $800
Annexation agreement amendment                                         $800
Appearance fee for approvals required by the UDO but not listed herein $500
Courtesy review                                                        $240
Development staff review                                               $640
Easement encroachment                                                  $300
Gary/North Avenue Corridor review
   New or replacement ground signs                                  $500
   One discipline (site design, architecture or landscaping)        $500
   Two disciplines                                                  $1,000
   Three disciplines                                                $1,500
   New development                                                  $1,500
Outdoor dining permit                                                  $120
Planned development
   Existing planned development, minor change                       $500
   Existing planned development, major change                       $1,000
   New planned development                                          $1,500
Rezoning (zoning map amendment)                                        $640
Shared parking facility permit                                         $500
Site plan review                                                       $640
Special use
   First                                                            $800
   Each additional                                                  $200
Special use amendment                                                  $800
Staff adjustment                                                       $240
Subdivision
   Major                                                            $700
   Minor                                                            $400
Temporary building, structure or use                                   $120
Temporary waiver to the Code of Ordinances                             $120
Text amendment
   Building codes                                                   $240
   Unified Development Ordinance                                    $640
Variation
   First                                                            $640
   Each additional                                                  $200
Zoning verification letter                                             $80
 
(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013; Ord.
2021-06-20, passed 6-7-2021)
§ 6-13-13 ANNEXATION FEES.
   In consideration of annexation of any real estate to the village, there
shall be paid to the village a fee of $600 for each acre of property so
annexed.
(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013; Ord.
2022-02-10, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 6-13-14 LAND AND CASH DONATIONS.
   See
Ch. 16, Art. 9, Sec. 12.
(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013; Ord.
2022-02-10, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 6-13-15 CODE APPEAL FEES.
   The fee for an appeal of the application of the building construction and
maintenance codes of the village shall be $400.
(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013)
§ 6-13-16 DOCUMENT SALES AND REPRODUCTION COSTS.
   (A)   Publication costs.
 
Zoning Code                                    $25
Subdivision Code                               $20
Engineering Design Manual                      $30
Local amendments to the adopted building codes $25
Any part of the above documents, per page      $0.20
   (B)   Document sales.
Official Zoning Map
   11-inch x 17-inch                                         $3
   36-inch x 48-inch                                         $15
Future Land Use Plan
   11-inch x 17-inch                                         $3
   36-inch x 48-inch                                         $15
Reproduction of archive records, per page (11-inch x 17-inch or B&W $0.20
smaller)                                                        Color $0.40
Duplication, per copy per page (11-inch x 17-inch or smaller)   B&W $0.20
                                                                Color $0.40
 
Duplication of plans (larger than 11" x 17"), per copy, shall be in
accordance with the following costs per sheet:
Size      Paper (B&W) Paper (Color) Glossy Mylar
36" x 24" $3.00       $5.00         $8.00  $10.00
36" x 36" $5.00       $9.00         $14.00 $17.00
36" x 48" $7.00       $13.00        $19.00 $24.00
36" x 60" $9.00       $16.00        $25.00 $31.00
36" x 72" $11.00      $20.00        $31.00 $38.00
(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013)
§ 6-13-17 PENALTY.
   If work is commenced prior to obtaining a required permit, the permit fee
shall be increased by 50%, with the stipulation that such permit fee increase
shall be not less than $150, nor more than $1,500.
(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010; Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013; Ord.
2023-04-17, passed 4-17-2023)
§ 6-13-18 WAIVER OF PERMIT FEES FOR GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES.
   Building, zoning and engineering permit fees as set forth in this article of
the Carol Stream Code of Ordinances for construction, alteration, demolition
and other building operations in the Village of Carol Stream shall be waived
for governmental agencies, with the exception of actual costs incurred and paid
by the village; provided that, the construction, alteration, demolition and
other building operations are for a governmental purpose. The term GOVERNMENTAL
AGENCY shall refer to a unit of local government, public taxing body or
extension thereof.
(Ord. 2011-11-36, passed 11-7-2011; Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013)
§ 6-13-19 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE FEES.
   (A)   Contract services. The Village's costs of mowing, weed control,
property securement, and other measures deemed necessary to abate or correct a
violation of the Property Maintenance Code, performed by means of contract
services after failure of the property owner or responsible party to comply
with the requirements of the Property Maintenance Code, shall be paid for at
the billed rate as charged to the village by the contractor(s).
   (B)   Administrative fee. The administrative fee for an action taken by the
village to abate or correct one or more violations of the Property Maintenance
Code, after failure of the property owner or responsible party to comply with
the requirements of the Property Maintenance Code, shall be $840.
   (C)   Property lien. The administrative fee and the fees for contract
services shall be charged against the real estate upon which the violation was
abated and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
( Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013)
ARTICLE 14: COUNTYWIDE STORM WATER AND FLOODPLAIN CODE
Section
   
6-14-1   Adoption of various provisions of DuPage County countywide stormwater
and floodplain ordinance
Cross-references:
   Building construction and maintenance, see
Ch. 6, Art. 9
   Land Movement Regulations, see
Ch. 7, Art. 5
   Storm water detention, see
Ch. 7, Art. 9
   Subdivisions, see
Ch. 7, Art. 7
§ 6-14-1 ADOPTION OF VARIOUS PROVISIONS OF DUPAGE COUNTY COUNTYWIDE STORMWATER
AND FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE.
   (A)   The DuPage County Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance ("DuPage County
Ordinance") as contained in Section 15-1-1 et seq. of the DuPage County Code,
as amended and approved by the DuPage County Board effective May 14, 2019, and
any and all amendments and additions thereto that may from time to time be
adopted by the DuPage County Board, are hereby adopted by reference. Three
copies of the DuPage County Ordinance shall be kept on file for public
inspection in the office of the Village Clerk for public use, inspection and
examination.
   (B)   The Flood Insurance Rate Map ("FIRM") and the Flood Insurance Study
("FIS") approved by the Federal Emergency Management Agency on February 1, 2019
and adopted by DuPage County, effective August 1, 2019, is hereby adopted by
reference as the FIRM and FIS for the Village of Carol Stream.
   (C)   The provisions adopted by this section shall be in full force and
effect and shall supersede any other ordinances of the village with which they
are inconsistent or which are less stringent than the terms of this section.
   (D)   Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be punishable by
a fine of not less than $200 nor more than $1,000 for each day that a violation
occurs. The village may also take other legal steps to enforce the provisions
of this section as shall exist within its common law and home rule powers. Such
additional legal steps, however, shall be consistent with and shall not be less
strict than Article XIV of the DuPage County Ordinance.
(Ord. 2019-07-24, passed 7-15-2019)
ARTICLE 15: CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL SYSTEM
Section
   
6-15-1   Backflow prevention required
   
6-15-2   Connection prohibited
   
6-15-3   Surveys
   
6-15-4   Mandatory inspection
   
6-15-5   Shut off authorized
   
6-15-6   Cost of clean-up
   
6-15-7   Regulations
   
6-15-8   Penalty
§ 6-15-1 BACKFLOW PREVENTION REQUIRED.
   If the Director of Public Works determines that a backflow prevention device
is necessary for the safety of the public water supply system for an existing
or new water customer, the Director will give notice to the water customer to
install an approved backflow device within such reasonable period of time as
shall be contained within the notice. The water customer shall, at the
customer’s own expense, install such an approved device at a location and in a
manner in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code, Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency and all applicable local regulations, and shall have
inspections and tests made of such approved devices upon installation and as
required by the Illinois Plumbing Code, Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency and local regulations. Approved backflow devices shall be as determined
by the Director of Public Works.
(Ord. 2004-04-23, passed 4-19-2004)
§ 6-15-2 CONNECTION PROHIBITED.
   No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be established
or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a private,
auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply
of the village may enter the supply or distribution system, unless such
private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and
use of such supply shall have been approved by the Director of Public Works and
the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
(Ord. 2004-04-23, passed 4-19-2004)
§ 6-15-3 SURVEYS.
   It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works to cause surveys and
investigations to be made of industrial and other properties served by the
public water supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the
public water supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be made a
matter of public record and shall be repeated as often as the Director of
Public Works shall deem necessary. Records of such surveys shall be maintained
and available for review for a period of at least five years.
(Ord. 2004-04-23, passed 4-19-2004)
§ 6-15-4 MANDATORY INSPECTION.
   The approved cross-connection control device inspector shall have the right
to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the
public water supply or distribution system of the village for the purpose of
verifying the presence or absence of cross-connections, and the Director of
Public Works or an authorized agent shall have the right to enter at any
reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply
or distribution system of the village for the purpose of verifying information
submitted by the customer regarding the required cross-connection control
inspection. On demand, the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so
served shall furnish to the Director of Public Works any information which the
Director may request regarding the piping system or systems or water use on
such property. The refusal of such information when demanded, shall be deemed
evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided in this article.
(Ord. 2004-04-23, passed 4-19-2004)
§ 6-15-5 SHUT OFF AUTHORIZED.
   The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized and directed to
discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof and opportunity
for a hearing before the Director, the water service to any property wherein
any connection in violation of the provisions of this code, or rules
promulgated pursuant hereto, is reasonably believed to exist, and to take such
other precautionary measures as he or she may deem necessary to eliminate any
danger of contamination of the public water supply distribution mains. Water
service to such property shall not be restored until such conditions have been
eliminated or corrected in compliance with the provisions of this article, and
until a reconnection fee, in an amount set from time-to-time, but not less than
$200, is paid to the village. Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be
effected when the Director of Public Works reasonably believes that imminent
danger of harmful contamination of the public water supply system exists. Such
action shall be followed by written notification of the cause of disconnection
and opportunity for a hearing. The village and its agents shall not be liable
to any person for any injury, damages or lost revenues which may result from
termination of any customer’s water supply in accordance with the terms of this
section.
(Ord. 2004-04-23, passed 4-19-2004)
§ 6-15-6 COST OF CLEAN-UP.
   The consumer responsible for back siphoned or back pressured material or
contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply
system occurs through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed,
maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, shall bear
the cost of clean-up of the potable water supply system.
(Ord. 2004-04-23, passed 4-19-2004)
§ 6-15-7 REGULATIONS.
   The Director of Public Works may make regulations regarding implementation
and enforcement of this article. The provisions of this article and any
regulations adopted shall constitute a term and condition of receiving water
from the village’s potable water system.
(Ord. 2004-04-23, passed 4-19-2004)
§ 6-15-8 PENALTY.
   Violation of this article, or any rule promulgated pursuant hereto, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $100, nor
more than $750.
(Ord. 2004-04-23, passed 4-19-2004)
ARTICLE 16: FUEL GAS CODE
Section
   
6-16-1   Adoption of Fuel Gas Code
§ 6-16-1 ADOPTION OF FUEL GAS CODE.
   The ICC International Fuel Gas Code, 2024 Edition, as published by the
International Code Council Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Fuel Gas Code
of the village for the control of buildings and structures as therein provided;
and each and all regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of offenses
thereunder of the ICC International Fuel Gas Code, 2024 Edition, are hereby
referred to, adopted and made part hereof as if fully set out in this article,
with additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in other
village ordinances which contain local amendments to national codes. Three
document copies of said Code, in accordance with 50 ILCS 220/2 and 65 ILCS 5/1-
3-2, have been available for public use, inspection and examination for 30 days
and one copy for permanent public use in the office of the Village Clerk.
(Ord. 2004-06-37, passed 6-21-2004; Ord. 2009-05-20, passed 5-4-2009; Ord.
2014-02-07, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 2014-06-21, passed 6-2- 2014; Ord. 2019-05-
16, passed 5-6-2019; Ord. 25-09-38, passed 9-2-2025)
ARTICLE 17: ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
Section
   
6-17-1   Adoption of Energy Conservation Code
§ 6-17-1 ADOPTION OF INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE.
   The ICC International Energy Conservation Code, 2018 Edition, as published
by the International Code Council Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Energy
Conservation Code of the village for the control of buildings and structures as
therein provided; and each and all regulations, provisions, conditions and
terms of offenses thereunder of the ICC International Energy Conservation Code,
2018 Edition, are hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof as if fully
set out in this article, with additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if
any, prescribed in other village ordinances which contain local amendments to
national codes. Three document copies of said Code, in accordance with 50 ILCS
220/2 and 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2, have been available for public use, inspection and
examination for 30 days and one copy for permanent public use in the office of
the Village Clerk.
(Ord. 2004-06-37, passed 6-21-2004; Ord. 2009-05-20, passed 5-4-2009; Ord.
2014-06-21, passed 6-2-2014; Ord. 2019-05-16, passed 5-6- 2019)
ARTICLE 18: EXISTING BUILDING CODE
Section
   
6-18-1   Adoption of Existing Building Code
§ 6-18-1 ADOPTION OF EXISTING BUILDING CODE.
   The ICC International Existing Building Code, 2024 Edition, as published by
the International Code Council Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Existing
Building Code of the village for the control of buildings and structures as
therein provided, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions,
terms and offenses thereunder of the ICC Existing Building Code, 2024 Edition,
are hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof, as if fully set out in
this article, with additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in other village ordinances which contain local amendments to
national codes. Three document copies of said Code, in accordance with 50 ILCS
220/2 and 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2, have been available for public use, inspection and
examination for 30 days and one copy for permanent public use in the office of
the Village Clerk.
(Ord. 2019-05-16, passed 5-6-2019; Ord. 25-09- 38, passed 9-2-2025)
ARTICLE 19: SOLAR ENERGY PROVISIONS
Section
   
6-19-1   Adoption of Solar Energy Provisions
§ 6-19-1 ADOPTION OF SOLAR ENERGY PROVISIONS.
   The ICC International Solar Energy Provisions, 2018 Edition, as published by
the International Code Council Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Solar
Energy Provisions of the village for the control of buildings and structures as
therein provided, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions,
terms and offenses thereunder of the ICC Solar Energy Provisions, 2018 Edition,
are hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof, as if fully set out in
this article, with additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in other village ordinances which contain local amendments to
national codes. Three document copies of said Code, in accordance with 50 ILCS
220/2 and 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2, have been available for public use, inspection and
examination for 30 days and one copy for permanent public use in the office of
the Village Clerk.
(Ord. 2019-05-16, passed 5-6-2019)
CHAPTER 7: (RESERVED)
 
CHAPTER 8: TRAFFIC CODE
      Article
         
1.   UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE
         
2.   THROUGH STREETS, STOP STREETS, ONE-WAY STREETS, LOAD LIMITS, PROHIBITED
PARKING AND MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
         
3.   TOWING PROVISIONS
         
4.   BICYCLES
         
5.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
         
6.   PARKING SCHEDULES
         
7.   MOTORIZED SKATEBOARDS
         
8.   VEHICLE SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT
         
9.   AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEMS
ARTICLE 1: UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE
Section
   
8-1-1   Adoption of provisions of Illinois Vehicle Code and Child Passenger
Protection Act by reference
   
8-1-2   Penalties and related provisions
§ 8-1-1 ADOPTION OF PROVISIONS OF ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE AND CHILD PASSENGER
PROTECTION ACT BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   The Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/100 et seq., as amended from
time to time, is hereby adopted by reference as the traffic code of the
village, to be applied within the corporate limits of the village to the extent
permitted by law and to the extent that its subject matter is not regulated by
or inconsistent with any lawful provisions of the Carol Stream Village Code.
   (B)   All references in sections of the Illinois Vehicle Code to a state
employee or official may be to a corresponding village employee or official
where such reference is applicable or necessary. Any provisions of the Illinois
Vehicle Code adopted herein may be cited by placing "8-1:" before the
appropriate Illinois Vehicle Code section (i.e., 8-1-11-501, Carol Stream
Traffic Code).
   (C)   The Illinois Child Passenger Protection Act, 625 ILCS 25/1 et seq., as
amended from time to time is hereby adopted by reference to be applied within
the corporate limits of the village to the extent permitted by law and to the
extent that its subject matter is not regulated by the Carol Stream Village
Code or inconsistent with any lawful provisions of the Carol Stream Village
Code.
   (D)   All references in sections of the Illinois Child Passenger Protection
Act to a state employee or official may be to a corresponding village employee
or official where such reference is applicable or necessary. Any provisions of
the Illinois Child Passenger Protection Act adopted herein may be cited by
placing "8-1:" before the appropriate Illinois Child Passenger Protection Act
section (i.e., 8-1-25/1), Carol Stream Traffic Code).
   (E)   The burden of proof for any offense classified as a "petty" offense or
"business" offense in the Illinois Vehicle Code or the Illinois Child Passenger
Protection Act adopted herein shall be by a preponderance of the evidence.
Offenses classified therein as "misdemeanor" offenses shall be proven beyond a
reasonable doubt.
(Ord. 2004-10-56, passed 10-4-2004; Ord. 2021-11-54, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 8-1-2 PENALTIES AND RELATED PROVISIONS.
   (A)   A violation of any provision of this title, unless otherwise
specified, or of an offenses classified as “petty” offenses under the aforesaid
provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code shall be punishable by a fine of not
less than $60, nor more than $1,000, for each offense. Offenses classified as
business offenses under the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code, adopted by
reference pursuant to this chapter, shall be punishable as set forth herein.
   (B)   Offenses classified as “misdemeanors” under the provisions of the
Illinois Vehicle Code, adopted by reference pursuant to this chapter, shall be
subject to a fine or imprisonment for a determinant term according to the
following limitations:
      (1)   For a class A misdemeanor, imprisonment for any term less than one
year and/or a fine of not less than $1,000 and not to exceed $2,500, except as
provided in division (B)(4) below;
      (2)   For a class B misdemeanor, imprisonment for not more than six
months and/or a fine of not less than $300 and not to exceed $1,500;
      (3)   For a class C misdemeanor imprisonment for not more than 30 days
and/or a fine of not less than $150 and not to exceed $1,500;
      (4)   The court, upon making a finding of guilty for any offense under §§
8-1-11-501 or 8-1-11-503 of this code, in addition to any sentence alternative
elected by the court, shall impose a fine of not less than $2,000 if the
defendant has previously been convicted of driving under the influence of
alcohol or any prohibited controlled substance under any local code or under §
11-503 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, or a similar provision under local
ordinance;
      (5)   The court, upon making a finding of guilty of any offense under §
8-1-11-501 of this code, in addition to any sentencing alternative elected by
the court, shall impose an additional fine of $500 if the defendant had a
breath alcohol content of 0.160 or higher in the case for which he or she is
being sentenced; and
      (6)   In addition to any other alternative sentence imposed by the court,
an individual found guilty of a violation of § 8-1-11-501, whose operation of a
motor vehicle while in violation of § 8-1-11-501, proximately caused an
incident resulting in an appropriate emergency response, shall be required to
make restitution to a public agency for the costs of that emergency response.
The restitution may not exceed $1,000 per public agency for each emergency
response. As used in this division (B)(6), EMERGENCY RESPONSE means any
incident requiring a response by a police officer, a firefighter carried on the
rolls of a regularly constituted Fire Department or an ambulance.
   (C)   All fines recited herein are in addition to all costs, including DUI
tech fees mandated by state statute which is adopted herein by reference.
   (D)   The court, upon making a finding of guilty for any offense under § 8-
1-11-501(a)(3), 8-1-11-501(a)(4), 8-1-11 -501(a)(5) or 8-1-11-501(6) of this
code, in addition to any sentence alternative elected by the court, shall
impose a fee in the amount of $50 for costs incurred by the village for
equipment and the handling of drug samples.
   (E)   The fine for a violation of § 11- 1301.3(a) of the Traffic Code shall
be $350. Any person found guilty or liable of violating the provisions of
subsection (a-1) a first time shall be fined $600. Any person found guilty or
liable of violating subsection (a-1) a second or subsequent time shall be fined
$1,000. Any person found guilty or liable of violating subsection (a-2) shall
be fined $2,500.
(Ord. 2004-10-56, passed 10-4-2004; Ord. 2011-12-45, passed 12-19-2011; Ord.
2019-07- 22, passed 7-15-2019)
ARTICLE 2: THROUGH STREETS, STOP STREETS, ONE-WAY STREETS, LOAD LIMITS,
PROHIBITED PARKING AND MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
8-2-1   Through streets
   
8-2-2   Duty of driver at stop intersections; maintenance of signs
   
8-2-3   Yielding right-of-way
   
8-2-4   One-way streets and alleys
   
8-2-5   Overweight and/or overdimension vehicles
   
8-2-6   Permits for overweight and/or overdimension vehicles
   
8-2-7   Vehicles prohibited on certain streets
   
8-2-8   Limited parking zones
   
8-2-9   Prohibited parking; alleys
   
8-2-10   Prohibited parking; overnight
   
8-2-11   Prohibited parking; after snowstorm
   
8-2-12   Prohibited parking; private property
   
8-2-13   Prohibited parking; unpaved surfaces
   
8-2-14   Prohibited parking; for sales of vehicles and merchandise
   
8-2-15   Prohibited parking; loading zones
   
8-2-16   Prohibited parking; bus and taxicab stands
   
8-2-17   Parking prohibited; intersections
   
8-2-18   Stopping, standing or parking prohibited; no signs required
   
8-2-19   Issuance of permits for special parking privileges for persons with
disabilities
   
8-2-20   Parking of large vehicles and trailers on a roadway in a residence
district
   
8-2-21   Authority to erect signs
   
8-2-22   Operation of motor vehicles upon sidewalks, unpaved public rights-of-
way and certain public property prohibited
   
8-2-23   Unnecessary noise; loss of control in operation of vehicles prohibited
   
8-2-24   Riding on part of vehicle not intended for passengers prohibited
   
8-2-25   Firefighters authorized to direct traffic
   
8-2-26   Use of crosswalks by pedestrians
   
8-2-27   Visibility of traffic signals and the like; clearview areas
Cross-reference:
   Towing provisions, see
Ch. 8, Art. 3
§ 8-2-1 THROUGH STREETS.
   (A)   Every operator of a vehicle or other conveyance traveling upon any
street intersecting any through street herein designated shall bring such
vehicle or conveyance to a full stop at the stop sign posted at such
intersection or at a clearly marked stop line before entering the intersection;
subject, however, to the direction of any police officer or traffic control
signal at such intersection.
   (B)   The operation of any vehicle or conveyance which has come to a full
stop as required above, upon entering the through street, as well as operators
of vehicles on such through streets, shall be subject to the usual right-of-way
rule prescribed by law and applicable to vehicles at intersections.
§ 8-2-2 DUTY OF DRIVER AT STOP INTERSECTIONS; MAINTENANCE OF SIGNS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to a stop sign at an
intersection where a stop sign is erected and designated by this article at one
or more entrances thereto, and shall proceed cautiously, yielding to the
vehicles not so obliged to stop which are within the intersection or
approaching so close as to constitute an immediate hazard, unless traffic at
such intersection is controlled by a police officer on duty, in which event the
directions of the police officer shall be obeyed.
   (B)   Stop signs shall be maintained at the appropriate approaches to such
intersections. The driver of every vehicle approaching the stop sign shall stop
before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the
event there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked line, or if none,
then the point nearest the intersection roadway where the driver has a view of
the approaching traffic on the intersecting highway, before entering the
intersection, except where directed to proceed by a police officer.
(Ord. 90-07-55, passed 7-10-1990)
§ 8-2-3 YIELDING RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   The intersections named in
Art. 5, Schd. I, of this chapter are designated as yield right-of-way
intersections.
   (B)   Yield right-of-way signs shall be maintained at the appropriate
approaches to said intersections and thereupon the driver of every vehicle
approaching said sign shall reduce the speed of his or her vehicle to not more
than 20 mph and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have
entered the intersecting street either from the right or left or which are
approaching so closely on said intersecting streets as to constitute an
immediate hazard; but said driver having so yielded may proceed at such time as
a safe interval occurs. If a driver is involved in a collision at such
intersection or interferes with the movement of other vehicles after driving
past a yield right-of-way sign, such collision or interference shall be deemed
prima facie evidence of the driver’s failure to yield the right-of-way.
(Ord. 90-07-55, passed 7-10-1990)
Cross-reference:
   Yield right-of-way intersections, see
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. I
§ 8-2-4 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   Whenever this code or any ordinance designates any one-way street or alley,
vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs
indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every
intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited.
§ 8-2-5 OVERWEIGHT AND/OR OVERDIMENSION VEHICLES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be in control of, to drive, to
park, or move on, upon or across or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit
to be parked, driven, or moved upon or across, any street or highway under the
jurisdiction of the village, any vehicle or combination of vehicles exceeding
the size and weight limitations stated in 625 ILCS 5/15-102 (width), 625 ILCS
5/15-103 (height), 625 ILCS 5/15-107 (length) and 625 ILCS 5/15-111 (weight).
   (B)   Size and weight limitations while operating on village streets shall
not apply to the following vehicles or equipment:
      (1)   Fire Department Vehicles;
      (2)   Those vehicles operating under an emergency declaration;
      (3)   Village owned vehicles engaged in emergency utility repair;
      (4)   Equipment used for snow and ice removal, owned and operated by any
government body;
      (5)   Implements of husbandry temporarily operated or towed in a
combination in the furtherance of a farm or agricultural endeavor;
      (6)   Any vehicle or combination of vehicles operating under the terms of
a valid overweight and/or over dimension permit issued by the village under the
authority of §
8-2-6 .
   (C)   Where lower size and weight limits or other restrictions are imposed
by ordinance under authority of 625 ILCS 5/15-316 and 625 ICLS 5/15-317, and
signs indicating such limitations or restrictions are posted, it shall be
unlawful to operate any vehicle or combination of vehicles in excess of such
size or weight limitations or in violation of such restrictions.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful to operate any "construction vehicle" as defined
herein on any street in the village when signs are posted on that street
prohibiting "construction vehicle." CONSTRUCTION VEHICLE shall be defined as
any vehicle over 10,000 pounds actual weight, registered weight or gross
vehicle weight rating that is required to comply with 625 ILCS 5/12-712 and 625
ICLS 5/12-713 on identification required to be displayed.
   (E)   Whenever a vehicle or combination of vehicles is operated in violation
of this section, the owner and/or operator of such vehicle shall be deemed
guilty of such violation and either the owner or operator may be prosecuted for
such violation.
(Ord. 93-04-40, passed 4-13-1993; Ord. 2014-12-56, passed 12-15-2014)
Cross-reference:
   Weight limits on certain streets, see
Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. VI
§ 8-2-6 PERMITS FOR OVERWEIGHT AND/OR OVERDIMENSION VEHICLES.
   (A)   The village, with respect to any street or highway under its
jurisdiction, may upon application to the Village Engineering Department
through a format approved by the village and good cause being shown therefore
issue a permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or
combination of vehicles of a size exceeding the maximum specified in §
8-2-5 or a vehicle or combination or vehicles, that is non-divisible or
carrying a load that is non-divisible and exceeding the following limits
(specified in §
8-2-5):
      (1)   Gross weights, axle weights or series of axle weights that exceed
the maximum limits set forth in 625 ILCS 5/15- 111(a);
      (2)   Vehicles specifically designed as tow trucks as defined in 625 ILCS
5/15-111(a)(12) engaging in the tow of a disabled vehicle from the original
point of disablement to a point where repairs are to actually occur, when the
point of repair is more than 20 miles from the original point of disablement.
   (B)   The applicant of the permit shall furnish the following information
within the permit application:
      (1)   Name, address and telephone number of the owner or lessee of the
vehicle;
      (2)   Applicant's name;
      (3)   Type of permit requested (single trip, round trip, multiple trip);
      (4)   Description and registration of the power unit;
      (5)   Description of load to be moved;
      (6)   Number of axles of the vehicle of combination of vehicles;
      (7)   Gross weight of the vehicle and its load;
      (8)   Axle weights of all single, tandem or series of axles;
      (9)   Width, length and height of the vehicle and its load;
      (10)   Origin of the load within the state or state line if the origin is
outside of the State of Illinois;
      (11)   Roads within the village which are requested to be traveled; and
      (12)   Container identification number of any intermodal shipping
container.
   (C)   The Village Engineer or their designee is authorized to review,
authorize, modify or reject all permit applications. Routes may be modified
prior to authorization as determined by the Village Engineer or their designee.
   (D)   Upon authorization and payment of the permit fees, specified in the
fee schedule in division (M)(1) of this section, the Village Engineer or their
designee shall issue a permit allowing passage of the overweight and/or over
dimension vehicle over the authorized village roadways. The permit shall
contain:
      (1)   Permit number;
      (2)   Dates that the permit is valid;
      (3)   Type of permit (single trip, round trip);
      (4)   Description of the load to be moved;
      (5)   Authorized gross weight, axle weights, width, length and height;
      (6)   The authorized routing over village streets including the origin
and destination point within the village;
      (7)   The fees paid;
      (8)   The date and name of the Village Engineer or his or her designee;
and
      (9)   Any general conditions that the permittee must comply with that are
consistent and reasonable for the protection of the general public and village
streets. A copy of all permits issued will be provided to the Traffic Sergeant
and/or Commercial Motor Vehicle Enforcement Officer of the Carol Stream Police
Department for information and compliance.
   (E)   Permits issued will authorize movement between specific dates
depending on the type of permit obtained. Any movement outside of the dates
listed on the permit shall be deemed to be unpermitted and will be subject to
legal size and weight laws. The Village Engineer or his or her designee
reserves the right to modify the number of calendar days each permit is allowed
to run concurrent with permits issued by other government agencies issued for
the same movement.
      (1)   Single trip – valid for seven calendar days;
      (2)   Round trip – valid for 14 calendar days; and
   (F)   Permits for vehicles that are oversized (height or length) or
overweight are only valid a half hour before sunrise until a half hour after
sunset, on any day for which a permit issued by the Illinois Department of
Transportation is valid.
   (G)   The permit, when issued, constitutes an agreement between the
permittee and the village that the move described in the application will take
place only as described. The permittee has the responsibility to report any
inaccuracies or errors on the part of the village or the permittee to the
Village Engineering Department, prior to moving any load. Undertaking the move
is prima facie evidence of acceptance of the permit as issued and that:
      (1)   The permittee is in compliance with all operation requirements;
      (2)   All height, length and weight limitations specified in the permit;
      (3)   All operation, registration and license requirements;
      (4)   All financial responsibilities, obligations and other legal
requirements; and
      (5)   The permitee assumes all responsibility for injury or damage to
persons or to public or private property, including his or her own, or to the
object being transported, caused directly or indirectly by the transportation
or movement of vehicles and objects under the permit. The permittee agrees to
hold the village harmless from all suits, claims, damages, or proceedings of
any kind and to indemnify the village for any claim it may be required to pay
arising from the movement.
   (H)   The routing prescribed in the permit constitutes the sole extent of
the authority granted by the permit for the use of roads within the
jurisdiction of the village. Any vehicle and/or load found to be operating on
village roadways not specified on its permit will be considered to be off route
and without a permit. Permits shall be in the drivers possession at all times
and shall be exhibited upon demand by any enforcement officer, police officer
or other authorized village official. Permits may be displayed electronically
so long as it is accessible to any of the above listed authorized agents upon
demand.
   (I)   Any vehicle(s) and/or load that is found to be divisible will render
the permit null and void. The entire gross weight and axle weights of the
vehicle(s) with the load will then be subject to legal weights as defined in
625 ILCS 5/15-111. It is the duty of the applicant to verify the non-
divisibility of the vehicle(s) before applying for the permit. The permit
itself is prima facie evidence that the applicant confirmed the vehicle(s) and/
or load was non-divisible.
   (J)   If required, arrangement shall be made by the permittee to have the
proper utilities notified, property moved, bridge or highway analysis performed
and completed in advance of any permit movement.
   (K)   All movements under the permit shall be made in accordance with all
applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.
The Village Engineer or their designee holds the right to change any
requirements or provisions of the permit or permit process as deemed rationally
related to the interests of the village.
   (L)   Permits are null and void if altered for the purpose of deception.
Permits issued under this section constitute the grant of a privilege by the
village and may be denied or suspended for such reasons as the village may deem
rationally related to its governmental interests.
   (M)   The village with respect to streets and highways under its
jurisdiction shall collect a fee as shown herein from applicants for the
issuance of a permit to operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles,
and/or loads, which fit the categories shown. Any axle or gross weight greater
than the maximum weights set forth in this section is subject to special
assessment and investigation to determine appropriate fees.
      (1)   The fee schedules for all vehicles are as follows:
         (a)   Oversize Fee Schedule (Legal Weight Only)
 
CATEGORY MAX WIDTH MAX HEIGHT MAX LENGTH ESCORT SINGLE TRIP ROUND TRIP
S1       14'       13'6"      115'       No     $ 50.00     $ 80.00
S2       18'       13'6"      135'       Yes    $ 75.00     $120.00
S3       >18'      13'6"      >135'      Yes    $100.00     $160.00
 
         (b)   Overweight Vehicle Fee Schedule
CATEGORY AXLES MAX GROSS WEIGHT SINGLE TRIP ROUND TRIP
CATEGORY AXLES MAX GROSS WEIGHT SINGLE TRIP ROUND TRIP
A1       2     48000            $ 50.00     $ 80.00
A2       2     54000            55.00       90.00
A3       2     >54000           75.00       115.00
A4       3     60000            50.00       80.00
A5       3     72000            55.00       90.00
A6       3     80000            60.00       1,000.00
A7       3     >80000           80.00       120.00
A8       4     72000            50.00       80.00
A9       4     80000            55.00       90.00
A10      4     >80000           75.00       115.00
A11      5     88000            50.00       80.00
A12      5     100000           55.00       90.00
A13      5     >100000          75.00       115.00
A14      6     110000           50.00       80.00
A15      6     120000           55.00       90.00
A16      6     143000           60.00       100.00
A17      6     >143000          75.00       115.00
A18      7     162000           85.00       120.00
A19      7     >162000          115.00      200.00
A20      8     187000           85.00       120.00
A21      8     200000           95.00       160.00
A22      8     >200000          115.00      200.00
A23      9+    225000           100.00      175.00
A24      9+    >225000          150.00      225.00
 
   (N)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator to operate any vehicle
upon any street or highway in the village in violation of the provisions of
this section and the owner and operator may be prosecuted for such violation.
   (O)   For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
      (1)   NON-DIVISIBLE. A vehicle and load will be considered non-divisible
when further separating or dismantling the vehicle or load:
         (a)   Would require more than eight work hours to dismantle using
appropriate equipment. (The applicant has the burden of proof as to the number
of work hours required to dismantle the load.)
         (b)   Will compromise or destroy the intended use of the load only. A
load can be either permanently mounted or temporarily secured equipment. Any
parts, fluids, or material necessary to the operation of only the power unit
portion of the vehicle shall be deemed non-divisible.
         (c)   Would prohibit the vehicle from hauling one attachment that is
necessary to the operation of the load. To be considered non-divisible, the
attachment must be securely mounted to the load in the manner it is to be used
and not carried as a separate object on the hauling vehicle.
(Ord. 2018-12-50, passed 12-17-2018)
§ 8-2-7 VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   As provided under the authority of 625 ILCS 5/15-316, it shall be unlawful
to operate any vehicle upon any street where the operation of that vehicle is
prohibited by ordinance and where signs of such prohibition are posted.
(Ord. 93-04-40, passed 4-13-1993)
§ 8-2-8 LIMITED PARKING ZONES.
   Appropriate signs shall be posted in all areas where parking is limited or
prohibited, indicating such limitations or prohibitions. When signs are erected
giving notice of such limitations or prohibitions, it shall be unlawful to park
any vehicle otherwise than as directed.
§ 8-2-9 PROHIBITED PARKING; ALLEYS.
   It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle within an alley, except for the
purpose of loading and unloading merchandise, and then in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of
the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall
stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block
the driveway entrance to any abutting property.
§ 8-2-10 PROHIBITED PARKING; OVERNIGHT.
   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any street in the village
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. of any day; except that, emergency
vehicles and physicians on emergency calls are hereby exempt from these
provisions.
§ 8-2-11 PROHIBITED PARKING; AFTER SNOWSTORM.
   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any public street in the village
at any time within 12 hours after a snowfall of one inch or more has occurred,
unless the snow has been plowed off or otherwise removed from the street.
§ 8-2-12 PROHIBITED PARKING; PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any private property
without the consent of the owner of the property.
§ 8-2-13 PROHIBITED PARKING; UNPAVED SURFACES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle upon a surface
which is not paved in accordance with provisions of the ordinances of the
village. It shall also be unlawful for any person to allow a motor vehicle to
be parked on any property owned or under the control of such person when such
vehicle is parked upon a surface which is not paved in accordance with the
provisions of ordinances of the village. It shall not be a violation of this
section where a vehicle is parked contrary to the provisions of this section
upon a site at which construction is taking place and suitable paved surfaces
are not then available; nor shall it be a violation of the provisions of this
section where a vehicle is temporarily parked upon a non-aged surface in
accordance with the provisions of any other section of the code of ordinances.
§ 8-2-14 PROHIBITED PARKING; FOR SALES OF VEHICLES AND MERCHANDISE.
   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for the purpose of
displaying it for sale, or to park any vehicle upon any street from which
vehicle merchandise is peddled or sold, unless the person selling such goods
has a license to make such sales.
§ 8-2-15 PROHIBITED PARKING; LOADING ZONES.
   During the times specified in this section, it shall be unlawful for a
driver of a vehicle to stand a passenger vehicle for a period of time longer
than is necessary for the loading or unloading of passengers, not to exceed
three minutes, and for the driver to stand any freight-carrying vehicle for a
period of time longer than is necessary to load, unload and deliver materials,
not to exceed 30 minutes, in any of the following places:
   (A)   In any public alley, during any hour of the day or night;
   (B)   At any place not to exceed 75 feet along the curb before the entrance
to any hospital or hotel at any time; and/or
   (C)   Directly in front of the entrance to any theater at any time the
theater is open for business.
§ 8-2-16 PROHIBITED PARKING; BUS AND TAXICAB STANDS.
   It shall be unlawful to stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a
bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when such stop or stand
has been officially designated and appropriately indicated by signs; except
that, the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers, when
such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or
about to enter such zone.
§ 8-2-17 PARKING PROHIBITED; INTERSECTIONS.
   There shall be no parking within 100 feet of the intersection of an arterial
street and any other street in the village where posted.
(Ord. 90-07-55, passed 7-10-1990)
§ 8-2-18 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED; NO SIGNS REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary
to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the law or direction
of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk, except:
         (a)   Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; and
         (b)   In front of those residences that are prohibited from street
parking between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session.
      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;
      (3)   Within an intersection;
      (4)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
      (5)   On a crosswalk;
      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      (7)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign,
yield right-of-way sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a
roadway;
      (8)   Between the curb or edge of the pavement and the public sidewalk or
property line;
      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of railroad crossing;
      (10)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on
the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet
of said entrance when posted;
      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      (12)   On a roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street;
      (13)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or in a
tunnel;
      (14)   In a private parking lot, parking outside of the designated
parking places in such a manner as to block other vehicles from exiting or
entering parking stalls; or
      (15)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping or parking.
   (B)   Unless otherwise indicated, no sign shall be required to be posted
indicating parking is prohibited in those locations specified in division (A)
above.
   (C)   No person other than a police officer shall move a vehicle not
lawfully under his or her control into any area enumerated in division (A)
above or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful, or to start or cause to
be started the motor of any motor vehicle, or shift, or change or move the
levers, brake, starting device, gears or other mechanism of a parked motor
vehicle to a position other than in which it was left by the owner or driver
thereof, or attempt to do so.
   (D)   In a parking lot, parking outside of the designated parking places in
such a manner as to block other vehicles from exiting and entering parking
stalls.
(Ord. 90-07-55, passed 7-10-1990; Ord. 97-12-82, passed 11-17-1997; Ord. 99-01-
04, passed 1-18-1999; Ord. 2003-10-69, passed 10-20-2003; Ord. 2009-12-66,
passed 12-7-2009)
Cross-reference:
   Stopping, standing or parking prohibited; signs required, see
Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III
§ 8-2-19 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS FOR SPECIAL PARKING PRIVILEGES FOR PERSONS WITH
DISABILITIES.
   Upon application of any person with disabilities or disabled veteran, the
village shall issue a card in the format furnished by the Illinois Secretary of
State. This card shall be the property of such person with disabilities and may
be used by that person to designate and identify a vehicle not owning or
displaying a disabled veteran’s license plate or disabled person’s license
plate when the vehicle is being used to transport such person with disabilities
and is thus entitled to enjoy the privileges that would be afforded a disabled
person’s licensed vehicle. Such cards shall be issued only to persons with
disabilities or disabled veterans who are residents of the village, and the
same shall be displayed along the right border of the front windshield of the
vehicle and shall allow the vehicle to utilize special parking privileges for
persons with disabilities when used to transport such disabled person or
disabled veteran. The card shall be issued provided that any person making
request for it must submit a statement certified by a licensed physician to the
effect that such person is a person with disabilities as defined by 625 ILCS 5/
1-159.1. Such cards shall be provided at cost.
§ 8-2-20 PARKING OF LARGE VEHICLES AND TRAILERS ON A ROADWAY IN A RESIDENCE
DISTRICT.
   (A)   No vehicle or vehicle and trailer combination having a gross vehicle
weight rating (GVWR), gross combined weight rating (GCWR), gross weight,
registered weight, or combined registered weight greater than 8,000 pounds
shall be parked on any roadway in a residence district.
   (B)   No construction or service equipment, having a gross vehicle weight
rating (GVWR), gross weight, or registered weight greater than 8,000 pounds
shall be parked on a roadway in a residence district.
   (C)   No trailer of any size or weight shall be parked on any roadway in a
residence district.
   (D)   "Roadway in a residence district" shall mean any roadway located
within a designated residential zoning district or located adjacent to property
located within a designated residential zoning district within the village.
   (E)   The provisions of divisions (A) and (B) herein shall not apply to:
      (1)   A vehicle or trailer making a delivery, picking up a load, or
performing a requested service at a particular location, in which case the
equipment, vehicle or trailer may be parked upon the roadway only for the
minimum time required to make the delivery, pickup or perform the requested
service. The storage of any equipment, vehicle, or trailer at a particular
location shall not constitute a delivery, pickup or the performance of a
requested service and is prohibited.
      (2)   Equipment, vehicles, or trailers used for construction, alteration,
excavation, service, or repair at a particular location property within a
residence district in which case the equipment, vehicle or trailer may be
parked upon the roadway only for the minimum time required to make the
delivery, pickup or perform the requested service.
      (3)   Recreational vehicles and recreational trailers, but only as
authorized by village ordinance.
      (4)   Emergency vehicles, or other vehicles owned and operated by a
government entity.
(Ord. 2025-07-27, passed 7-7-2025)
§ 8-2-21 AUTHORITY TO ERECT SIGNS.
   (A)   Stop signs. The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized and
directed to place and maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained, in each
and every street intersecting a through street designated in this article, at
or near the property line of the through street, appropriate signs upon the
street to bear the word “STOP” and to be located so as to be clearly legible at
a distance of at least 100 feet along the street intersecting the through
street. All such signs shall conform to such standards as may be established by
state statute. All such signs shall be illuminated at night or be so placed as
to be illuminated by street lights or by the headlights of approaching
vehicles.
   (B)   Other signs. The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized and
directed to erect and maintain appropriate signs for one-way streets and
alleys, load limits, prohibited parking, loading zones, bus and taxicab stands,
signs prohibiting construction traffic, and any other sign regulating traffic
and parking as deemed necessary by the corporate authorities, required by state
statute, or otherwise authorized in this code. No such regulations shall be
effective unless such signs are in place. In determining at what locations
signs shall be placed prohibiting construction traffic, the Director of Public
Works shall consider the damage to unfinished, new or existing roads which
would take place if construction traffic were permitted to traverse the roads.
Signs prohibiting the passage of construction traffic shall not be in place for
a period of more than one year without the prohibition being acted upon by the
Village Board. The Village Board intends to delegate to the Director of Public
Works its authority to prohibit construction traffic whenever, in the opinion
of the Director of Public Works, the passage of such traffic would unduly
damage the roadway.
§ 8-2-22 OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES UPON SIDEWALKS, UNPAVED PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-
WAY AND CERTAIN PUBLIC PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle, including, but not
limited to, motorized bicycles, motorcycles, go-carts, snowmobiles, automobiles
or trucks within the village upon a sidewalk, upon the unpaved portion of a
public right-of-way or upon any public property other than that portion devoted
to roadway or parking use, or otherwise marked to allow the entry of motor
vehicles.
   (B)   Because the operation of any motor vehicle upon the areas prohibited
for such use in this section is extremely dangerous to persons and property,
the penalty upon conviction for violations of this section shall be a minimum
fine of $25 and a maximum fine of $750 for each violation.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply where a motor vehicle
is operated on a sidewalk, upon the unpaved portion of a public right-of-way or
upon public property to avoid injury to a person or persons and/or to avoid
damage to property or for the pick-up or delivery of goods. Public property, as
defined in this section, shall apply to all real property owned by the village,
whether then used or not for a specific public purpose.
§ 8-2-23 UNNECESSARY NOISE; LOSS OF CONTROL IN OPERATION OF VEHICLES
PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle in the village so as
to cause unnecessary noise by rapid acceleration or deceleration of the
vehicle, or by racing of the engine, or by squealing or screeching of tires on
the pavement.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle in the village in
such a manner so as to lose control of the motor vehicle.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to accelerate, decelerate or turn any motor
vehicle so as to cause the tires of the motor vehicle to disengage from the
surface upon which the motor vehicle is being operated.
§ 8-2-24 RIDING ON PART OF VEHICLE NOT INTENDED FOR PASSENGERS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to ride upon the fenders, running board or outside step
of any vehicle, or any portion of a vehicle not designed for passengers.
§ 8-2-25 FIREFIGHTERS AUTHORIZED TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.
   The Fire Department officer in command, or any firefighter designated by
such officer, may exercise the powers and authority of a Police Officer in
directing traffic at the scene of any fire or where the Fire Department has
responded to any emergency call for so long as the Fire Department equipment is
on the scene, in the absence of or in assisting the police.
§ 8-2-26 USE OF CROSSWALKS BY PEDESTRIANS.
   Where crosswalks are established for any block or blocks, pedestrians shall
cross a roadway only in such crosswalks.
§ 8-2-27 VISIBILITY OF TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND THE LIKE; CLEARVIEW AREAS.
   No sign, tree, bush or foliage of any kind, fence, mailbox or any other
natural or artificial object or grade of land shall be so placed, maintained,
allowed to remain or displayed upon either public or private property in such a
manner as to hide from view or interfere with the movement of traffic or the
visibility of any traffic control device, sign or signal.
ARTICLE 3: TOWING PROVISIONS
Section
   
8-3-1   Definitions
   
8-3-2   Authorization for towing
   
8-3-3   Pre-tow notice for abandoned vehicles
   
8-3-4   Pre-tow hearing procedures
   
8-3-5   Post-tow notice for hazardous and unlawful vehicles
   
8-3-6   Post-tow hearing procedures
§ 8-3-1 DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this article. Any term not defined herein shall have the meaning ascribed to
it in other ordinances of this village, and if not defined in any other village
ordinance, it shall have the meaning ascribed in 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE.
      (1)   A vehicle parked or otherwise located on the public way, and:
         (a)   In such a state of disrepair that it is incapable of being
driven; or
         (b)   That has been unmoved for a period of at least 24 hours and,
from its condition, the period during which it has not been moved or some other
circumstance appears to have been, and will be presumed to have been, abandoned
by its owner.
      (2)   Vehicles parked in a public parking lot or on private property
without the consent of the lot owner, proprietor or agent of the property,
which person has requested that the vehicle be towed; or
      (3)   A vehicle defined as abandoned, or capable of being towed, by any
other ordinances of the village, and which does not fall into the categories of
“hazardous” or “unlawful” vehicles, and therefore is not subject to an
immediate tow.
   HAZARDOUS VEHICLE.
      (1)   A vehicle that has been involved in an accident and is disabled or
cannot be immediately moved by the owner or operator of the vehicle;
      (2)   A vehicle that presents an immediate danger to the health or
welfare of the members of the public;
      (3)   A vehicle abandoned or disabled on a public street, way or alley
that is impeding the orderly flow of traffic or poses a potential danger to
pedestrians and other operators of vehicles; or
      (4)   A vehicle that must be moved to allow for proper village snow
removal from a public street, way or alley.
   OWNER. A person who holds legal title to the vehicle, or the right of
possession of the vehicle.
   UNLAWFUL VEHICLE.
      (1)   A vehicle that has been reported stolen or is the subject of a
search and seizure by the Police Department; or
      (2)   A vehicle parked in violation of state statutes or ordinances of
the village which prohibit parking at the location in question or for the
period of time for which the vehicle has been parked, and where either the
statute or the ordinance authorize the vehicle to be towed and the signs posted
at the general location note that fact.
   VEHICLE. Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a street, highway or any public way, except devices
moved by human power, devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks,
or snowmobiles.
§ 8-3-2 AUTHORIZATION FOR TOWING.
   (A)   Generally. The towing of vehicles by the village, or by its approved
towing service operators on behalf of the village, shall be authorized only by
the Police Department and only under the circumstances herein provided. Towed
vehicles shall be impounded at facilities designated by the Police Department
until lawfully claimed or disposed of.
   (B)   Towing without notice; immediate tows. Hazardous or unlawful vehicles
may be towed without prior notice; except that, when an unlawful vehicle is the
only one that has been reported as stolen and is not towable for some other
specific reason, the owner should be, when practicable, notified by telephone
or other means and given the opportunity to claim or move the vehicle, if he or
she so wishes, to avoid incurring the expense of a police-ordered tow;
provided, however, that, the vehicle may be towed if the owner permitted the
tow to be made when the vehicle was reported stolen or at any time thereafter,
in the form provided. Within a working period of 24 hours after towing a
vehicle pursuant to this article, a notice shall be sent to or personally
delivered to the owner of the vehicle, affording the opportunity for a hearing.
For the purpose of this article, a working period of 24 hours shall not include
Saturday, Sunday and holidays.
   (C)   Towing with prior notice; abandoned vehicles. Abandoned vehicles may
be towed after the mailing or delivery of prior notice and the affording of an
opportunity for a hearing as provided in §§
8-3-3 and
8-3-4.
§ 8-3-3 PRE-TOW NOTICE FOR ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Notice pursuant to this section shall be personally delivered to the
owner, or shall be forwarded by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, to the address of the owner of the vehicle as indicated in the most
current registration list of the Secretary of State. The notice shall be in the
form provided. In the event that an out-of-state vehicle is proposed to be
towed, inquiry by computer, telephone or letter shall be made of the Secretary
of State of the particular jurisdiction for the furnishing of the most current
registered name and address of the owner of the vehicle, and notice shall be
mailed as provided herein to the address furnished, though in no case will the
village be required to delay towing more than seven days after the date of the
mailing or personal delivery of the notice if no request for a hearing has been
received within that seven-day period.
   (B)   A notice of intent to tow sticker with the earliest date upon which
the tow may take place and the address and phone number of the Police
Department shall be placed on the vehicle.
§ 8-3-4 PRE-TOW HEARING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Opportunity for hearing. The owner or person entitled to possession of
a vehicle to be towed as an abandoned vehicle shall have seven days after the
date of mailing or personal delivery of the notice to request, in writing, a
pre-tow hearing. Subsequent to this seven-day period, the vehicle may be towed,
if the owner has not filed a written hearing request within the seven-day
period, and any hearing rights under the provisions of this article will be
deemed waived.
   (B)   Scheduling of pre-tow hearings. The pre-tow hearing shall be scheduled
for a date within 14 days of the mailing or personal delivery of the pre-tow
notice. The village shall not be required to delay towing longer than such a
14-day period.
   (C)   Request for pre-tow hearings. Requests for a pre-tow hearing are to be
made in person to the office indicated on the notice. Requests for hearing by
persons who reside more than 50 miles from the village may be made by mail.
Forms for such requests shall be made available at the Police Department. At
the time of making the request, the owner will be provided a hearing date and
time by mail or in person, as the circumstances require.
   (D)   Appointment of Hearing Officer. The village shall choose an officer or
employee of the village to serve as Hearing Officer. In no case shall the
Hearing Officer be an individual who was involved in the initial decision to
tow the vehicle. The Hearing Officer shall have the authority to require the
presence of the enforcement officer who initiated the proposed tow or any other
village personnel.
   (E)   Nature of hearing. The hearing shall be informal in nature, and the
rules of evidence shall not apply. The hearing will not be determinative of, or
adjudicate, any citation relative to any vehicle. After receiving all relevant
evidence, the Hearing Officer shall make a written decision based upon a
preponderance of the evidence as to whether towing of the vehicle is authorized
by the laws of the state or the ordinances of the village, with a specific
statutory or ordinance section cited in the decision. The owner shall be
provided a copy of such pre-tow hearing decision.
   (F)   Decision to tow and rates to be charged. If the preponderance of the
evidence supports towing and compliance with the provisions of this article,
the Hearing Officer shall direct that the vehicle be towed, with any towing and
storage costs to then be imposed upon the owner thereof. The fees to be charged
for towing and storage services shall be no more than the maximum rates set by
the Chief of Police pursuant to the provisions of §
8-3-5. The owner of such vehicle, having had such a hearing, may avoid the
towing by immediately removing the vehicle from the improper location to a
proper, lawful location and correcting any unlawful condition of the vehicle.
   (G)   Decision not to tow.
      (1)   If the preponderance of the evidence fails to support towing of the
vehicle, the Hearing Officer shall direct that the vehicle shall not be towed.
The village shall furnish a copy of such decision to the owner, who may place
it inside the vehicle in a location plainly visible from the outside, such as
the dashboard or rear window. No vehicle about which such a decision has been
rendered shall be towed by the village unless the circumstances under which the
decision was rendered have changed.
      (2)   If, at some subsequent time, the village should wish to tow the
vehicle from the same location, it shall follow the same procedures required
for the towing of any other similarly situated vehicle.
   (H)   Reports and documents to be retained; contesting decisions. Originals
or copies of all notices, pre-tow hearing decisions, towing reports and any
associated police reports or documents shall be retained by the Police
Department for a period of at least five years after each hearing, or after
each tow if no hearing was requested or held. The village or the owner may
contest the decision of the Hearing Officer in any manner provided by law.
§ 8-3-5 POST-TOW NOTICE FOR HAZARDOUS AND UNLAWFUL VEHICLES.
   (A)   Mailing or delivery of notice. Notice pursuant to this section shall
be forwarded by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the
address of the owner of the vehicle as indicated in the most current
registration list of the Secretary of State, unless the notice is personally
delivered to the owner, in which case, the date and time of the delivery and
the name of the police officer making the delivery shall be noted in the Police
Department records or reports. The notice shall be in the form provided, and
shall be mailed or delivered within 24 hours, Monday through Friday, excluding
holidays. In the event that the village has towed an out-of-state, hazardous or
unlawful vehicle, inquiry by computer, telephone or letter shall be made of the
Secretary of State of the particular jurisdiction for the furnishing of the
most current registered name and address of the owner of the vehicle, and
notice shall be mailed as provided herein to the address furnished.
   (B)   Posting of signs showing hearing rights. All approved towing service
operators shall prominently post at least one sign, with dimensions of at least
12 inches by 18 inches, indicating the opportunity and procedures for a hearing
to contest the validity of a towed vehicle. The sign shall be placed in
locations readily visible to the public transacting business at any towing
facility. If a towing service operator performs services for more than one
municipality, the information for contacting the various appropriate municipal
officers can be listed on one such sign.
   (C)   Requests for post-tow hearings. Requests for hearings may be made in
person at the office indicated on the notice within 15 days of the mailing or
personal delivery of the notification of tow, or release of the vehicle,
whichever occurs first; otherwise, the right to a hearing shall be deemed
waived. Requests for hearings by persons who reside more than 50 miles from the
village may be made in person or by mail received by the village within the 15-
day period.
   (D)   Release of motor vehicles. Before the owner or person entitled to
possession of any impounded vehicle shall be permitted to remove same, the
owner or other person entitled to possession shall furnish evidence of his or
her identity, ownership of the vehicle, or his or her right to possession, sign
a receipt for the vehicle, and pay the amount currently owed for towing and
storage fees to the towing service operator. The Police Chief is authorized to
promulgate regulations as to the documents or other proof necessary to
establish these facts.
   (E)   Establishment of maximum towing and storage rates.
      (1)   The owner shall pay fees to the towing service operator for towing
and storage on police-ordered tows at rates that do not exceed maximum amounts
to be administratively established by the Chief of Police and which may be
revised from time to time. The basic rates for such fees shall be shown in the
form and on the sign concerning vehicle release requirements.
      (2)   However, nothing in this section is intended to prevent a
competitive towing service operator from charging less than the established
maximum rates for police-ordered or any other tows. In arriving at the maximum
rates for various services, the Chief of Police shall consider such matters as
the prevalent market rates in the area for the different types of vehicles, the
types of storage and area requirements for categories such as large trucks and
commercial vehicles, and the relative difficulties and amount of work required
to perform various types of towing operations. For particularly difficult or
unusual towing jobs, such as large or serious accidents, the Chief of Police is
authorized to allow towing operators to charge rates above those established
for normal situations, which special charges must be based upon the cost of
services provided, taking into account such matters as the man-hours and
equipment time required for the job. A towing service operator must fully
itemize in writing the details of such a billing at special rates for a
particularly difficult or unusual tow, and supply a copy of the itemized bill
to the owner and to the Police Department. Any such special rates charged must
be customary in the towing industry in the area for the nature and extent of
the services provided. Every towing service operator and the Police Department
shall have available a copy of the complete current rate schedule and any
special rate policy established by the Chief of Police, for vehicle owners to
view upon request.
§ 8-3-6 POST-TOW HEARING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Opportunity for hearing. The owner of a vehicle towed as an immediate
tow, by or pursuant to the authority of the Police Department as set forth
herein, shall be provided the opportunity for a post-tow hearing to determine
the validity of such tow and any towing or storage charges. The hearing will
not be determinative of, or adjudicate, any citation issued relative to any
towed vehicle.
   (B)   Nature of the hearing and Hearing Officer. The nature of the hearing
and the appointment of the Hearing Officer shall be the same as set forth above
in §§
8-3-4 and
8-3-5.
   (C)   Scheduling of post-tow hearings. Hearings shall take place as follows.
      (1)   In those instances where the vehicle has been released upon the
deposit of the full payment currently owed for towing and storage charges, and
the owner has properly requested a hearing, the hearing shall take place within
15 days after the release of such vehicle, unless the owner requests a later
date convenient to all parties.
      (2)   In those instances where the vehicle remains impounded, the hearing
shall take place, at the option of the owner:
         (a)   On the next day after an owner’s demand for such hearing,
excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays; if such demand is made after 3:00
p.m., or if the unavailability of a necessary witness or evidence creates a
particular difficulty in conducting the hearing on the next calendar day, then
a hearing shall be held on the second day following the request, excluding
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays; or
         (b)   If acceptable to the owner, within 15 days of such request on
the date convenient to all parties.
   (D)   Conduct of post-tow hearing. The Hearing Officer shall review all
evidence presented by the vehicle owner and the Police Department or other
village employees, and shall make a finding based upon the preponderance of the
evidence presented, as to the lawful authority for the towing and storage of
the vehicle. The village must establish such authority by a preponderance of
the evidence.
   (E)   Post-tow hearing decision. For each hearing, the Hearing Officer shall
complete a post-tow hearing decision and attach such decision to the Police
Department’s original vehicle towing report, and supply a copy of the decision
to the owner by personal delivery if the owner is present, otherwise by mail.
The decision and findings shall be substantially as stated in the form for the
post-tow hearing decision.
   (F)   Reports and documents to be retained; contesting decisions. All
originals or copies of the notices, post-tow hearing decisions, towing reports
and any associated police reports or documents shall be retained by the Police
Department for a period of at least five years after each hearing, or after
each tow if no hearing was requested or held. The village or the owner may
contest the decision of the Hearing Officer in any manner provided by law.
   (G)   Towing services subject to ordinance. Notwithstanding any other
ordinance or statutory provisions to the contrary, any towing service operator
authorized to perform tows on behalf of the village must perform its services
subject to the provisions of this article. However, the towing company shall
have the right to recover the reason-able value of its services for police-
ordered tows, which are not paid by the vehicle owner, from the village;
provided, however, that, if a tow or the charge for a tow is found by a court
to be illegal and the towing service operator is required to return the charge
for the tow to the owner of the vehicle, the village shall not be liable to
reimburse the operator for the towing charges.
ARTICLE 4: BICYCLES
Section
   
8-4-1   Definition
   
8-4-2   Registration required
   
8-4-3   Application
   
8-4-4   Equipment; condition
   
8-4-5   Transfer of registration
   
8-4-6   Compliance with general traffic rules and regulations
   
8-4-7   Riding of bicycles on sidewalks
   
8-4-8   Maximum speed
   
8-4-9   Parking
§ 8-4-1 DEFINITION.
   For purposes of this article, the word OWNER shall include any minor who has
the use and control of a bicycle with the knowledge and consent of any parent
or guardian.
§ 8-4-2 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   No person who resides in the village shall ride a bicycle in the village
unless such bicycle shall be registered with the Police Department.
§ 8-4-3 APPLICATION.
   It shall be the duty of every owner of a bicycle residing in the village to
file an application for registration of such bicycle with the Police Department
upon a form provided by that Department, setting forth the name and address of
the owner, a description of the bicycle by name or make and the serial number
thereof.
§ 8-4-4 EQUIPMENT; CONDITION.
   All bicycles submitted for registration shall be equipped as provided by
state statute, and the Police Department shall refuse to register any bicycle
not so equipped or not found to be in a safe mechanical condition.
§ 8-4-5 TRANSFER OF REGISTRATION.
   Upon the transfer of the ownership of a registered bicycle, by sale or
otherwise, the owner thereof shall have it registered in the name of the new
owner.
§ 8-4-6 COMPLIANCE WITH GENERAL TRAFFIC RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   Every person operating a bicycle upon the streets of the village shall be
subject to the provisions of this article, this code and other traffic
ordinances of the village and the statutes of the state applicable to bicycles
and to the drivers of motor vehicles, except as to the special regulations
hereof, and except as to those provisions which, by their nature, can have no
application.
§ 8-4-7 RIDING OF BICYCLES ON SIDEWALKS.
   Persons shall be allowed to ride bicycles upon village sidewalks. Such
bicycle riders will, in each instance, give the right-of-way to pedestrians and
the speed of such bicycles shall not exceed such speed as is reasonable under
the weather conditions, physical condition of the sidewalk and other bicycle
and pedestrian traffic. Where necessary, a person riding a bicycle on a
sidewalk may, because of one or more of the factors stated above, be required
to dismount and walk the bicycle. A failure to grant the right-of-way to
pedestrians or to ride in a manner or at a speed which is inconsistent with
conditions shall be a violation of the provisions of this section.
§ 8-4-8 MAXIMUM SPEED.
   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
proper, having regard for the traffic and the use of the way, or so as to
endanger life or limb or injure the property of any person.
§ 8-4-9 PARKING.
   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street, other than off the roadway,
against the curb or in the racks provided by the village for the parking of
such bicycles.
ARTICLE 5: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Yield right-of-way intersections
   
II.   Stop intersections designated
   
III.   Speed limits on specific streets
   
IV.   Turns
   
V.   Traffic signals
   
VI.   Weight limits
   
VII.   Truck routes
   
VIII.   Local weight restricted highways
SCHEDULE I. YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY INTERSECTIONS.
   The following intersections are designated as yield right-of-way
intersections, and traffic shall yield as follows:
Yield Street Intersection with
Yield Street         Intersection with
Alamo Court          Dearborn Circle
Alton Court          Teton Circle
Apache Lane          Aztec Drive
Apache Lane          Indianwood Drive
Biloxi Court         Teton Circle
Bison Trail          Lance Lane
Blackhawk Drive      Eagleview Drive
Boone Drive          Dearborn Circle
Bowie Drive          Dearborn Circle
Carson Court         Dearborn Circle
Cherokee Court       Aztec Drive
Cherokee Court       Indianwood Drive
Cimarron Drive       Iroquois Trail
Cochise Court        Silverleaf Blvd
Cochise Place        Aztec Drive
Cochise Place        Indianwood Drive
Colorado Court       Teton Circle
Country Glen Lane    Baybrook Lane
Country Glen Lane    Knollwood Drive
Crystal Shore Drive  Hyannis Circle (both intersections)
Dodge Court          Dearborn Circle
El Paso Lane         Eagle View Drive
Fawn Court           Erie Court
Hawk Lane            Cactus Trail
Heather Lane         Eagle View Drive
Horseshoe Court      Ridge Trail
Illini Drive         Arrowhead Trail (both intersections)
Kelly Drive          Forest/Glenlake
Lance Lane           New Britton Road
Magnolia Way         Sussex Road
Mohawk Drive         Tomahawk Court
Narrangansett Drive  Boa Trail (both intersections)
Oswego Drive         Iroquois Trail
Overlook Lane        Waco Drive
Park Hill Trail      Carriage Drive
Prairie Court        Iroquois Trail
Ridge Drive          Paddock Drive
Sand Creek Drive     Shining Waters Drive
Seminole Lane        Shawnee Drive
Shining Water Drive  Iroquois Trail
Silverleaf Boulevard Illini Drive
Sioux Lane           Cochise Court
Stanford Lane        Trinity Drive
Summit Pass          Waco Drive
Tomahawk Court       Seminole Lane
Valley View Trail    Ridge Trail
Valley View Trail    Shenandoah Drive
Yuma Lane            Blackhawk Drive
Yuma Lane            Tomahawk Court
 
(Ord. 90-07-55, passed 7-10-1990; Ord. 90-09-83, passed 9-25-1990; Ord. 92-08-
96, passed 8-25-1992; Ord 94-06-49, passed 6-14-1994; Ord. 95-05-25, passed 5-
15-1995; Ord. 97-11-80, passed 11-3-1997; Ord. 2003-09-55, passed 9-3-2003;
Ord. 2003-11-77, passed 11-17-2003; Ord. 2004-06-34, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
2008-12-72, passed 12-15-2008; Ord. 2011-10-35, passed 10-3-2011; Ord. 2017-11-
64, passed 11-6-2017; Ord. 2024-03-11, passed 3-18-2024)
SCHEDULE II. STOP INTERSECTIONS DESIGNATED.
   The following intersections are designated as stop intersections, and
traffic shall stop as follows:
Stop Street Intersection with
Stop Street                        Intersection with
Adam Lane                          Birchbark Trail
Adler Lane                         Merbach Drive
Adobe Court                        Inca Boulevard
Adobe Court                        Mohican Road
Alabama Trail                      Idaho Street
Alexandra Way                      North Avenue (both intersections)
Alison Lane                        Birchbark Trail
Amber Lane                         President Street
Andrew Lane                        Birchbark Trail
Andover Court                      Concord Lane
Antelope Trail                     Idaho Street
Antigo Trail                       Spring Valley Drive
Appaloosa Court                    Munson Drive
Appomattox Trail                   Spring Valley Drive
Arapahoe Trail                     Gary Avenue
Arapahoe Trail                     Hiawatha Drive
Arlington Court                    President Street
Armstrong Park Driveway            Illini Drive
Arrowhead Trail                    Thunderbird Trail
Ash Court                          Big Horn Trail
Aspen Court                        Merbach Drive
Aztec Court                        Thunderbird Trail
Aztec Drive                        Mohican Road
Aztec Drive                        Thunderbird Trail
Barton Place                       Thunderbird Trail
Basswood Court                     Merbach Drive
Baybrook Lane                      Lies Road
Baybrook Lane                      Woodhill Drive
Bear Paw Court                     Birchbark Trail
Bedford Drive                      Lies Road
Beech Court                        Merbach Drive
Bennett Drive                      North Avenue
Bennett Drive                      Surrey Drive
Bennington Lane                    Army Trail
Big Eagle Trail                    Birchbark Trail
Big Eagle Trail                    Morton Road
Big Horn Trail                     Fair Oaks Road
Big Horn Trail                     Spring Valley Drive
Birchbark Trail                    County Farm Road
Birchbark Trail                    Fair Oaks Road
Birchbark Trail                    Kuhn Road
Birchbark Trail                    Morton Road
Bison Trail                        Birchbark Trail
Blackhawk Drive                    Arapahoe Trail
Blackhawk Drive                    Thunderbird Drive
Bluff Street                       Elk Trail
Bluff Street                       Hiawatha Drive
Boa Trail                          Big Horn Trail
Boa Trail                          Woodlake Drive
Boa Trail                          Spring Valley Drive
Boone Drive                        Elk Trail
Bowie Drive                        Lies Road
Bradbury Circle                    Merbach Drive
Brave Court                        Spring Valley Drive
Brighton Drive                     Buckingham Drive
Brighton Drive                     Woodhill Drive
Bristol Drive                      Thunderbird Trail
Brompton Court                     President Street
Brookstone Drive                   High Ridge Pass
Brookstone Drive                   Lies Road
Brookstone Drive                   Morton Road
Buckingham Court                   Buckingham Drive
Buckingham Drive                   Lies Road
Buckingham Drive                   Woodhill Drive
Buckskin Lane                      Birchbark Trail
Buckskin Lane                      Evergreen Drive
Buffalo Circle                     Evergreen Drive (both intersections)
Burke Drive                        Kuhn Road
Burke Drive                        Merbach Drive
Burning Trail                      Birchbark Trail
Burning Trail                      Evergreen Drive
Cactus Trail                       Birchbark Trail
Canterbury Drive                   Burke Drive
Canyon Trail                       Idaho Street
Caribou Trail                      Spring Valley Drive
Carlton Drive                      St. Charles Road
Carol Court                        Lies Road
Cedar Court                        Merbach Drive
Center Avenue                      Mission Street
Center Drive                       Fullerton Avenue
Central Park Drive                 Kuhn Road
Chalet Drive                       Burke Drive
Chattanooga Trail                  Spring Valley Drive
Chestnut Drive                     Kuhn Road
Chetwood Drive                     Woodhill Drive
Cheyenne Trail                     Arrowhead Trail
Cheyenne Trail                     Aztec Drive
Chippewa Trail                     Aztec Drive
Christopher Lane                   Tall Oaks Drive
Christopher Lane                   Timber Lane
Cimarron Drive                     Birchbark Trail
Clearwater Court                   Idaho Street
Cliff Court                        Canyon Trail
Cliff View Lane                    Brookstone Drive
Cliff View Lane                    High Ridge Pass
Cochise Court                      Arrowhead Trail
Columbia Court                     Idaho Street
Commanche Court                    Aztec Drive
Commanche Lane                     Arrowhead Trail
Commanche Lane                     Aztec Drive
Commerce Drive                     Kehoe Boulevard
Commerce Drive                     St. Paul Boulevard
Commonwealth Road                  St. Charles Road
Concord Court                      Concord Lane
Concord Lane                       North Avenue
Concord Lane                       President Street
Country Glen Lane                  Woodhill Drive
Creekwood Court                    Munson Drive
Crystal Shore Drive                Woodlake Drive
Cypress Lane                       Evergreen Drive (both intersections
Dakota Court                       Teton Circle
Danbury Drive                      Thunderbird Trail
Dancing Water Court                Idaho Street
David Lane                         Birchbark Trail
Daybreak Lane                      Elk Trail
Dearborn Circle                    Idaho Street (both intersections)
Deerskin Trail                     Canyon/Flint Trail
Deerskin Trail                     Kuhn Road
Delaware Trail                     Flint Trail
Della Court                        Gary Avenue
Devon Court                        Woodhill Drive
Dogwood Lane                       Birchbark Trail
Dogwood Lane                       Evergreen Drive
Dorchester Drive                   Country Farm Road
Dorchester Drive                   Lies Road
Doris Avenue                       Gary Avenue
Dugout Trail                       Birchbark Trail
Eagle View Drive                   Arapahoe Trail
Eagle View Drive                   Hiawatha Drive
East Drive                         Mission Street
Easton Drive                       Lies Road
Easy Street                        St. Charles Road (both intersections)
Edgebrook Court                    Hiawatha Drive
Edington Court                     Woodhill Drive
Edington Lane                      Woodhill Drive
El Paso Lane                       Hiawatha Drive
Elk Trail                          Idaho Street
Erie Court                         Flint Trail
Esselen Circle                     Teton Circle
Essex Drive                        Thunderbird Trail
Evergreen Drive                    Birchbark Trail (both intersections)
Executive Drive                    Main Place
Fair Oaks Road                     Army Trail
Fairfield Court                    Concord Lane
Flame Court                        President Street
Flame Drive                        Concord Lane
Flint Trail                        Idaho Street
Fountain View Drive                Goldenhill Street
Fountain View Road                 Gary Avenue
Fountain View Road                 Lies Road
Fox Court                          Evergreen Drive
Fullerton Avenue                   Schmale Road
Georgetown Drive                   Big Horn Trail
Georgetown Drive                   Spring Valley
Gerzeske Lane                      Kehoe Boulevard
Glen Flora Drive                   Hiawatha Drive
Greenway Trail                     Gary Avenue
Greenway Trail                     Hiawatha Drive
Gundersen Drive                    Main Place
Hampton Court                      Woodhill Drive
Harbor Point                       Woodlake Drive
Harwich Drive                      Woodlake Drive
Hawk Lane                          Birchbark Trail
Heather Lane                       Hiawatha Drive
Hemlock Lane                       Birchbark Trail (both intersections)
Hiawatha Drive                     Illini Drive
Hickory Lane                       Birchbark Trail (both intersections)
High Ridge Pass                    Birchbark Trail
High Ridge Pass                    Lies Road
Hill Crest Drive                   Brookstone Drive (all intersections with)
Hill Crest Drive                   High Ridge Pass
Hoover Drive                       Elk Trail
Hopi Court                         Idaho Street
Horizon Circle                     Bluff Street
Hunter Drive                       Burke Drive
Hunter Drive                       Merbach Drive
Huntington Drive                   Buckingham Drive
Huntington Drive                   Kuhn Road
Huron Court                        Idaho Street
Hyannis Circle                     Spring Valley Drive
Hyannis Circle                     Woodlake Drive (both intersections)
Idaho Street                       Lies Road
Illini Drive                       Aztec Drive
Illini Drive                       Hiawatha Drive
Inca Boulevard                     Aztec Drive
Indianwood Drive                   Illini Drive
Indianwood Drive                   Thunderbird Trail
Iowa Court                         Arapahoe Trail
Iris Avenue                        Rose Avenue
Ironhawk Court                     Idaho Street
Iroquois Trail                     Birchbark Trail
Iroquois Trail                     Pawnee Drive (both intersections)
Jason Court                        Fair Oaks Road
Kalamazoo Court                    Canyon Trail
Kamiah Court                       Munson Trail
Kansas Street                      Flint Trail
Kehoe Boulevard                    Gary Avenue
Kehoe Boulevard                    Schmale Road
Kelly Drive                        County Farm Road
Kimberly Drive                     Fullerton Avenue
Kimberly Drive                     Kehoe Boulevard
Kimberly Drive                     Lies Road
Kingsbridge Drive                  Woodhill Drive (both intersections)
Knollwood Drive                    Woodhill Drive
Kuhn Road                          Birchbark Trail
Kuhn Road                          Lies Road
Kuhn Road                          Mohican Road
Kuhn Road                          Thunderbird Trail
Lacrosse Street                    Canyon Trail
Lance Lane                         Birchbark Trail
Lenox Court                        Concord Lane
Lies Road                          Fair Oaks Road
Lies Road                          Kuhn Road
Lies Road                          Schmale Road
Lightning Trail                    Evergreen Drive
Lilac Lane                         Rose Avenue (all intersections with)
Lily Lane                          Rose Avenue
Longmeadow Drive                   Birchbark Trail
Main Place                         Gundersen Drive
Main Place                         St. Charles Road
Main Place (Northbound )           Thornhill Drive
Malibu Court                       Flint Trail
Maple Ridge Court                  Fair Oaks Road
Matthew Lane                       Birchbark Trail
Mayfair Drive                      Buckingham Drive
McNees Drive                       Kuhn Road
Medford Drive                      Thunderbird Trail
Merbach Drive                      Army Trail
Merbach Drive                      Lies Road
Mercedes Drive                     Gary Avenue
Mesa Verde Court                   Munson Drive
Mill Court                         Woodhill Drive
Minnesota Court                    Teton Circle
Mission Street                     Kimberly Drive
Mission Street                     Schmale Road
Moccasin Court                     Canyon Trail
Mohawk Drive                       Blackhawk Drive
Mohican Road                       Kuhn Road
Morton Road                        Birchbark Trail
Morton Road                        Lies Road
Mountain Glen Way                  High Ridge Pass
Municipal Center Parking Lot (both Hiawatha Drive
drives)
Munson Drive                       County Farm Road
Munson Drive                       Kuhn Road
Mystic Court                       Woodlake Drive
Napa Street                        Flint Trail
Napa Street                        Niagara Street
Navajo Street                      Canyon Trail
Nebraska Circle                    Teton Circle
Nekoma Court                       Pawnee Drive
New Britton Road                   Rose Avenue
Newburg Court                      Woodhill Drive
Nez Perce Court                    Munson Drive
Niagara Street                     Flint Trail
Oakwood Drive                      Woodhill Drive
Oakwood Drive                      Woodlake Drive
Ohio Court                         Canyon Trail
Old Gary (S)                       Goldenhill Street
Omaha Street                       Flint Trail
Oriole Trail                       Spring Valley Drive
Osage Circle                       Pawnee Drive
Oswego Drive                       Pawnee Drive
Ottawa Court                       Flint Trail
Overlook Lane                      Brookstone Drive
Oxford Drive                       Big Horn Trail
Oxford Drive                       Fair Oaks Road
Paddock Drive                      County Farm Road
Paddock Drive                      Morton Road
Palomino Street                    Canyon Trail
Papoose Court                      Flint Trail
Park Hill Trail                    Gary Avenue
Parkside Drive                     Burke Drive
Parkview Circle                    Woodhill Drive
Parkview Circle                    Woodlake Drive
Pawnee Drive                       County Farm Road
Pawnee Drive                       Morton Road
Pebblecreek Trail                  Hiawatha Drive
Pembrook Court                     President Street
Penfield Drive                     Birchbark Trail
Pennsboro Court                    Big Horn Trail
Petersburg Court                   Big Horn Trail
Pheasant Trail                     Spring Valley Drive (both intersections)
Phillips Court                     Schmale Road
Plum Grove Court                   Fair Oaks Road
Pocohantas Trail                   Chippewa Trail
Pontiac Lane                       Pawnee Drive
Portsmouth Court                   Spring Valley Drive
President Court                    President Street
President Street                   North Avenue
President Street                   St. Charles Road
Quail Run Court                    Park Hill Trail
Quincy Court                       Birchbark Trail
Randy Road                         Schmale Road
Regency Lane                       Buckingham Drive
Regency Lane                       Woodhill Drive
Ridge Trail                        Morton Road
Robin Drive                        Spring Valley Drive (both intersections)
Rockport Drive                     Bennington Drive
Rockport Drive                     Woodlake Drive
Rocky Valley Way                   Brookstone Drive
Rolling Oaks Drive                 Fair Oaks Road
Rose Court                         Rose Avenue
Rose Avenue                        Lies Road (both intersections)
Royal Glen Lane                    Baybrook Lane
Royal Glen Lane                    Woodhill Drive
St. Paul Boulevard                 Kimberly Drive
St. Paul Boulevard                 Schmale Road
Saginaw Court                      Canyon Trail
Sandcreek Drive                    Birchbark Trail
Sandhurst Lane                     Woodhill Drive
Santa Fe Court                     Flint Trail
Sauk Court                         Munson Drive
Schmale Road                       Fullerton Avenue
Scott Court                        Woodhill Drive
Seabury Circle                     Woodlake Drive
Seminole Lane                      Thunderbird Trail
Seneca Lane                        Pawnee Drive
Sequoia Court                      Munson Drive
Shaftsbury Street                  Fountain View Drive
Shawnee Drive                      Blackhawk Drive
Shelbourne Drive                   Thunderbird Trail (both intersections)
Shenandoah Drive                   Birchbark Trail
Shining Water Drive                Birchbark Trail
Shorewood Drive                    Concord Lane
Silverleaf Boulevard               Illini Drive
Silverleaf Boulevard               Thunderbird Trail
Sioux Lane                         Thunderbird Trail
Split Rail Drive                   Lies Road
Split Rail Drive                   Paddock Drive
Spring Valley Court                Spring Valley Drive
Spring Valley Drive                Army Trail
Spring Valley Drive                Lies Road
Spring Valley Drive                Robin Drive (northern intersection)
Springbrook Lane                   Hiawatha Drive
Sunrise Court                      Hiawatha Drive
Stanford Lane                      Woodhill Drive
Stark Drive                        Gary Avenue
Stark Drive                        Old Gary Avenue
Stockbridge Drive                  Birchbark Trail
Stonewood Circle                   Merbach Drive
Stuart Drive                       Birchbark Trail (both intersections)
Summit Pass                        Rose Avenue
Sundance Court                     Munson Drive
Surrey Drive                       Shawnee Drive
Sussex Road                        Rose Avenue
Sype Court                         Bennett Drive
Tacoma Drive                       Birchbark Trail
Tacoma Drive                       Munson Drive
Tahoe Court                        Munson Drive
Tall Oaks Drive                    Fair Oaks Road
Teton Circle                       Munson Drive (both intersections)
Teton Drive                        Munson Drive
Texas Court                        Teton Circle
Thornhill Drive                    Main Place
Thunderbird Trail                  Arrowhead Trail
Thunderbird Trail                  County Farm Road
Thunderbird Trail                  Kuhn Road
Tioga Court                        Canyon Trail
Tomahawk Court                     Arapahoe Trail
Tonto Court                        Flint Trail
Topeka Court                       Munson Drive
Tower Boulevard                    Center Avenue
Tower Boulevard                    Schmale Road
Town Center Parking Lot            Fountain View Drive
Trailside Court                    Merbach Drive
Trevi Drive                        Fountain View Drive
Trinity Drive                      Woodhill Drive (both intersections)
Tubeway Drive                      Gary Avenue
Ute Lane                           Chippewa Trail
Vale Road                          County Farm Road
Village Court                      Gary Avenue
Village Drive                      Kehoe Boulevard
Violet Street                      Fair Oaks Road
Violet Street                      Rose Avenue
Waco Drive                         Birchbark Trail
Waco Drive                         Brookstone Drive
Walnut Circle                      Big Horn Trail (both intersections)
Wampum Court                       Canyon Trail
Warwick Court                      Buckingham Drive
Warwick Drive                      Buckingham Drive
West Street                        Geneva Road
Westgate Drive                     St. Charles
Westward Trail                     Birchbark Trail
Whisper Point                      Bluff Street
Williamstown Drive                 Birchbark Trail
Winchester Court                   Birchbark Trail
Winding Glen Drive                 Woodlake Drive
Woodcrest Court                    Hiawatha Drive
Woodhill Drive                     County Farms Road
Woodhill Drive                     Kuhn Road
Woodhill Drive                     Woodlake Drive
Woodlake Drive                     Lies Road
Yardley Drive                      Kuhn Road
Yardley Drive                      Stonewood Circle
Yorkshire Lane                     Birchbark Trail
Yuma Lane                          Shawnee Drive
Yuma Lane                          Thunderbird Trail
 
(Ord. 90-07-55, passed 7-10-1990; Ord. 90-11-93, passed 11-13-1990; Ord. 91-05-
38, passed 5-14-1991; Ord. 91-10-71, passed 10-8-1991; Ord. 91-11-77, passed
11-12-1991; Ord. 93-05-49, passed 5-25-1993; Ord. 94-08-71, passed 8-15-1994;
Ord. 97-10-74, passed 10-20-1997; Ord. 97-11-80, passed 11-3-1997; Ord. 2000-
06-57, passed 6-5-2000; Ord. 2000-08-72, passed 8-21-2000; Ord. 2003-05-22,
passed 5-5-2003; Ord. 2003-09-55, passed 9-3-2003; Ord. 2004-06-34, passed 6-
21-2004; Ord. 2005-08-49, passed 8-15-2005; Ord. 2008-12-72, passed 12-15-2008;
Ord. 2010-05-24, passed 5-3-2010; Ord. 2011-10-35, passed 10-3-2011)
SCHEDULE III. SPEED LIMITS ON SPECIFIC STREETS.
   On the basis of engineering or traffic investigations conducted by the
village, it has been and is determined that the speed limits be altered on
certain streets. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon
the following streets as a speed greater than indicated.
   (A)   Unless otherwise specified in divisions (B) through (E) below, no
vehicle may be driven upon any street under the jurisdiction of the village at
any speed greater than 25 mph.
   (B)   The speed limit on the following streets shall be 30 mph:
      Alexandra Way
      Birchbark Trail (from County Farm Road to Fair Oaks Road)
      Commerce Drive
      Elk Trail
      Gundersen Drive
      Merbach Drive
      Mercedes Drive
      Munson Drive
      Navaho Drive
      President Street
      Thornhill Drive (from Schmale Road to eastern terminus)
      Tubeway Drive
   (C)   The speed limit on the following streets shall be 35 mph:
      Bonnie Lane
      Carol Street
      Center Avenue
      East Drive
      Fair Oaks Road
      Fullerton Avenue
      Kehoe Boulevard
      Kimberly Drive
      Kuhn Road
      Lies Road
      Main Place
      Mission Street
      Morton Road (from Lies Road to Birchbark Trail)
      Randy Road
      St. Paul Boulevard
      Village Court
      Village Drive
   (D)   The speed limit on the following streets shall be 40 mph:
Morton Road (from Birchbark Trail southerly to the village limits)
   (E)   The speed limit in school zones on school days when children are
present shall be 20 miles an hour as follows:
Street Location
Street              Location
Aztec Drive         Between Ute Lane and 100 feet west of Ute Lane
Buckskin Lane       Between 200 feet north and 200 feet south of the pedestrian
                    walkway
Chippewa Trail      Between Niagara Street and 100 feet west of Ute Lane
Cochise Court       Between 200 feet east and 200 feet west of the crosswalk at
                    Sioux Lane
El Paso Lane        Between 350 feet east of Hiawatha Drive and 750 feet east
                    of Hiawatha Drive
Elk Trail           Between Hoover Drive and Idaho Street
Evergreen Drive     Between 155 feet south of Fox Court and 235 feet north of
                    Buffalo Circle
Georgetown Drive    From Spring Valley Drive to 400 feet west of Spring Valley
                    Drive
Hiawatha Drive      Between 200 feet north and 400 feet south of Illini Drive
Idaho Street        Between 205 feet north of Dearborn Circle and 370 feet
                    south of Elk Trail
Illini Drive        Between Hiawatha Drive and 200 feet west of Silverleaf
                    Boulevard
Knollwood Drive     Between Woodhill Drive and 620 feet north of Woodhill Drive
Merbach Drive       From 100 feet north of Cloverdale School north property
                    line to 100 feet south of the south property line
Niagara Street      Between Chippewa Trail and Napa Street
Pocahontas Trail    Between Chippewa Trail and 150 feet south
Sioux Lane          Thunderbird Trail to Cochise Court
Spring Valley Drive Between Portsmouth Court and Antigo Trail
                    From 100 feet north of Cloverdale School north property
Stonewood Circle    line to 200 feet south of the crosswalk at Stonewood and
                    Yardley
Thunderbird Trail   Between 200 feet east and 200 feet west of Sioux Lane
Thunderbird Trail   Between Arrowhead Trail (west) and 200 feet east of the
                    Carol Stream School driveway
Ute Lane            Between Chippewa Trail and Aztec Drive
Woodhill Drive      100 feet west of Royal Glen Lane to 100 feet east of
                    Knollwood Drive
Yardley Drive       200 feet west of Stonewood Circle to Stonewood Circle
 
(Ord. 90-07-55, passed 7-10-1990; Ord. 90-09-73, passed 9-11-1990; Ord. 90-11-
93, passed 11-13-1990; Ord. 91-10-71, passed 10-8-1991; Ord. 96-08-58, passed
8-19-1996; Ord. 98-11-80, passed 11-16-1998; Ord. 99-10-55, passed 10-4-1999;
Ord. 2000-08-66, passed 8-7-2000; Ord. 2000-08-72, passed 8-21-2000; Ord. 2005-
08-49, passed 8-15-2005; Ord. 2006-12-71, passed 12-4-2006; Ord. 2007-07-29,
passed 7-16-2007; Ord. 2011-02-03, passed 2-7-2011; Ord. 2017-10-58, passed 10-
2-2017; Ord. 2024-10-46, passed 10-21-2024)
SCHEDULE IV. TURNS.
   Signs indicating limitations upon turns within the village shall be placed
at the following locations:
Street Turning Limitation
Street                                  Turning Limitation
                                        No right turn onto Chippewa Trail from
Aztec Drive (northbound)                8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to
                                        4:30 p.m., on school days
                                        No left turn onto Chippewa Trail from
Aztec Drive (southbound)                8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to
                                        4:30 p.m., on school days
                                        No left turn onto Buckskin Lane from 7:
Birchbark Trail                         30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to
                                        3:30 p.m., on school days
                                        No right turn onto Buckskin Lane from
Birchbark Trail                         7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to
                                        3:30 p.m., on school days
                                        No left turn southbound on to Evergreen
Buffalo Circle (north intersection with Drive, between 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
Evergreen Drive)                        and 2:00 p.m. to 3:30 p.m., on school
                                        days when school is in session
                                        No right turn onto Ute Lane from 8:00
Chippewa Trail                          a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:30
                                        p.m. on school days
                                        No left turn onto Pocahontas Trail from
Chippewa Trail (westbound)              8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to
                                        4:30 p.m., on school days
                                        No left turn onto Sioux Lane from 8:00
Cochise Court (westbound)               a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00
                                        p.m. on school days
County Farm Road (northbound)           No left turn onto Pawnee Drive
County Farm Road (southbound)           No left turn onto Dorchester Drive
Dearborn Circle (south intersection     No left turn southbound onto Idaho
with Idaho Street)                      Street from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and
                                        2:00 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. on school days
                                        No left turn northbound into Evergreen
Evergreen Drive                         School, between 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
                                        and 2:00 p.m. to 3:30 p.m., on school
                                        days when school is in session
                                        Right turn only on to Evergreen Drive,
Evergreen School                        between 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00
(South Driveway)                        p.m. to 3:30 p.m., on school days when
                                        school is in session
                                        No left turn southbound on to Evergreen
Fox Court                               Drive, between 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
                                        and 2:00 p.m. to 3:30 p.m., on school
                                        days when school is in session
                                        No left turn onto Spring Valley Drive
Georgetown Drive                        from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00
                                        p.m. to 3:00 p.m., on school days
                                        No left turn from north bound Idaho
                                        Street into Western Trails School north
Idaho Street                            parking lot entrance from 8:00 a.m. to
                                        9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. on
                                        school days
                                        Right turn only from Western Trails
Idaho Street                            School north parking lot driveway exit
                                        from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 3:00
                                        p.m. to 4:00 p.m., on school days
Lies Road (eastbound)                   No right turn into Glenbard North
                                        eastern driveway
Lies Road (westbound)                   No left turn into Glenbard North
                                        eastern driveway
                                        Right turn only from Cloverdale School
Merbach Drive                           north driveway from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00
                                        a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:30 p.m., on
                                        school days
                                        No right turn onto Chippewa Trail from
Pocahontas Trail (northbound)           8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to
                                        4:30 p.m., on school days
                                        Right turn only from Carol Stream
Sioux Lane                              School driveway from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00
                                        a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:30 p.m., on
                                        school days
Spring Trail School,                    No left turn onto Spring Valley Drive
north and south driveways               from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00
                                        p.m. to 3:00 p.m., on school days
                                        No right or left turn onto Sioux Lane
Thunderbird Trail                       from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00
                                        p.m. to 4:30 p.m., on school days
                                        No left turn onto Chippewa Trail from
Ute Lane (southbound)                   8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to
                                        4:30 p.m., on school days
                                        No right turn from Western Trails
Western Trails School                   School north parking lot driveway exit
                                        from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00
                                        p.m. to 4:30 p.m., on school days
                                        No left turn from Western Trails School
Western Trails School                   south parking lot driveway exit from 8:
                                        00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to
                                        4:30 p.m. on school days
                                        No left or right turn onto Knollwood
Woodhill Drive                          Drive from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and
                                        2:00 p.m. to 4:30 p.m., on school days
                                        Right turn only from Heritage Lakes
Woodhill Drive                          School west driveway from 8:00 a.m. to
                                        9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:30 p.m.,
                                        on school days
 
(Ord. 90-07-55, passed 7-10-1990; Ord. 92-02-25, passed 2-25-1992; Ord. 92-01-
11, passed 1-28-1992; Ord. 93-12-116, passed 12-14-1993; Ord. 2000-08-65,
passed 8-7-2000; Ord. 2001-02-10, passed 2-20-2001; Ord. 2001-05-27, passed 5-
21-2001; Ord. 2001-08-42, passed 8-6-2001; Ord. 2001-09-48, passed 9-17-2001;
Ord. 2002-09-57, passed 9-16-2002; Ord. 2011-02-03, passed 2-7-2011; Ord. 2014-
03-11, passed 3-3-2014; Ord. 2016-04-19, passed 4-4-2016; Ord. 2017-09-56,
passed 9-18-2017; Ord. 2019-03-10, passed 3-18-2019; Ord. 2019-07-23, passed 7-
15-2019)
SCHEDULE V. TRAFFIC SIGNALS.
   Mechanized traffic signals shall be installed at the following
intersections:
      Army Trail Road and Country Farm Road
      Army Trail Road and Woodlake Drive
      Country Farm Road and Lies Road
      Country Farm Road and Birchbark Trail
      Gary Avenue and St. Charles Road
      Gary Avenue and North Avenue
      Gary Avenue and Thunderbird Trail
      Gary Avenue and Hiawatha Drive
      Gary Avenue and Elk Trail
      Gary Avenue and Lies Road
      Geneva Road and Schmale Road
      Geneva Road and President Street
      Lies Road and Kuhn Road
      North Avenue and Kuhn Road
      North Avenue and Schmale Road
      St. Charles Road and Schmale Road
      Schmale Road and Thornhill Drive
      Schmale Road and Gundersen Road
(Ord. 90-07-55, passed 7-10-1990; Ord. 99-12-69, passed 12-6-1999)
SCHEDULE VI. WEIGHT LIMITS.
   (A)   A weight limit of 10,000 pounds shall be placed on the following
streets:
 
Street         Location
Fair Oaks Road Between Birchbark and Army Trail Road
Morton Road    Entire length within the village
Vale Road      Entire length within the village
 
   (B)   The Village Manager is authorized to grant variation from the weight
limit imposed in division (A) above to the following uses upon application by
the affected party:
      (1)   To garbage truck routes which could not otherwise provide service;
and
      (2)   To construction traffic; provided:
         (a)   Such traffic conforms to Subsection E-79-6, “Use of Residential
Streets as Construction Haul Roads”, Section B-Engineering, Chapter 1 -
Community Development of the Administrative Procedures Manual of the Village of
Carol Stream;
         (b)   There is no alternate route onto a higher structural strength
street;
         (c)   The shortest distance from an approved highway is used; and
         (d)   Usage between March 1 and May 1 is limited to only when
necessary.
(Ord. 90-07-55, passed 7-10-1990; Ord. 90-11-93, passed 11-13-1990; Ord. 99-12-
69, passed 12-6-1999; Ord. 2012-11-36, passed 11-19-2012; Ord. 2014-11-53,
passed 11-3-2014)
SCHEDULE VII. TRUCK ROUTES.
   The following streets are designated as class II truck routes:
      Alexandra Way
      Carol Court
      Center Avenue
      Commerce Drive
      Delia Court
      East Drive
      Elk Trail Court
      Fullerton Avenue
      Gerzevske Lane
      Mercedes Drive
      Mission Street
      Randy Road
      St. Paul Boulevard
      Tower Boulevard
      Tubeway Drive
      Village Court
      Village Drive
      Westgate Drive
(Ord. 92-04-36, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 2006-08-38, passed 8-7-2006)
SCHEDULE VIII. LOCAL WEIGHT RESTRICTED HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   Pursuant to the authority granted on 625 ILCS 5/15-316, all village
highways, except those listed in Schedule VI, or designated by Schedule VII as
Class II Truck Routes, shall be designated as local weight restricted highways.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle which
exceeds 26,000 pounds in actual weight, registered weight, manufacturer
suggested gross vehicle rating (GVWR), or the gross combined manufacturer
suggested weight rating (GCWR) on any village local weight restricted highway
or portion thereof.
   (C)   The prohibitions and weight limitations set forth herein shall be
designated by appropriate signs placed on such highways.
   (D)   The weight restrictions of this Schedule VIII shall not apply to:
      (1)   Vehicles engaged in the delivery or picking up of a load where
access by a truck route is not available, in which case such vehicle may be
driven on a local restricted highway for not more than the minimum distance
necessary for such delivery or pick up.
      (2)   Tow trucks engaged in providing service to an inoperable vehicle,
accident or emergency where access by a truck route is not available, in which
case such vehicle may be driven on a local restricted highway for not more than
the minimum distance necessary to provide service to the inoperable vehicle,
accident or emergency.
      (3)   Emergency vehicles, school buses, public works vehicles, garbage
trucks, public utility vehicles or government owned vehicles, traveling on a
local weight restricted highway in connection with official duties.
(Ord. 2017-10-61, passed 10-16-2017)
ARTICLE 6: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Parking prohibited; signs required
   
II.   Twenty-four hour parking allowed
   
III.   Stopping, standing or parking prohibited; signs required
SCHEDULE I. PARKING PROHIBITED; SIGNS REQUIRED.
   Parking, except in cases of emergency, shall be prohibited and the
appropriate signs shall be posted on the following streets in the village:
Street Location
Street                                 Location
Alexandra Way                          Gary Avenue (east to Gary Avenue (west))
Alton Court                            Either side
Aztec Drive                            Between Cochise Place and Thunderbird
                                       Trail
Bennett Drive                          North and west sides, and both sides
                                       between North Avenue and Sype Drive
Biloxie Court                          Either side
                                       From a point 75 feet north of its
Blackhawk Drive                        intersection with Mohawk Drive, in front
                                       of 397, 403 and 411 Blackhawk Drive, to
                                       its intersection with Arapahoe Trail
Brighton Drive                         North and south sides from Buckingham
                                       Drive to a point 50 feet west
Buckingham Drive                       East and west sides from Lies Road to a
                                       point 150 feet north of Brighton Drive
                                       West side from Birchbark Trail to
Buckskin Lane                          Evergreen Drive from 7:30 a.m. to 8:30
                                       a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m., on
                                       school days
Carlton Court                          West side from St. Charles Road to south
                                       end
Carol Court                            East and west sides from Lies Road to
                                       south end
                                       East and west sides from Mission Drive
Center Avenue                          to south end and Fullerton Avenue to
                                       north end
Chippewa Trail                         North side between Ute Lane and Niagra
                                       Street
Cochise Court                          North side between Silverleaf Boulevard
                                       and Arrowhead Trail
                                       South side between Arrowhead Trail and
Cochise Court                          Sioux Lane from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
                                       and from 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on
                                       school days
Colorado Court                         Either side
Commerce Avenue                        East and west sides from Kehoe Boulevard
                                       to St. Paul Boulevard
Commercial/Industrial Streets          Within 10 feet of a driveway where signs
                                       are posted
                                       Within 20 feet of a truck dock driveway
Commercial/Industrial Streets          on the opposite side of the road where
                                       signs are posted
Commonwealth Drive                     East side from St. Charles Road to south
                                       end
Dakota Court                           Either side
Doris Avenue                           From a point 60 feet east of Gary Avenue
                                       to Farwell Avenue
East Drive                             East and west sides from Mission Drive
                                       to south end
East Street                            North, east and west sides for its
                                       entire length on the inside radius
Elk Trail                              South side from Gary Avenue to the west
                                       property line of 160 Bluff Street
Elk Trail Court                        South side from Gary Avenue to the first
                                       driveway east of Gary Avenue
Esselen Court                          Either side
                                       On the west side between the north
                                       driveway at Evergreen School and
Evergreen Drive                        Birchbark Trail, between 7:30 a.m. to 9:
                                       00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 3:30 p.m., on
                                       school days when school is in session
Executive Drive                        North and south sides for 175 feet west
                                       of the intersection with Main Place
Executive Drive                        North side from Main Place to west end
Fullerton Avenue                       North and south side from Gary Avenue to
                                       Schmale Road
Gerzevske Lane                         East and west sides from Kehoe Boulevard
                                       to Randy Road
                                       North side for its entire length within
                                       the village. Except that parking for not
                                       more than four continuous hours shall be
                                       permitted on the north side west of Main
                                       Place; provided, however, that, even
                                       along the north side west of Main Place,
Gundersen Drive                        two no parking zones shall be
                                       established such that there shall be no
                                       parking on the north side from a point
                                       429 feet west of Main Place to a point
                                       445 feet west of Main Place and on
                                       either side from a point 985 feet west
                                       of Main Place to a point 1,045 feet west
                                       of Main Place
                                       North and south sides 240 feet east and
Gundersen Drive                        west of the center of the intersection
                                       with Main Place
327 Gundersen Drive                    From five feet west to five feet east of
                                       the service walkway to the building
                                       North side for its entire length within
Gundersen Drive                        the village, north and south sides from
                                       West Street to 240 feet east of Main
                                       Place
                                       On the south side from a point 15 feet
Gundersen Drive                        east and 15 feet west of any entrance or
                                       exit to the parking lot located at 350
                                       and 450 Gundersen Drive
                                       On the west side between Clearwater
                                       Court and the Western Trails School
Idaho Street                           north driveway, on school days from 8:00
                                       a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. to 4:00
                                       p.m.
                                       For a distance of 75 feet between Lots
Illini Drive                           568 and 569, in Carol Stream Unit #5,
                                       commonly known as the entrance to St.
                                       Luke Park
Kehoe Boulevard                        South side from Gary Avenue to Schmale
                                       Road
Kimberly Drive                         East side from Fullerton Avenue to Lies
                                       Road
                                       West side from Fullerton Avenue to a
Kimberly Drive                         point 413 feet north and from a point
                                       730 feet north of Fullerton Avenue to
                                       Lies Road
                                       On the east side between Woodhill Drive
Knollwood Drive                        and Countryside Lane from 7:00 a.m. to
                                       4:00 p.m. when school is in session on
                                       school days
Main Place                             East and west sides from St. Charles
                                       Road to south end
Minnesota Circle                       Either side
Mission Drive                          North and south sides from Schmale Road
                                       to Kimberly Drive
Mohican Road                           North side between Kuhn Road and
                                       Pocahontas Trail
Nebraska Circle                        Either side
                                       North side from Gary Avenue east to
                                       Schmale Road and on the south side from
North Avenue                           Gary Avenue east to Fireside Drive and
                                       again from the centerline of Concord
                                       Lane 64 feet west to 60 feet east
                                       On the north side from 1,473 feet west
                                       of Kuhn Road east to Schmale Road and on
North Avenue                           the south side from 1,473 feet east to
                                       Fireside Drive and again from the
                                       centerline of Concord Lane 64 feet west
                                       of 60 feet east.
Old Gary Avenue                        East and west sides from the north end
                                       to the south end
Parkview Circle                        1067 Parkview Circle to 1085 Parkview
                                       Circle along center island
                                       On the east side on school days from 8:
Pocahontas Trail                       00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. to 4:
                                       00 p.m.
President Street                       Both sides from North Avenue to St.
                                       Charles Road
President Street                       West side from St. Charles Road to
                                       Geneva Road
                                       10 feet each side of both driveways at
Randy Road                             465 Randy Road and 110 feet east of the
                                       eastern most driveway
Randy Road                             On the north side 30 feet each side of
                                       the driveway opposite 444 Randy Road
                                       From 10 feet east of the driveway at 445
Randy Road                             Randy Road to 10 feet west of the
                                       driveway at 383 Randy Road
                                       From 40 feet east of the driveway at 381
Randy Road                             Randy Road to 10 feet west of the
                                       loading dock at 373 Randy Road
                                       From 10 feet east of the driveway at 373
Randy Road                             Randy Road to 10 feet west of the
                                       driveway at 361 Randy Road
Randy Road                             South side from Gerzevske Lane to
                                       Schmale Road
Randy Road                             Entire north curve between Gerzevske
                                       Lane and Randy Road
Randy Road                             From 50 feet east to 20 feet west of the
                                       driveway at 475 Randy Road
                                       East side within the village, north of
Schmale Road                           the intersection with North Avenue (Rt.
                                       64)
                                       West side along Carol Stream School from
Sioux Lane                             8:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and from 2:00
                                       p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days
St. Paul Boulevard                     North side from Kimberly Drive to
                                       Schmale Road
St. Paul Boulevard                     South side from Kimberly Drive to
                                       Schmale Road
Stark Drive                            North and south sides from Gary Avenue
                                       to Old Gary Avenue
Stonewood Circle (east side)           Adjacent to Cloverdale School property
                                       line
Sype Drive                             North and west sides
                                       From Munson Drive to the south edge of
                                       Building 10 as platted on the west-
Teton Circle                           south-east; and from the south edge of
                                       Building 10 northward to Munson Drive on
                                       the west side
Texas Court                            Either side
                                       Either side from its intersection with
Thornhill Drive                        Schmale Road to the western entrance to
                                       what is commonly known as the Colony
                                       Park Apartment Complex
Thornhill Drive                        North and south sides for the entire
                                       length west of Schmale Road
Thornhill Drive                        North and south sides for the entire
                                       length west of Schmale Road
Tubeway Drive                          North side from Gary Avenue to Westgate
                                       Drive
                                       On the west side on school days from 8:
Ute Lane                               00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. to 4:
                                       00 p.m.
Village Court                          North and south sides from Village Drive
                                       to Gary Avenue
                                       East and west sides for its entire
Village Drive                          length between Kehoe Boulevard and
                                       Village Court
Westgate Drive                         West side from St. Charles Road to
                                       Tubeway Drive
                                       On the north side within 100 feet of the
Woodhill Drive                         crosswalk at Baybrook between the hours
                                       of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on school
                                       days when school is in session
                                       Army, Geneva, Fair Oaks, Garu, North,
Arterial streets (except in cases of   St. Charles, Schmale, County Farm, Kuhn,
emergency)                             Morton, Lies, Fullerton Avenue, Kehoe
                                       Boulevard
                                       Birchbark from County Farm Road to Fair
Through streets (north and east sides) Oaks Road; Birchbark Drive on the south
                                       side between Kuhn Road and County Farm
                                       Road
                                       Munson, Flint, Deerskin, Evergreen,
                                       Iroquois, Main, Arapahoe, Aztec, Illini,
Through streets (north and east sides) Spring Valley, Idaho, Canyon, Elk,
                                       Bluff, Pawnee, Big Horn, Thornhill,
                                       Arrowhead, Thunderbird, Hiawatha
Thunderbird Trail                      On the south side between Kuhn Road and
                                       Aztec Drive
 
(Ord. 90-07-55, passed 7-10-1990; Ord. 90-09-73, passed 9-11-1990; Ord. 90-10-
88, passed 10-9-1990; Ord. 92-01-02, passed 1-14-1992; Ord. 92-02-25, passed 2-
25-1992; Ord. 92-04-37, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 92-05-63, passed 5-26-1992; Ord.
94-01-03, passed 1-11-1994; Ord. 94-11-89, passed 11-7-1994; Ord. 96-10-69,
passed 10-7-1996; Ord. 97-05-34, passed 5-19-1997; Ord. 97-11-80, passed 11-3-
1997; Ord. 2000-01-05, passed 1-17-2000; Ord. 2000-08-66, passed 8-7-2000; Ord.
2001-05-27, passed 5-21-2001; Ord. 2001-08-42, passed 8-6-2001; Ord. 2001-09-
48, passed 9-17-2001; Ord. 2002-08-45, passed 8-5-2002; Ord. 2002-09-57, passed
9-16-2002; Ord. 2002-12-74, passed 12-16-2002; Ord. 2003-10-68, passed 10-20-
2003; Ord. 2004-01-07, passed 1-19-2004; Ord. 2005-12-63, passed 12-5-2005;
Ord. 2006-11-58, passed 11-6-2006; Ord. 2007-10-37A, passed 10-15-2007; Ord.
2011-02-03, passed 2-7-2011; Ord. 2011-08-26, passed 8-1-2011; Ord. 2014-07-30,
passed 7-7-2014; Ord. 2014-07-31, passed 7-7-2014; Ord. 2016-04-19, passed 4-4-
2016; Ord. 2017-07-32, passed 7-17-2017; Ord. 2017-07-33, passed 7-17- 2017;
Ord. 2017-11-63, passed 11-6-2017; Ord. 2018-02-05, passed 2-20-2018; Ord.
2018-03-09, passed 3-5-2018; Ord. 2018-09-33, passed 9-4-2018; Ord. 2018-12-46,
passed 12-17-2018; Ord. 2019- 07-23, passed 7-15-2019; Ord. 2020-07-19, passed
7-6-2020; Ord. 2022-01-06, passed 1-17-2022; Ord. 2023-11-52, passed 11-6-2023;
Ord. 2024-09-37, passed 9-16-2024; Ord. 2024-10-45, passed 10-21-2024)
SCHEDULE II. TWENTY-FOUR HOUR PARKING ALLOWED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on any roadway
in a residential district for a period of over 24 hours.
   (B)   Any person desiring temporary exemption from the provisions of
division (A) shall first notify the Police Department of the Village of Carol
Stream. The Police Chief or designee shall evaluate any such request with due
regard for the reason for such request including existing traffic and weather
conditions in the area, the length of time requested, the availability of
reasonable alternative parking, the number of requests previously made and any
other relevant circumstances. After a review of the facts, for good cause
shown, the Police Chief or designee may grant a temporary exemption from the
provisions of division (A) for a period determined to be appropriate.
   (C)   Parking for over 24 hours shall be allowed on the following sections
of roadways, as provided:
 
Street                         Location
                               South side between Kuhn Road and County Farm
Munson Drive                   Road, except after a snowfall of 1 inch has
                               occurred, unless the snow has been plowed off or
                               otherwise removed from the street
                               From Munson Drive on the east side southward to
                               the south edge of Building 10 as platted to the
                               west edge of the Park Unit 2, except after a
Teton Circle (The Park Unit 2) snowfall of 1 inch has occurred, unless the snow
                               has been plowed off or otherwise removed from
                               the street, and further provided that such 24-
                               hour parking shall only take place from 2:00
                               a.m. Saturday to 5:00 a.m. Sunday
                               On the northeast side from the east edge of the
                               Park Unit 3 to Munson Drive, except after a
                               snowfall of 1 inch has occurred, unless the snow
Teton Circle (The Park Unit 3) has been plowed off or otherwise removed from
                               the street, and further provided that such 24-
                               hour parking shall only take place from 2:00
                               a.m. Saturday to 5:00 a.m. Monday
 
(Ord. 90-07-55, passed 7-10-1990; Ord. 2025-07-27, passed 7-7-2025)
SCHEDULE III. STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED; SIGNS REQUIRED.
   Parking, stopping or parking, except in cases of emergency shall be
prohibited and the appropriate signs shall be posted on the following streets
in the village:
Street Location
Street       Location
Aleut Trail  Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Alison Lane  Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Armstrong    Adjoining Illini Drive, on south side (Hiawatha Drive to Arrowhead Trail)
Park
Armstrong    Adjoining Napa Street, on north and west sides (Niagara Street to north
Park         property line of 792 Napa Street)
Aztec Drive  From the intersection of Mohican Road to the intersection of Ute Lane between
             7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Bedford      Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Drive
Birchbark    From the intersection of Kuhn Road to the intersection of Matthew Lane between
Trail        7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Brighton     From 51 feet west of Buckingham Drive to Woodhill Drive between 7:00 a.m. and
Drive        9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Buckingham   Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Court
Buckingham   East side from Brighton Drive to Warwick Drive
Drive
Buckingham   From the intersection of Warwick Drive to the intersection of Woodhill Drive
Drive        between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Buckingham   West side from 151 feet north of Brighton Drive between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00
Drive        a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Buckskin     Both sides of the street, 20 feet north and 20 feet south of the mid block
Lane         pedestrian crosswalk located between Birchbark Trail and Evergreen Drive
Buffalo
Circle
(north       On the north side between Evergreen Drive through the property address located
intersection at 760 Buffalo Circle, between 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 3:30
with         p.m., on school days when school is in session
Evergreen
Drive)
Buffalo
Circle
(south       On the north side between Evergreen Drive through the property address located
intersection at 705 Buffalo Circle, between 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 3:30
with         p.m., on school days when school is in session
Evergreen
Drive)
Burke Drive  From the intersection of Chalet Drive to the intersection of Kuhn Road between
             7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Cambridge    Adjoining Woodhill Drive, on north side (Kuhn Road to County Farm Road)
Park
Canterbury   Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Drive
Canyon Trail East side from Deerskin Trail to Moccasin Court between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00
             a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Chalet Drive From the intersection of Burke Drive to the intersection of Parkside Drive
             between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Chatham      Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Drive
Chestnut     Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Drive
Carlton      East and west sides from the intersection with St. Charles to a point 190 feet
Drive        south
Chetwood     From the intersection of Brighton Drive to the intersection of Woodhill Drive
Drive        between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Chetwood     From Brighton Drive to a point 425 feet west and north on Chetwood Drive from
Drive        7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. when school is in session, on school days
Chippewa     From the intersection of Aztec Drive to the intersection of Ute Lane between
Trail        7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Chippewa     South side between 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., on school days
Trail
Chippewa     South side from a point 200 feet west of the lane to Niagra Street on school
Trail        days between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
Cliff Court  Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on school days when school is in session
Community    Adjoining President Street, on west side (St. Charles Road to Gundersen Drive)
Park
Country Glen From the intersection of Woodhill Drive to the intersection of Baybrook Lane
Lane         between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
             Only authorized vehicles registered with the Police Department and owned by
Creekcourt   residents of Creekwood Court may park on their street during the hours of 6:00
Court        a.m. and 6:00 p.m.; provided, they are otherwise legally authorized to do so
             (these parking restrictions do not apply on the following days: Thanksgiving,
             Christmas Eve, Christmas Day, New Year’s Eve and New Years Day)
Dearborn     Between 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. between Idaho
Circle       Street and 986 Dearborn Circle on the north side, on school days
Deerskin     North and south sides
Trail
Delaware     Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Trail
Devon Court  Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Dorchester   Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Drive
Edington     From the intersection of Huntington Drive to the intersection of Woodhill
Lane         Drive between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school
             days
El Paso Lane From Hiawatha to the east side of 246 El Paso Lane between the hours of 2:30
             p.m. and 3:00 p.m., on school days
El Paso Lane 20 feet east and 20 feet west of the driveway at 283 El Paso Lane (Jay Stream
             School)
Erie Court   Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Evergreen    On the east side between the north intersection of Buffalo Circle and
Drive        Birchbark Trail; on the west side between the north parking lot entrance to
             Evergreen School and the south intersection of Buffalo Circle
Evergreen    On the east side between the north and south intersections of Buffalo Circle,
Drive        between 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 3:30 p.m., on school days when
             school is in session
Fawn Court   Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Flint Trail  East side from Deerskin Trail to Niagra Street between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.
             when school is in session, on school days
Fountain     On both sides
View Road
             North side from Evergreen Drive through the property address located at 702
Fox Court    Fox Court, between 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. on school
             days when school is in session
Fullerton    North side, east of Kimberly to Schmale Road
Avenue
Georgetown   Both sides of the street, 20 feet east and 20 feet west of the school
Drive        crosswalk located west of Spring Valley Drive
Georgetown   South and east side between Big Horn Trail and Spring Valley Drive from 8:00
Drive        a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m., on school days.
Hampe Park   Adjoining Adler Lane, on west side (McCormick Street to north property line of
             1192 Adler Lane)
Hampton      Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Drive
Hiawatha     East side from El Paso Lane to Springbrook Lane
Drive
Hiawatha     North and south sides from the intersection with Gary Avenue to a point 230
Drive        feet west
Hiawatha     South side, between Gary and Eagleview
Drive
Hopi Court   Between 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m., on school days
Horseshoe    Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Court
Hunter Drive Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Huntington   Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Court
Huntington   Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Drive
Huron Court  Between 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. between Idaho and
             824 Huron on the west side, on school days
             West side of street, from 50 feet north of Western Trails School north
Idaho Street property lot exit, to 50 feet south of Western Trails School south parking lot
             entrance
Idaho Street East side from Hopi Court to the northern intersection of Dearborn Circle
Idaho Trail  East side from Lies Road to 150 feet north of Lies Road
Iron Hawk    Between 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m., on school days
Court
Jan Smith    Adjoining Burke Drive, on north side (Kuhn Road to Canterbury Drive)
Park
Jan Smith    Adjoining Canterbury Drive, on east side (Burke Drive to east property line of
Park         563 Canterbury Drive)
Jirsa Park   Adjoining Lilac Lane, on south side (Rose Avenue to east property line of 1314
             Lilac Lane)
Jirsa Park   Adjoining Rose Avenue, on west side (Lies Road to east property line of 1356
             Rose Avenue)
Kehoe        North side from Gary Avenue to Schmale Road
Boulevard
Kent Park    Adjoining Woodhill Drive, on south side (County Farm Road to Woodlake Drive)
Kimberly     East and west sides between Kehoe Boulevard and Fullerton Avenue
Drive
Kingsport    Adjoining Allison Lane, on west side (Matthew Lane to Chestnut Drive
Ridge Basin
Knollwood    Both sides of the street, 20 feet north and 20 feet south of the mid block
Drive        pedestrian crosswalk located north of Woodhill Drive
Knollwood    East side from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., on school days
Drive
Larch Drive  Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Linden Drive Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Longmeadow   Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Drive
Matthew Lane Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Mayfair      Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Drive
Merbach      Adjoining Merbach Drive, on west side (Lies Road to Army Trail)
Basins
Merbach      East side from Bradbury Circle (north) to Cedar Court
Drive
Merbach      East side from Lies Road to Hunter Drive
Drive
Merbach      Right turn only from Cloverdale School (all driveways) between 8:00 a.m. and
Drive        9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m., on school days
Mercedes     North side from Gary Avenue to 250 east and south side from Gary Avenue to 600
Drive        feet east.
Napa Court   Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Navajo       Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Street
Niagra       From the intersection of Flint Trail north along its entire length between 7:
Street       00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Ohio Court   Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Omaha Court  Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Ottawa Court Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Paddock      From the intersection of County Farm Road to the intersection of Morton Road
Drive        between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Palomino     Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Street
Papoose      Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Court
Park Hill    From Gary Avenue west for a length of 190 feet on the south side and 175 feet
Trail        on the north side
Parkside     Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Court
Parkside     From the intersection of Burke Drive to the intersection of Parkside Court
Drive        between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Penny Court  Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Phillips     South side from Schmale Road to west end
Court
Pocahontas   Between Chippewa and Mohican on school days between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
Trail
Princeton    Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Court
Provincetown Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Drive
Regency Lane Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Renaissance  Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Drive
Royal Glen   From the intersection of Baybrook Lane east along its entire length between 7:
Lane         00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
St. Paul     South side from Kimberly Drive to Schmale Road
Boulevard
Sandhurst    Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Court
Sandhurst    Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Lane
Santa Fe     Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Court
Sauk Lane    West side from Munson Drive to the cul-de-sac curb
Shelburne    Adjoining Shelburne, on north side (Thunderbird Trail to east property line of
Basin        322 Shelburne Drive)
Shenandoah   Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Drive
Sioux Lane   Between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on east side when school is in session, on
             school days
Somerset     Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Court
Somerset     Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Drive
Sorrel Court Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Split Rail   Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Drive
Spring       Between Army Trail Road and Georgetown Drive
Valley Drive
Spring       On both sides between Army Trail Road and Appomattox Trail from 8:00 a.m. to
Valley Drive 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m., on school days.
Stonewood    North side between Merbach Drive and Kildare Court from 8:00 a.m. to 9:30 a.m.
Circle       and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days
Sundance     Adjoining Yardley Drive, on north side (Kuhn Road to east property line of 525
Park         Yardley Drive)
Tama Court   Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Tamarac      Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Drive
Thunderbird  North side from Sioux Lane west to Arrowhead Trail
Trail
Thunderbird  South side between Arrowhead Trail (west) and 442 Thunderbird Trail from 8:00
Trail        a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days
Tioga Court  Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Tonto Court  Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Tower        North side from Center Avenue to Schmale Road, and south side for 10 feet on
Boulevard    each side of all driveways
Trinity      From the intersection of Woodhill Drive to the intersection of Trinity Court
Drive        between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Ute Lane     Between Chippewa and Aztec between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
Walter Park  Adjoining Brookstone Drive, on south side (High Ridge Pass to west property
             line of 1170 Brookstone Drive)
Walter Park  Adjoining High Ridge Pass, on east side (Lies Road to 933 High Ridge Pass)
Wampum Court Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m., when school is in session, on school days
Warwick      Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Court
Warwick      Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Drive
Williamstown Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Drive
Willow Drive Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Woodhill     From the intersection of Buckingham and Kingsbridge Drives to the intersection
Drive        of County Farm Road between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session,
             on school days
Woodhill     South side from Woodlake Drive to County Farm Road
Drive
Yardley      From the intersection of Kuhn Road to a point 422 feet east of Kuhn Road
Drive        between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Yellowstone  Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. when school is in session, on school days
Street
 
(Ord. 90-07-55, passed 7-10-1990; Ord. 91-06-48, passed 6-25-1991; Ord. 91-11-
81, passed 11-26-1991; Ord. 92-04-37, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 93-01-05, passed
1-12-1993; Ord. 93-01-07, passed 1-26-1993; Ord. 93-07-62, passed 7-13-1993;
Ord. 96-08-58, passed 8-19-1996; Ord. 98-11-74, passed 11-2-1998; Ord. 99-05-
28, passed 5-3-1999; Ord. 99-09-52, passed 9-20-1999; Ord. 2000-08-66, passed
8-7-2000; Ord. 2000-10-81, passed 10-16-2000; Ord. 2001-02-10, passed 2-20-
2001; Ord. 2001-05-27, passed 5-27-2001; Ord. 2001-08-42, passed 8-6-2001; Ord.
2001-08-45, passed 8-20-2001; Ord. 2001-10-51, passed 10-1-2001; Ord. 2002-09-
57, passed 9-16-2002; Ord. 2003-05-23, passed 5-5-2003; Ord. 2003-05-34, passed
5-19-2003; Ord. 2004-01-07, passed 1-19-2004; Ord. 2006-11-60, passed 11-20-
2006; Ord. 2006-12-75, passed 12-18-2006; Ord. 2011-02-03, passed 2-7-2011;
Ord. 2011-08-25, passed 8-1-2011; Ord. 2017-07-33, passed 7-17-2017; Ord. 2017-
09-56, passed 9-18-2017; Ord. 2017-10-58, passed 10-2-2017; Ord. 2018-01-01,
passed 1-16-2018; Ord. 2018-02-05, passed 2-20-2018; Ord. 2021-10-50, passed
10-18-2021; Ord. 2022-01-06, passed 1-17-2022)
ARTICLE 7: MOTORIZED SKATEBOARDS
Section
   
8-7-1   Operation of electric bicycles, electric scooters, or any other
motorized bicycle, skateboard, or scooter
   
8-7-2   Parental responsibility for violations by minors
   
8-7-3   Operation of personal assistive mobility devices
   
8-7-4   Penalty
§ 8-7-1 OPERATION OF ELECTRIC BICYCLES, ELECTRIC SCOOTERS, OR ANY OTHER
MOTORIZED BICYCLE, SKATEBOARD, OR SCOOTER.
   (A)   Definition.
      ELECTRIC BICYCLE or E-BIKE. A bicycle equipped with fully operable pedals
and an electronic motor of less than 750 watts, classified as follows:
         CLASS 1. An electric bicycle equipped with a motor that provides
assistance only when the rider is pedaling and that ceases to provide
assistance when the bicycle reaches a speed of 20 miles per hour.
         CLASS 2. An electric bicycle equipped with a motor that may be used
exclusively to propel the bicycle and that is not capable of providing
assistance when the bicycle reaches a speed of 20 miles per hour.
         CLASS 3. An electric bicycle equipped with a motor that provides
assistance only when the rider is pedaling and that ceases to provide
assistance when the bicycle reaches a speed of 28 miles per hour.
      ELECTRIC SCOOTER or E-SCOOTER. A device weighing less than 100 pounds,
with two or three wheels, handlebars, and a floorboard that can be stood upon
while riding, that is solely powered by an electric motor and human power,
whose maximum speed, with or without human propulsion, is no more than ten
miles per hour. An electronic scooter does not include a moped, motorized
bicycle, motorized skateboard, or any other motor-driven device.
      MOTORIZED BICYCLE. A two-wheeled or three-wheeled device with fully
operable pedals and a gasoline motor of less than one horsepower or 15 cubic
centimeters displacement that is operated at speeds of less than 20 miles per
hour and does not require registration per the Illinois Vehicle Code.
      MOTORIZED SCOOTER. Any electric or gas-powered vehicle that does not
require registration per the Illinois Vehicle Code. For the purpose of this
definition, a motorized scooter includes all go-karts, minibikes, snow
vehicles, or any similar engine-powered vehicles.
      MOTORIZED SKATEBOARD. A board or horizontal surface having any number of
wheels, which are operable by some type of gas or electric motor, and generally
designed to hold one person.
   (B)   Electric bicycle regulations.
      (1)   Where permitted, all electric bicycles shall be required to act in
compliance with and obey all provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code applicable
to bicycles.
      (2)   Except as provided in this section, all electronic bicycles shall
be subject to the same regulations and be operated in the same manner as
bicycles.
      (3)   All Class 1, Class 2, and Class 3 electric bicycles shall be
permitted to operate only on public streets where the speed limit is 35 miles
per hour or less or on private property with the permission of the property
owner.
      (4)   An electric bicycle, regardless of class, can only be operated by a
person who is 16 years of age or older and possesses a valid driver's license.
      (5)   All Class 3 electric bicycles must have a functioning speedometer.
      (6)   All electric bicycles must have functional brakes to be operated
within the village.
      (7)   Every electric bicycle used within the village between dusk and
dawn must be equipped with a front lamp that emits a white light visible from
distances of at least 500 feet and with a red reflector on the rear that is
visible from all distances from 100 to 600 feet to the rear when directly in
front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle, except that a lamp
emitting a steady or flashing red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to
the rear may be used in addition to or instead of the red reflector.
      (8)   Any person in possession of an electric bicycle that, according to
625 ILCS 5/11-1518, requires a label that shows the wattage, top speed, and
class of e-bike must remain affixed to the bicycle and be otherwise untampered.
   (C)   Electric scooter regulations.
      (1)   Where permitted, all electric scooters shall be required to act in
compliance with and obey all provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code applicable
to bicycles and electric bicycles.
      (2)   No one under the age of 18 can operate an electric scooter anywhere
within the village.
      (3)   Every electric scooter used within the village between dusk and
dawn must be equipped with a front lamp that emits a white light visible from
distances of at least 500 feet and with a red reflector on the rear that is
visible from all distances from 100 to 600 feet to the rear when directly in
front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle, except that a lamp
emitting a steady or flashing red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to
the rear may be used in addition to or instead of the red reflector.
      (4)   All electric scooters shall be permitted to operate only on public
streets where the speed limit is 35 miles per hour or less. No other paths,
locations, or sidewalks within the village are authorized for the use of
electric scooters.
      (5)   When operating an electric scooter on a public street, the operator
must possess a valid driver's license.
      (6)   Except as otherwise set forth in this ordinance, all electric
scooters shall operate in conformance with 625 ILCS 5/11-1518.
   (D)   Motorized bicycle, skateboard, and scooter regulation.
      (1)   Where permitted, all motorized bicycles shall be required to act in
compliance with and obey all provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code applicable
to bicycles.
      (2)   Except as provided in this section, all motorized bicycles shall be
subject to the same regulations and be operated in the same manner as bicycles.
      (3)   All motorized bicycles shall be permitted to operate only on public
streets where the speed limit is 35 miles per hour or less or on private
property with the permission of the property owner.
      (4)   A motorized bicycle can only be operated by a person who is 16
years of age or older and possesses a valid driver's license.
      (5)   A motorized bicycle must have functional brakes to be operated
within the village.
      (6)   Every motorized bicycle used within the village between dusk and
dawn must be equipped with a front lamp that emits a white light visible from
distances of at least 500 feet and with a red reflector on the rear that is
visible from all distances from 100 to 600 feet to the rear when directly in
front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle, except that a lamp
emitting a steady or flashing red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to
the rear may be used in addition to or instead of the red reflector.
      (7)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use, operate, or be in
control of a motorized skateboard or motorized scooter upon any street,
sidewalk, public path, or public area within the village. Operation of a
motorized skateboard or motorized scooter may be permitted on private property
with the permission of the property owner.
   (E)   Reckless operation.
      (1)   Any person who operates an electric bicycle, electric scooter,
motorized bicycle, motorized skateboard, or motor scooter with willful or
wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property, or engages in conduct
likely to cause bodily harm, permanent disability, or disfigurement to others-
such as operating at excessive speed in pedestrian areas, intentionally weaving
through crowds, or attempting to launch the device using an incline is in
violation of this ordinance.
      (2)   No person may use an electronic communication device while
operating an electric bicycle, electric scooter, motorized bicycle, motorized
skateboard, or motorized scooter.
      (3)   While operating an electric bicycle, electric scooter, motorized
bicycle, motorized skateboard, or motorized scooter, no person may carry any
item that interferes with their ability to maintain control of the vehicle.
(Ord. 2003-12-84, passed 12-1-2003; Ord. 2025-08-34, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 8-7-2 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR VIOLATIONS BY MINORS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian of a person under the
age of 17 years to suffer or permit such a person under the age of 17 years to
violate any provision of this article.
   (B)   The commission of such an act by a minor who is living with the
minor’s parents or guardian shall raise the presumption that the parent or
guardian has suffered or permitted the minor to commit such an act.
   (C)   It shall be an affirmative defense for the parent or guardian to prove
that the parent or guardian attempted to restrain the minor from committing the
act as prohibited in this article, but the attempt, although exercised with due
care, was unsuccessful.
(Ord. 2003-12-84, passed 12-1-2003)
§ 8-7-3 OPERATION OF PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES.
   (A)   Personal assistive motorized devices, such as motorized wheel chairs,
power chairs or scooters specifically designed for people with limited
mobility, shall be prohibited on any public right-of-way, including, but not
limited to, streets, parking lots, sidewalks, bike paths or other areas open to
the public, except when utilized by an individual or individuals described as
follows:
      (1)   Those who have limited mobility, including, but not limited to, the
elderly and disabled;
      (2)   The United States Postal Service to deliver United States mail; or
      (3)   Government entities for public safety purposes.
   (B)   (1)   When utilized by individuals pursuant to this section, personal
assisted motorized devices may be operated on public sidewalks, when utilized
in a generally safe manner in such a way that their use does not impede
pedestrian traffic.
      (2)   The speed of any such device may not exceed ten mph.
   (C)   This section does not apply to motorized wheelchairs, as defined in
the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-148.3.
(Ord. 2003-12-84, passed 12-1-2003)
§ 8-7-4 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject
to a fine of $50 for a first offense, any prior warning not deemed to be a
prior offense. The penalty for a second offense shall be $100. Thereafter,
subsequent violations shall subject the operator to a fine of $200 for each and
every offense. Any police officer or community service technician who observes
a violation of this article may, as an alternative to arresting the offender,
issue a "hang-on ticket," as provided in Ch. 15, Art. 4, of this code.
(Ord. 2003-12-84, passed 12-1-2003; Ord. 2025-08-34, passed 8-4-2025)
ARTICLE 8: VEHICLE SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT
Section
   
8-8-1   Definitions
   
8-8-2   Acts subjecting vehicle to seizure and impound; administrative and
public safety fee
   
8-8-3   Seizure and impound procedures
   
8-8-4   Release of motor vehicle; posting of bond
   
8-8-5   Notice of seizure and impound
   
8-8-6   Administrative hearings
   
8-8-7   Collection of unpaid administrative and public safety fee
   
8-8-8   Release of motor vehicle not allowed
   
8-8-9   Multiple owners
   
8-8-10   Failure to claim vehicle
§ 8-8-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
   BUSINESS DAY. Any day in which the office of the Village Clerk of the
Village of Carol Stream is open to the public for a minimum of seven hours.
   MOTOR VEHICLE or VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled, including,
but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, vans, motorcycles and motor scooters,
and shall include every vehicle defined by § 1-146 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code.
   OWNER. A person who holds legal title of a vehicle, or in the event a
vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease
thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in
the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the
conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of such vehicle is
entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor
shall be deemed the owner. Any person may, with the owner’s express permission,
perform any act that the owner is authorized to perform.
(Ord. 2010-01-02, passed 1-19-2010; Ord. 2012-02-02, passed 2-6-2012)
§ 8-8-2 ACTS SUBJECTING VEHICLE TO SEIZURE AND IMPOUND; ADMINISTRATIVE AND
PUBLIC SAFETY FEE.
   (A)   A motor vehicle that is driven, used or operated, by a person who is
reasonably charged or could be charged with any of the following violations
shall declared a public nuisance and be subject to seizure and impound by the
village. It shall not be necessary for criminal charges to be filed, prosecuted
and/or proven in order to demonstrate that one or more of the following
violations has/have been committed:
      (1)   Driving a motor vehicle under the influence of alcohol, other drug
or drugs, intoxicating compound(s), or a combination thereof, as prohibited in
§ 5/11-501(a) of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-501(a);
      (2)   Driving a motor vehicle while driver’s license, permit or privilege
to operate a motor vehicle is suspended or revoked, regardless of whether the
revocation or suspension was of an Illinois driver’s license or the driver’s
license from another state, except that vehicles shall not be subject to
seizure or impound if a driver’s license is suspended for unpaid citations
(parking or moving) or due to a failure to comply with emission testing;
      (3)   Driving a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a valid
driver’s license;
      (4)   Driving a motor vehicle when the driver’s license has been expired
for more than one year, or the driver’s permit, restricted driver’s permit or
other driving privilege has expired, regardless of whether such expired
license, permit, restricted driver’s permit or other driving privilege was
previously issued by the State of Illinois or another state;
      (5)   Firearms offenses:
         (a)   Unlawful use of weapons, 720 ILCS 5/24-1;
         (b)   Unlawful use or possession of weapons by felons or persons in
the custody of the department of corrections facilities, 720 ILCS 5/24-1.1;
         (c)   Aggravated discharge of a firearm, 720 ILCS 5/24-1.2;
         (d)   Aggravated discharge of a machine gun or a firearm equipped with
a device designed or used for silencing the report of a firearm, 720 ILCS 5/24-
1.2-5;
         (e)   Reckless discharge of a firearm, 720 ILCS 5/24-1.5;
         (f)   Aggravated unlawful use of a weapon, 720 ILCS 5/24-1.6; and
         (g)   Unlawful use or possession of ammunition, 720 ILCS 5/24-3.1.
      (6)   Drug offenses:
         (a)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or the
attempt to commit, a felony or in violation of the Cannabis Control Act; and
         (b)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting, possessing
or possess cannabis or a controlled substance, as defined by the Cannabis
Control Act or the Illinois Controlled Substance Act.
      (7)   Operation of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a warrant has
been issued by a Circuit Clerk in Illinois for failing to answer charges that
the driver violated §§ 6-101, 6-303 or 11-501 of this code;
      (8)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in the violation of Art. 16 or 16A of the
Criminal Code of 1961; and
      (9)   Any offense for which a motor vehicle can be seized and forfeited
pursuant to § 36-1 of the Illinois Criminal Code, 720 ILCS 5/36-1.
   (B)   No vehicle shall be seized and impounded pursuant to divisions (A)(3)
and (A)(4) above, if the driver was driving pursuant to certain exceptions to
the licensing requirements, as allowed in the exemption provision, 625 ILCS 5/
6-102, of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
   (C)   In the event a motor vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to this
article, the owner of the motor vehicle shall be liable to the village for an
administrative and public safety fee of $500, in order to cover the
administrative and processing costs incurred by the village associated with the
investigation, arrest and detention of the offender and the removal, impound
and release of the vehicle, including ensuring that the motor vehicle is
properly removed from the scene of the incident and the vehicle, personal
property enclosed therein, is secured and safeguarded, and any passengers in
the vehicle, including children are assisted. All owners of a motor vehicle
shall be jointly and severally liable for the administrative and public safety
fee.
   (D)   Upon demonstration that it has the right to possession of a seized
motor vehicle, a lessor, whether a rental agency or otherwise, or lienholder of
a motor vehicle shall have the right to pay the administrative and public
safety fee and be issued a release from the Carol Stream Police Department
authorizing it to gain possession of the vehicle.
   (E)   The administrative and public safety fee is separate and distinct
from, and in addition to, any fees or costs owed by the owner to a private
towing company for the towing and storage of the vehicle.
(Ord. 2010-01-02, passed 1-19-2010; Ord. 2012-02-02, passed 2-6-2012)
§ 8-8-3 SEIZURE AND IMPOUND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Whenever a police officer has reason to believe that a motor vehicle
is subject to seizure and impound pursuant to §
8-8-2, the police officer shall order that the vehicle be seized and impounded.
The Carol Stream Police Department shall utilize the services of a private
towing company. If towed, the motor vehicle must be impounded and stored in a
secure facility owned, leased or operated by the private towing company.
   (B)   The police officer shall, at the time the vehicle is towed, notify or
make a reasonable attempt to notify the owner, lessee or person identifying
himself or herself as the owner of the vehicle, or any person who is found to
be in control of the vehicle at the time of the offense of the following:
      (1)   The seizure and impound of the vehicle;
      (2)   The owner’s right to retrieve the vehicle by payment of the
administrative and public safety fee to the village and towing and storage fees
and costs to the private towing company;
      (3)   The availability of posting a bond in the full amount of the
administrative and public safety fee;
      (4)   The date, time and place of the initial hearing before an
Administrative Hearing Officer to determine whether or not there was probable
cause for the seizure and impound; and
      (5)   The vehicle will remain impounded pending the administrative
hearing unless the owner or lessee posts a bond in an amount equal to the
administrative and public safety fee.
   (C)   If a properly licensed person authorized by the owner or the operator
of the motor vehicle is present and capable to provide for the lawful immediate
removal of the motor vehicle, and said motor vehicle is not required to be held
as evidence in regard to the violation, subject to forfeiture pursuant to 720
ILCS 5/36-1, or otherwise subject to impound pursuant to state law, the police
officer shall allow that individual to promptly remove the motor vehicle
without it being subject to seizure and impound. The police officer shall not
be under any duty or requirement to:
      (1)   Inform the person being arrested that he or she may contact another
person to remove the vehicle from the scene of the incident;
      (2)   Allow a driver being arrested to make or send a telephone call,
electronic message or other attempt to contact a person to drive the vehicle
from the scene of the arrest; and
      (3)   Initiate such call, message or contact another person on behalf of
the arrestee.
   (D)   Upon the arrest of a driver for violations referenced in §
8-8-2, the vehicle shall not be removed from the scene by any owner, or another
person authorized by the owner, if the police officer determines that the
vehicle should not be released due to the applicability of §
8-8-8.
   (E)   The imposition of the administrative and public safety fee shall not
apply if the vehicle driven by a person arrested in connection with the
offenses identified in §
8-8-2, was stolen at that time and the theft was reported to the appropriate
police authorities within 24 hours after the theft was discovered or reasonably
should have been discovered.
(Ord. 2010-01-02, passed 1-19-2010; Ord. 2012-02-02, passed 2-6-2012)
§ 8-8-4 RELEASE OF MOTOR VEHICLE; POSTING OF BOND.
   (A)   (1)   The owner of a motor vehicle that is seized and impounded
pursuant to this article may regain possession of the vehicle by first:
         (a)   Paying to the village the $500 administrative and public safety
fee; or
         (b)   Posting a bond in the full amount of the administrative and
public safety fee.
      (2)   The fee or bond shall be paid at the Carol Stream Police
Department. The fee or bond shall only be paid with cash, credit card,
cashier’s or certified check, or other type of payment acceptable to the
village that has the legal effect of being equivalent to the aforementioned
methods of payment.
   (B)   Upon payment of the fee or bond, the Department shall provide the
owner with a document authorizing the release of the vehicle from the private
towing company. No release shall be granted unless proof of insurance is
provided. The owner may present the Department-issued document authorizing
release to the private towing company and, upon payment of any fees and costs
to company for towing and storage of the vehicle, shall regain possession of
the vehicle.
(Ord. 2010-01-02, passed 1-19-2010; Ord. 2012-02-02, passed 2-6-2012)
§ 8-8-5 NOTICE OF SEIZURE AND IMPOUND.
   (A)   The village shall, within ten days after a vehicle is seized and
impounded pursuant to this article, send a written notice by first class mail
to the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle and any lienholder of record.
The notice shall be served upon the owner, lessee and lienholder of record by
personal service or first class mail to the addresses registered with the
Secretary of State.
   (B)   The notice shall:
      (1)   State that the motor vehicle was seized and impounded;
      (2)   Contain all pertinent facts relating to the date, time and reason
for the seizure and impound;
      (3)   Specify the procedures by which possession of the vehicle may be
regained;
      (4)   State that the failure to regain possession of the vehicle,
pursuant to the provisions of this article, shall result in the vehicle being
disposed of pursuant to law; and
      (5)   Provide the date and time of the scheduled initial hearing date,
which shall not be more than 45 days after the impound of the vehicle.
(Ord. 2010-01-02, passed 1-19-2010; Ord. 2012-02-02, passed 2-6-2012)
§ 8-8-6 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS.
   (A)   The administrative hearing shall be conducted by a Hearing Officer who
shall be an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of Illinois for at
least three years.
   (B)   Administrative hearing procedures shall be as follows.
      (1)   On the date of the initial hearing, the owner, any lessee and any
lienholder of record shall appear and either admit or deny probable cause for
the seizure and impound of the vehicle. If an admission is entered, or if the
owner, any lessee and any lienholder of record fail to appear, the case shall
be disposed of at that time, with an order/default order in favor of the
village, which order/default order shall require the payment to the village of
the $500 administrative fee and towing and storage costs to the applicable tow
company, and the continued impound of the motor vehicle until the owner of
record, any lessee or lienholder of record pays to the village the $500
administrative fee and towing and storage costs to the applicable towing
company. If the owner of record, any lessee or any lienholder of record enters
a denial, an evidentiary hearing shall be scheduled.
      (2)   All parties shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present
testimony and evidence at the hearing. Continuances of the hearing date must be
made in person before the Hearing Officer and may be granted upon a showing of
good cause. The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing, and
hearsay evidence shall be admissible, subject to the discretion of the Hearing
Officer.
      (3)   The original or a legible copy of the charging document signed by
the village officer certifying to the correctness of the information contained
therein shall be prima facie evidence of the facts specified therein.
      (4)   If the Hearing Officer determines by a preponderance of evidence
that the seizure and impound was proper, the Hearing Officer shall enter a
final order finding the owner of the vehicle liable to the village for the
administrative and public safety fee in the amount of $500. In the event a bond
was posted, it will be retained by the village as final payment of the
administrative and public safety fee. If the Hearing Officer determines by a
preponderance of evidence that the seizure and impound was not proper, the
Hearing Officer shall enter a final order for the return of the vehicle or the
bond. A finding that the seizure and impound was not proper shall not have any
bearing on whether the owner is obligated to pay the towing and storage fees
and costs, and the owner must pay all fees and costs owed to the private towing
company.
      (5)   The decision by the Hearing Officer on the issue of whether the
seizure and impound was proper, shall constitute a final determination for
purposes of judicial review and shall be subject to review pursuant to the
Illinois Administrative Review Act, 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq., as now or
hereafter amended. A party must exhaust its administrative remedies prior to
seeking judicial review.
   (C)   Any owner, lessee or lienholder may waive, in writing, his, her or
their right to a hearing.
(Ord. 2010-01-02, passed 1-19-2010; Ord. 2012-02-02, passed 2-6-2012)
§ 8-8-7 COLLECTION OF UNPAID ADMINISTRATIVE AND PUBLIC SAFETY FEE.
   (A)   If an administrative and public safety fee is imposed pursuant to this
article, the fee shall constitute a debt due and owing the Village of Carol
Stream. The village may collect on the debt using all means permitted by law,
including, without limitation, obtaining a judgment on the debt and enforcing
such judgment against the owner, or disposing of vehicle as unclaimed vehicle.
   (B)   The village may commence legal proceedings to collect an unpaid
administrative and public safety fee, or take actions to dispose of the
impounded vehicle:
      (1)   Thirty-five days after a determination was made at the requested
hearing that the seizure and impound was proper, and no petition was filed in
the Circuit Court seeking judicial review of the Administrative Hearing
Officer’s determination or other review;
      (2)   Thirty days after a final order is rendered by a judge of the
Circuit Court whenever a petition seeking judicial review was filed by a party;
or
      (3)   Fifteen days after the notice referenced in §
8-8-6, was mailed and the administrative hearing was waived in writing.
(Ord. 2010-01-02, passed 1-19-2010; Ord. 2012-02-02, passed 2-6-2012)
§ 8-8-8 RELEASE OF MOTOR VEHICLE NOT ALLOWED.
   (A)   The provisions of this article authorizing an owner, or other party,
to regain possession of a motor vehicle are not applicable when vehicle or
asset forfeiture proceedings have been instituted under state or federal drug
asset forfeiture laws or 720 ILCS 5/36-1 et seq. or 720 ILCS 5/36.5. In such
case, the village shall not release, or dispose of, the vehicle to any person,
except as consistent with those proceedings.
   (B)   In the event the Carol Stream Police Department determines that the
vehicle seized and impounded pursuant to this article should not be released to
its owner or other persons, or disposed of as an unclaimed vehicle, due to the
need to retain the vehicle as part of a continuing criminal investigation, or
as evidence in a crime, then the village shall notify the owner that the
vehicle will be retained and not released, except as required by law.
(Ord. 2010-01-02, passed 1-19-2010; Ord. 2012-02-02, passed 2-6-2012)
§ 8-8-9 MULTIPLE OWNERS.
   Whenever in this article the word “owner” is used, it shall apply to all
owners. This article presumes that all owners have equal rights to a seized and
impounded vehicle. In instances of multiple owners of a vehicle, the village
shall not have any duty or responsibility to inquire or determine whether all
owners concur with, or object to, any action taken, or omissions, by any one
owner in relation to the vehicle seized and impounded.
(Ord. 2010-01-02, passed 1-19-2010; Ord. 2012-02-02, passed 2-6-2012)
§ 8-8-10 FAILURE TO CLAIM VEHICLE.
   Any motor vehicle that is not reclaimed within 30 days after the expiration
of the time during which the owner may seek judicial review of the Hearing
Officers decision or, if judicial review is sought, the time at which a final
judgment is rendered in favor of the village; or the time a final
administrative decision is rendered against any owner, lessee or lienholder of
record who fails to appear at the hearing, may be disposed of as abandoned and
unclaimed as provided by law; provided that, where proceedings have been
instituted under state or federal forfeiture laws, the village may not dispose
of the vehicle, except as consistent with the forfeiture proceedings.
(Ord. 2010-01-02, passed 1-19-2010; Ord. 2012-02-02, passed 2-6-2012)
ARTICLE 9: AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEMS
Section
   
8-9-1   Definitions
   
8-9-2   Establishment of systems
   
8-9-3   Authorization to enter into agreements
   
8-9-4   Administrator
   
8-9-5   Violation notice
   
8-9-6   Technician’s determination
   
8-9-7   Hearing opportunity
   
8-9-8   Determination of liability
   
8-9-9   Determination notice
   
8-9-10   Setting aside final determination
   
8-9-11   Suspension notice
   
8-9-12   Challenging accuracy of notice and/or report
   
8-9-13   Non-residents may contest notices
   
8-9-14   Penalty
§ 8-9-1 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this article, words or terms shall have the following meanings
unless the context or usage clearly indicates that another meaning is intended.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The Village’s Traffic Control Administrator.
   AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW VIOLATION. A violation described in 625 ILCS 5/11-
208.6 of the Code or a violation of any municipal ordinance involving the
operation of a motor vehicle.
   AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCE-MENT SYSTEM. A device with one or more motor
vehicle sensors working in conjunction with a red light signal to produce
recorded images of motor vehicles entering an intersection against a red light
signal in violation of 625 ILCS 5/11-306 of the Code or a similar provision of
a village ordinance.
   CERTIFIED REPORT. A report concerning five or more unpaid fines or penalties
for automated traffic law violations made by the village to the Secretary in
accordance with 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5 of the Code or a municipal ordinance.
   CODE. The Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.
   DETERMINATION NOTICE. A notice of final determination of automated traffic
law violation liability issued pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3 of the Code and
pursuant to the provisions of this article.
   RECORDED IMAGES. Images showing the time, date and location of an automated
traffic law violation recorded by an automated traffic law enforcement system
on:
      (1)   Two or more photographs;
      (2)   Two or more microphotographs;
      (3)   Two or more electronic images; or
      (4)   A video recording showing the motor vehicle and, on at least one
image or portion of the recording, clearly identifying the registration plate
number of the motor vehicle.
   SECRETARY. The Illinois Secretary of State.
   SUSPENSION NOTICE. A notice of impending driver’s license suspension issued
pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3 of the Code and pursuant to the provisions of
this article.
   SYSTEM. Individually, an automated traffic law enforcement system or,
collectively, automated traffic law enforcement systems established in the
village pursuant to this article.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Carol Stream, DuPage County, Illinois.
   VIOLATION NOTICE. An automated traffic law violation notice issued pursuant
to 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3 and 625 ILCS 5/11-208.6 of the Code and pursuant to the
provisions of this article.
(Ord. 2008-02-06, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 8-9-2 ESTABLISHMENT OF SYSTEMS.
   The village hereby determines to establish systems at intersections located
within the corporate limits of the village that are mutually selected by
Redflex Traffic Systems, Inc., and the municipality and approved by the Village
Board by motion.
(Ord. 2008-02-06, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 8-9-3 AUTHORIZATION TO ENTER INTO AGREEMENTS.
   The village is authorized to enter into agreements, substantially in the
forms attached hereto as Group Exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference
(collectively, the “agreements”), with Redflex Traffic Systems, Inc.
(“Redflex”) for the design and implementation of the system(s) and for services
related to the system(s). The agreements shall be subject to final modification
by the attorneys for the village and Redflex. The Mayor is hereby authorized
and directed to execute the agreements, once finalized, thereby binding the
village to their terms. The Village Clerk is authorized and directed to attest
to the Mayor’s signature, as necessary.
(Ord. 2008-02-06, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 8-9-4 ADMINISTRATOR.
   There is hereby established the office of Administrator, which shall be
filled by appointment of the Mayor. The Administrator or his or her designee
shall be authorized to adopt, distribute and process violation notices and
other notices required by 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3 of the Code or a municipal
ordinance, collect money paid as fines and penalties for automated traffic law
violations and operate an administrative adjudication system for automated
traffic law violations. The Administrator is also authorized to make a
certified report to the Secretary pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5 of the Code,
and any such certified report shall contain the information required under 625
ILCS 5/6-306.5(c) of the Code.
(Ord. 2008-02-06, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 8-9-5 VIOLATION NOTICE.
   A violation notice, the contents of which shall comply with the requirements
of 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3 and 625 ILCS 5/11-208.6 of the Code, as amended, shall
be served by mail to the address of the registered owner of a vehicle cited for
an automated traffic law violation as recorded with the Secretary within 30
days after the Secretary notifies the village of the identity of the owner of
the vehicle, but in no event later than 90 days after the violation. Service of
a violation notice shall be deemed complete as of the date of deposit in the
United States mail. The original or a facsimile of a violation notice or, in
the case of a violation notice produced by a computerized device, a printed
record generated by the device showing the facts entered on the violation
notice, shall be retained by the Administrator, and shall be a record kept in
the ordinary course of business. A violation notice issued, signed and served
in accordance with this article and 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3 of the Code, a copy of
the violation notice or the computer generated record shall be prima facie
correct and shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts shown
on the violation notice. The violation notice, copy or computer generated
record shall be admissible in any subsequent administrative or legal
proceedings.
(Ord. 2008-02-06, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 8-9-6 TECHNICIAN’S DETERMINATION.
   Before a citation may be issued for any automated traffic law violation, a
determination must be made by a technician employed or contracted by the
village that, based on inspection of recorded images generated by the system,
the motor vehicle was being operated in violation of 625 ILCS 5/11-208.6 of the
Code or an ordinance of the village. If the technician determines that the
vehicle entered the intersection as part of a funeral procession or in order to
yield the right-of-way to an emergency vehicle, a citation shall not be issued.
(Ord. 2008-02-06, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 8-9-7 HEARING OPPORTUNITY.
   The registered owner of the vehicle cited in a violation notice shall have
the opportunity for a hearing in which said owner may contest the merits of the
alleged violation. The lessee of a vehicle cited in a violation notice likewise
shall be afforded the opportunity for a hearing of the same kind afforded the
registered owner. The formal or technical rules of evidence shall not apply at
any such hearing. Such hearings shall be recorded, and the person conducting
the hearing on behalf of the Administrator shall be empowered to administer
oaths and to secure by subpoena both the attendance and testimony of witnesses
and the production of relevant books and papers. Persons appearing at such a
hearing may be represented by counsel at their own expense.
(Ord. 2008-02-06, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 8-9-8 DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   A final determination of automated traffic law violation liability
shall occur following failure to pay the fine or penalty after a Hearing
Officer’s determination of violation liability.
   (B)   The village finds that a person chosen as a Hearing Officer for any
administrative adjudication undertaken by the village, who is otherwise
qualified, shall have fulfilled the education and training standards required
if that individual, at the time of his or her appointment, has served for at
least ten years in the position of a State’s Attorney or Assistant State’s
Attorney in the State of Illinois.
   (C)   Where a person fails to appear at a hearing to contest the alleged
violation in the time and manner specified in a prior mailed notice, the
Hearing Officer’s determination of violation liability shall become final:
      (1)   Upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination;
or
      (2)   Upon expiration of the period for filing such a petition without a
filing having been made.
(Ord. 2008-02-06, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. 2009-10-58, passed 10-19-2009)
§ 8-9-9 DETERMINATION NOTICE.
   A determination notice, the contents of which shall comply with the
requirements of 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3 of the Code, as amended, shall be sent
following a final determination of automated traffic law violation liability
and the conclusion of judicial review procedures taken under 625 ILCS 5/11-
208.3 of the Code. A determination notice shall be sent by first class United
States mail, postage prepaid, to the address of the registered owner of the
cited vehicle as recorded with the Secretary or, if any notice to that address
is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United
States Post Office approved database or, under 625 ILCS 5/11-1306 of the Code,
to the lessee of the cited vehicle at the last address known to the lessor of
the cited vehicle at the time of the lease or, if any notice to that address is
returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United
States Post Office database. Service of the determination notice shall be
deemed complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail.
(Ord. 2008-02-06, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 8-9-10 SETTING ASIDE FINAL DETERMINATION.
   (A)   A person owing an unpaid fine or penalty for automated traffic law
violation penalty may file a petition to set aside a final determination of
such liability within 21 days after service by the village of a determination
notice. Such a petition shall be filed by sending the same, together with any
documentation in support thereof, to the Administrator by certified mail,
return receipt requested, or by personal delivery to the Administrator.
   (B)   The grounds for such a petition shall be limited to:
      (1)   The person not having been the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle
on the date the violation notice was issued;
      (2)   The person having already paid the fine or penalty for the
violation in question; and
      (3)   Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing.
   (C)   A hearing on such a petition shall be held within 30 days after the
filing of same. In the event that such a petition is granted upon a showing of
just cause, and the subject determination of automated traffic law violation
liability is thereby set aside, the registered owner shall be provided with a
hearing on the merits for that violation.
(Ord. 2008-02-06, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 8-9-11 SUSPENSION NOTICE.
   A suspension notice, the contents of which shall comply with the
requirements of 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5 and 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3 of the Code, as
amended, shall be sent to the person liable for any fine or penalty that
remains due and owing on five or more unpaid automated traffic law violations.
The suspension notice shall be sent by first class United States mail, postage
prepaid, to the address recorded with the Secretary or, if any notice to that
address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a
United States Post Office approved database. Service of a suspension notice
shall be deemed complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail.
(Ord. 2008-02-06, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 8-9-12 CHALLENGING ACCURACY OF NOTICE AND/OR REPORT.
   (A)   If the Administrator provides a suspension notice to a vehicle owner
and subsequently makes a certified report to the Secretary, the subject vehicle
owner may challenge the accuracy of the certified report in writing.
   (B)   To do so, the vehicle owner must submit to the Administrator a written
statement under oath, together with any supporting documentation, establishing
one of the following grounds for challenging the accuracy of the certified
report:
      (1)   The person was not the owner or lessee of the subject vehicle or
vehicles receiving five or more automated traffic law violations on the date or
dates such violation notices were issued; or
      (2)   The person already paid the fines or penalties for the five or more
automated traffic law violations indicated on the certified report.
   (C)   Such statement and supporting documentation must be sent to the
Administrator by certified mail, return receipt requested, or hand-delivered to
the Administrator within five days after the person receives notice from the
Secretary that the person’s driver’s license will be suspended at the end of a
specified period of time unless the Secretary is presented with a notice from
the village certifying that the fines or penalties due and owing have been paid
or that the inclusion of the person’s name on the certified report was in
error.
(Ord. 2008-02-06, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 8-9-13 NON-RESIDENTS MAY CONTEST NOTICES.
   Non-residents of the village who receive violation notices may contest the
merits of the alleged automated traffic law violation without attending a
hearing by sending a signed statement, under oath, together with any supporting
documentation, to the Administrator via certified mail, return receipt
requested, within 21 days after service of the violation notice. Such a
statement shall set forth the reasons why a finding of liability should not be
entered. The Administrator shall rule on such a statement within ten days after
receipt of same, and shall inform the non-resident of his or her decision
within ten days thereafter.
(Ord. 2008-02-06, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 8-9-14 PENALTY.
   Unless the driver of the motor vehicle cited for an automated traffic law
violation received a uniform traffic citation from a police officer at the time
of the violation, the owner of the motor vehicle is subject to a penalty of
$100 per violation. In the event that such penalty is not paid within 21 days
after service of a violation notice, the penalty shall increase to $200.
(Ord. 2008-02-06, passed 2-19-2008)
CHAPTER 9: HEALTH REGULATIONS
      Article
         
1.   GARBAGE AND REFUSE
         
1.1.   SOLID WASTE COLLECTORS
         
2.   WEEDS
         
3.   REGULATION OF DOGS AND ANIMALS
         
4.   TREES
         
5.   FEEDING OF WILD ANIMALS PROHIBITED
ARTICLE 1: GARBAGE AND REFUSE
Section
   
9-1-1   Definitions
   
9-1-2   Disposal of garbage
   
9-1-3   Disposal of refuse
   
9-1-4   Residential collections
   
9-1-5   Multi-family, commercial, business and industrial collections
   
9-1-6   Containers
   
9-1-7   Placement of containers
   
9-1-8   Throwing, depositing of garbage and refuse prohibited
   
9-1-9   Uncovered garbage
   
9-1-10   Accumulation of refuse
   
9-1-11   Deposit on streets
   
9-1-12   Open burning prohibited
   
9-1-13   Removal of garbage and refuse; lien
   
9-1-14   Nuisance declared
   
9-1-15   Penalty for violation of Ch. 9
Cross-reference:
   Solid waste collectors, see
Ch. 9, Art. 1.1
§ 9-1-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose interpretation and enforcement of this article, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. Wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food, and wastes from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Items which have post-consumer use or value including,
but not limited to, the following: paper (newspaper, Kraft paper and mixed
paper), glass, steel and bi-metal cans, aluminum, HDPE plastics (milk, water
and laundry detergent bottles) and PET plastics (soda bottles).
   REFUSE. Combustible refuse, including but not limited to paper, cartons,
boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, wood furniture, bedding; non-combustible
refuse, including, but not limited to, metals, tin cans, metal furniture,
glass, crockery, other mineral waste, street rubbish and ashes, residue from
fires used for cooking and for heating buildings. REFUSE shall not include
earth and wastes from building operations, nor shall it include solid wastes
resulting from industrial processes and manufacturing operations such as food
processing wastes, boiler house cinders, lumber, scraps and shavings.
   YARD WASTE. Accumulations of grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves, tree limbs
and other materials accumulated as the result of the maintenance of lawns,
shrubbery, vines and trees.
(Ord. 91-03-23, passed 3-26-1991)
§ 9-1-2 DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE.
   All garbage shall be securely wrapped in paper or plastic and placed in
containers, as specified herein, for collection by private scavengers in
accordance with the provisions of this article. Garbage may also be disposed of
by finely grinding and shredding in a garbage disposal unit leading through
pipes to a sanitary sewer.
§ 9-1-3 DISPOSAL OF REFUSE.
   Refuse shall be disposed of by placing such refuse in containers, as
specified herein, for collection by private scavengers in accordance with the
provisions of this article.
§ 9-1-4 RESIDENTIAL COLLECTIONS.
   (A)   General. Those persons owning or occupying single-family residential
units, condominium units and multi-family units are required to provide garbage
and refuse collection only from an entity which is franchised to provide such
services by the village. Collection must take place at least once in every
seven-day period; provided, however, that, any multi-family unit, which
received its garbage and refuse collection under a written contract, which was
in force on 12-1-2007, with a provider which did not possess a village
franchise, may continue to receive that service for the term of the contract
only and not including later negotiated extensions. In addition, the owner or
occupants of multi-family apartments shall only be required to utilize an
entity that possesses a village franchise if that entity agrees to provide
services at a cost equal to or less than alternative, equivalent proposals
submitted by other service providers.
   (B)   Recycling. Single-family residential units, condominium units and
multi-family units are required to provide recycling services only from an
entity which is franchised to provide such services by the village. With
regards to multi-family units, the exceptions provided for in division (A)
herein shall also apply to recycling services.
   (C)   Title to containers. All recycling bins shall remain the property of
the village and shall not be removed from the property on which the dwelling
unit is located. Any damage to or loss of a recycling bin shall be reported to
the village’s Public Works Department by the primary user of the recycling bin
or by the person responsible for the damage or loss within 24 hours of the
damage or loss. The cost to repair or replace a recycling bin damaged or lost
shall be borne by the person responsible for such damage or loss.
   (D)   Pick up without contract prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation to collect, obtain, possess or pick up any
recyclable item placed in or adjacent to village recycling bins placed for
collection in front of a residence as part of the village’s curbside recycling
program or from any container on village property, unless such person, firm or
corporation has a contract with the village for the collection of recyclable
materials.
   (E)   Duty to pay for refuse collection. Any person occupying a place of
abode for residential purposes shall be required to dispose of solid waste
generated through the approved municipal solid waste franchise system and shall
pay the rates and charges agreed to by the village in a franchise agreement.
   (F)   Responsibility for collection. Any place of abode or any premises
occupied for residential purposes shall be prima facie evidence that waste is
being produced and accumulated on such premises, and it shall be the duty of
the designated representatives of the village, in the absence of satisfactory
proof to the County Health Officer or village representatives that other
adequate means of waste disposal or removal have been provided, to inspect the
premises and remove therefrom any and all waste found thereon, for which
removal as established by the required fees shall be paid by the occupant(s),
owner(s) or person(s) in possession of said premises, with said occupant(s),
owner(s) and person(s) in possession being jointly and severably liable for the
payment of the required fees.
(Ord. 91-03-23, passed 3-26-1991; Ord. 2005-09-52, passed 9-19-2005; Ord. 2007-
12-51, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 9-1-5 MULTI-FAMILY, COMMERCIAL, BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL COLLECTIONS.
   (A)   Multi-family, commercial business and industrial collection standards.
Collections shall be made by private scavengers from multi-family, commercial,
business and industrial establishments at least once every seven day period.
Every person owning or in possession, charge or control of any such
establishment shall be required to provide and at all times keep in a suitable
place, readily accessible to the garbage collector, garbage containers capable
of holding all garbage and refuse which would ordinarily accumulate on such
premises between the times of successive collections. Such containers shall be
enclosed on three sides and the garbage containers shall not be visible from
the street or adjacent properties.
   (B)   Hours of collection for non- residential properties. Non-residential
solid waste collection service in all areas of the village shall be limited to
Monday through Friday from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Collection service in non-
residential areas of the village may be extended to Saturdays between 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m. during those weeks which contain a nationally observed holiday.
(Ord. 2009-10-57, passed 10-19-2009; Ord. 2014-02-08, passed 2-18-2014; Ord.
2016-07-32, passed 7-18-2016)
§ 9-1-6 CONTAINERS.
   All containers used for the deposit of garbage and refuse shall be of
galvanized or non-corrodible metal or plastic, rodent and insect proof,
waterproof and of a suitable gauge and construction to ensure durability,
equipped with a cover and handles so that they may be lifted, wheeled or
carried by one person. Durable plastic bags, securely fastened, may also be
used. No such container shall have a capacity of less than five gallons, nor
more than 30 gallons, unless such container is designed and equipped to be
hydraulically lifted by a waste disposal vehicle, in which case these specially
designed containers may have a capacity of 90 gallons.
§ 9-1-7 PLACEMENT OF CONTAINERS.
   All containers for recycling, garbage and refuse shall be placed by
residents at the curb line of the premises served not earlier than 6:00 p.m. on
the day before the scheduled collection, and shall be removed on or before
midnight of the day on which the collection is made. Thereafter, containers
shall be situated or located so as to be hidden from view of the street and
shall not be placed so as to constitute a nuisance to adjacent property or to
the occupants thereof. Any employee of the village vested with police powers in
the enforcement of code compliance and issuance of citations for ordinance
violations in accordance with §
2-7-13, and who observes a violation of this section, may issue a "hang-on
ticket" as provided in
Chapter 15, Article 4 of this Code pursuant to which the person cited may pay
the sum of $25 within the time stated on the ticket as a compromise or
settlement to avoid the prosecution of an ordinance violation in the Circuit
Court.
(Ord. 2008-02-02, passed 2-4-2008; Ord. 2014-02-08, passed 2-18-2014)
§ 9-1-8 THROWING, DEPOSITING OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to throw or deposit garbage, refuse and yard waste on
any public or private property within the village, including retention/
detention basins and creeks, whether occupied or unoccupied; except that, the
owner or person in control of the property may maintain private receptacles for
garbage and refuse which are waste products resulting from the occupancy of the
property itself. Such receptacles shall comply with the provisions of this
article or other ordinances of the village and shall be placed and maintained
in such a manner so that the garbage and refuse deposited within such
receptacles shall not be carried, deposited or wind blown upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place, or upon any private property.
§ 9-1-9 UNCOVERED GARBAGE.
   It shall be unlawful to place or permit to remain anywhere in the village
any garbage or other material subject to decay, other than yard waste, except
in a tightly covered, waterproof container.
§ 9-1-10 ACCUMULATION OF REFUSE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to place or permit to accumulate any dust, ashes
or refuse, or any material anywhere in the village, except in a covered
container so that it cannot be wind blown, except that which may be placed in a
compost pile as specified in division (B) of this section.
   (B)   Compostable materials such as grass trimmings, wood waste, leaves,
weeds and other garden refuse may be placed in a compost pile; provided, it is
placed in such a way so the material will not be wind blown. The following
additional materials, namely shrubbery, vines, fruits, vegetables, egg shells,
coffee grounds, houseplant materials and cut flowers may only be placed in an
institutional compost pile as part of a school sponsored source reduction
educational project.
   (C)   Compost piles shall be no more than five feet in height and shall not
have a maximum ground or base area of more than 100 square feet.
(Ord. 2000-01-06, passed 1-17-2000)
§ 9-1-11 DEPOSIT ON STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful to deposit or permit any garbage or refuse to fall from
any vehicle on any public street, alley or public place in the village;
provided that, this section shall not be construed to prohibit placing garbage
or refuse in a container complying with the provisions of this article
preparatory to having such material collected and disposed of in the manner
provided herein.
§ 9-1-12 OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED.
   No person, firm or corporation shall burn or set fire to, or allow to be
burned or set fire to, any garbage, hay, grass, leaves or any combustible
material whatsoever within the village. This provision shall apply only to open
outdoor burning.
§ 9-1-13 REMOVAL OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE; LIEN.
   Whenever the owner of property, after reasonable notice, refuses or neglects
to remove garbage and refuse found upon such property, the village may remove
or see to the removal of such garbage and refuse and may collect from such
owner the reasonable cost of such removal. In the event that the village
removes or sees to the removal of such garbage and refuse, it shall file a lien
to recover the reasonable cost of that removal within 60 days after such cost
and expense is incurred. The filing of such lien shall be in accordance with
the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/11-20-13.
§ 9-1-14 NUISANCE DECLARED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or bury garbage within the
village or to permit same to accumulate in any manner within the village so as
to create a nuisance or attract flies, vermin or rats.
§ 9-1-15 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF CH. 9.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of a code violation, punishable by a fine of not less than $200
or more than $750 for each separate offense. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served shall constitute a separate offense.
In addition to a fine, the court may impose a period of conditional discharge
as defined in 730 ILCS 5/5-1-4 or court supervision as defined in 730 ILCS 5/5-
1-21 of the Criminal Code for a period of up to six months, an order of
restitution, an order to perform community service, an order to complete an
education program and/or any other appropriate penalties or conditions
authorized in any section of this code or ordinance or any conditions for
conditional discharge set forth in 730 ILCS 5/5-6-3 or for court supervision in
730 ILCS 5/5-6-3.1 as the foregoing are amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2014-02-08, passed 2-18-2014)
ARTICLE 1.1: SOLID WASTE COLLECTORS
Section
   
9-1.1-1   Definitions
   
9-1.1-2   Exclusive franchise
   
9-1.1-3   Removal of garbage, refuse, recyclables and yard waste without
franchise prohibited
   
9-1.1-4   Penalty for violation of Art. 1.1
Cross-reference:
   Garbage and refuse generally, see
Ch. 9, Art. 1
§ 9-1.1-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. Wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food, and wastes from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   RECYCLABLES. At a minimum, brown paper bags, corrugated boxes, frozen food
packages, magazines and catalogues, mixed paper, newspapers, paperboard,
telephone books, wet strength carrier stock, aerosol cans, aluminum cans,
aluminum foil, aseptic packaging and gable top containers, formed steel
containers, glass bottles and jars, HDPE (#2) plastic containers, PET (#1)
plastic containers, plastic six- and 12-pack rings, polystyrene (#6), steel
cans, steel paint cans and lids, and any other items which the intermediate
processing facility in the village or similar facility may add to its list of
items accepted at the facility.
   REFUSE. Combustible refuse, including but not limited to paper, cartons,
boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, wood furniture, bedding; non-combustible
refuse, including, but not limited to, tin cans, metal furniture, glass,
crockery, other mineral waste, street rubbish and ashes, residue from fires
used for cooking and for heating buildings. REFUSE shall not include earth and
waste from building operations, nor shall it include solid waste resulting from
industrial processes and manufacturing operations such as food processing
wastes, boiler house cinders, lumber, scraps and shavings.
   SOLID WASTE COLLECTORS. Any person, firm or corporation who provides
collection or removal services of garbage, refuse, recyclables or yard waste.
   YARD WASTE. Accumulations of grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves, tree limbs
and other materials accumulated as the result of the maintenance of lawns,
shrubbery, vines and trees.
(Ord. 96-05-33, passed 5-6-1996)
§ 9-1.1-2 EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE.
   The village may, in its discretion, grant an exclusive franchise to a solid
waste collector, granting the sole right to collect garbage, refuse,
recyclables and yard waste for single-family detached and attached dwellings or
multi-family dwellings or to such classes of dwellings as shall be specified in
the franchise.
(Ord. 96-05-33, passed 5-6-1996)
§ 9-1.1-3 REMOVAL OF GARBAGE, REFUSE, RECYCLABLES AND YARD WASTE WITHOUT
FRANCHISE PROHIBITED.
   No person, firm or corporation shall provide garbage, refuse, recyclables or
yard waste collection or removal services from single-family detached or
attached residences or from multiple-family residential complexes without first
acquiring a franchise from the village. In the event that the village has
elected to grant an exclusive franchise pursuant to § 9-1.1-2, no other person,
firm or corporation shall be granted a permit for collection of removal
services for dwellings covered by the exclusive franchise. No property owner
shall enter into a contract or otherwise permit a solid waste collector without
a franchise to provide collection or removal services for property within the
village.
(Ord. 96-05-33, passed 5-6-1996)
§ 9-1.1-4 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF ART. 1.1.
   Any person, firm or corporation providing garbage, refuse, recyclables and
yard waste collection or removal services without a franchise or any property
owner who contracts with or otherwise pays a solid waste collector who does not
hold a franchise for removal of garbage, refuse, recyclables or yard wastes
from his or her property shall be in violation of this article and shall be
subject to the penalties set forth in §
9-1-15 of this code.
(Ord. 96-05-33, passed 5-6-1996)
ARTICLE 2: WEEDS
Section
   
9-2-1   Definition
   
9-2-2   Nuisance prohibited
   
9-2-3   Notice to abate
   
9-2-4   Abatement by village
   
9-2-5   Lien against property
Cross-reference:
   Fees, see §
6-13-19
§ 9-2-1 DEFINITION.
   The term WEEDS, as used in this article, shall mean and include any annual
or perennial herbaceous plant, of volunteer growth, which is not cultivated or
specifically grown for human food; any high or rank growth that may conceal
filthy deposits or constitute a fire hazard when dry, or any non-cultivated
plant which reaches a height of eight inches.
§ 9-2-2 NUISANCE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone owning property in the village to permit
weeds upon such property to grow to a height exceeding eight inches anywhere in
the village within 500 feet of a residential, industrial or commercial
building, or where the growth of weeds presents a safety hazard or a hazard to
the flow of traffic. Any weed exceeding such height is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.
§ 9-2-3 NOTICE TO ABATE.
   (A)   Where any weed has grown to a height exceeding eight inches within the
village within 500 feet of a residential, industrial or commercial building, or
where the growth of weeds presents a safety hazard or a hazard to the flow of
traffic, the owners of the real estate upon which the weeds have been permitted
or allowed to grow shall be sent a notice stating that if the weeds are not cut
within ten days after the notice, the village will provide for the cutting of
the weeds and will place a lien upon the real estate affected.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Community Development Department to serve
or cause to be served, by mail or otherwise, a notice upon the owner of any
premises on which weeds or plants are permitted to grow in violation of the
provisions of this article, and to demand the abatement of the nuisance within
three days.
(Ord. 98-03-21, passed 3-16-1998; Ord. 2014-02-08, passed 2-18-2014)
§ 9-2-4 ABATEMENT BY VILLAGE.
   If the violation is not abated within the three-day period, the village,
through its duly appointed agent, shall enter upon the property where such
weeds are growing and shall proceed to destroy the weeds thereon causing the
violation. Any expense incurred by the village in so doing shall be a charge
against the owner or person in control and such charge may be recovered in an
appropriate action of law.
(Ord. 2014-02-08, passed 2-18-2014)
§ 9-2-5 LIEN AGAINST PROPERTY.
   (A)   Any costs incurred by the village, or its duly appointed officers or
agents, in removing weeds from any property, shall be a lien upon the real
estate so affected, and such lien shall be superior to all other liens and
encumbrances, except tax liens; provided that, within 60 days after such cost
and expense is incurred, the village, or person performing the service by
authority of the village, in its or his or her own name, files notice of lien
in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of DuPage County.
   (B)   The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out the
following:
      (1)   A description of the real estate sufficient for identification
thereof;
      (2)   The amount of money representing the costs and expenses incurred or
payable for the service; and
      (3)   The date or dates when such costs and expenses were incurred by the
village or one acting under its direction and authority.
   (C)   Upon payment of the costs and expenses by the owner of or persons
interested in such property after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall
be released by the village or person in whose name the lien has been filed and
the release shall be filed of record as in the case of filing notice of lien.
ARTICLE 3: REGULATION OF DOGS AND ANIMALS
Section
   
9-3-1   License required
   
9-3-2   Rabies inoculation required
   
9-3-3   Registration; license fee; term of license
   
9-3-4   License issued
   
9-3-5   Tag and collar
   
9-3-6   Licenses not transferable or refundable
   
9-3-7   Records
   
9-3-8   Dogs at large; leash requirements
   
9-3-9   Impounding; redemption
   
9-3-10   Animal bites
   
9-3-11   Regulation of dangerous and vicious animals
   
9-3-12   Limitation of animals
   
9-3-13   Nuisances
   
9-3-14   Control of defecation
   
9-3-15   Provisions not applicable
   
9-3-16   Humane treatment of birds and animals
   
9-3-17   Birds
   
9-3-18   Prohibitions; exceptions
   
9-3-19   Horses, riding of
Cross-reference:
   Injury to animals, see §
14-1-2
§ 9-3-1 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the village to own, keep, harbor
or have custody of any dog over six months of age without first obtaining a
license from the village as herein provided.
§ 9-3-2 RABIES INOCULATION REQUIRED.
   Every owner or keeper of a dog within the corporate limits shall cause such
dog to be inoculated by the County Rabies Inspector, or by his or her deputy,
or a licensed veterinarian, with a prophylactic serum to prevent rabies either
annually or tri-annually depending upon the type of serum used.
§ 9-3-3 REGISTRATION; LICENSE FEE; TERM OF LICENSE.
   (A)   All dogs kept in the village shall be registered with the Clerk as to
sex, breed, color, name and name and address of the owner of such dog. A
certificate of inoculation against rabies, issued by the County Rabies
Inspector, or by his or her deputy, or by a licensed veterinarian, shall be
submitted to the Clerk for inspection at the time registration is made.
   (B)   The annual license fee shall be $3 for a male dog and a spayed female
dog, and $5 for a female dog.
   (C)   If the owner or keeper of any dog comes into possession of the same
after the expiration of six months of the license year, he or she shall pay
one-half of the annual fee provided herein for the remainder of the year.
   (D)   Each license shall expire on December 31 following the year for which
such license is issued.
§ 9-3-4 LICENSE ISSUED.
   Upon payment of the license fee and evidence of a certificate of inoculation
as required in §
9-3-3, the Clerk shall issue to the owner a metallic tag bearing the legend
“Carol Stream Dog Tag”, as well as the license number and the year issued
marked thereon. Any owner of a licensed dog whose license tag has been lost may
obtain a replacement tag upon the payment of $1 to the Clerk.
§ 9-3-5 TAG AND COLLAR.
   Every owner of a dog within the village shall keep such license tag securely
attached to a collar or harness fastened around the neck or body of such dog at
all times when the dog is off the premises of the licensed owner.
§ 9-3-6 LICENSES NOT TRANSFERABLE OR REFUNDABLE.
   Dog licenses shall not be transferable from one dog to another and no
refunds shall be made on any dog license fee because of death of the dog or the
owner’s leaving the village before expiration of the license period.
§ 9-3-7 RECORDS.
   The Clerk shall forward to the Chief of the Police Department a copy of all
dog licenses issued. The Chief of Police shall keep, or cause to be kept, a
careful record of each registration and license issued for identifying lost,
stolen or impounded dogs.
§ 9-3-8 DOGS AT LARGE; LEASH REQUIREMENTS.
   No dog shall be permitted to run at large in the village, except upon the
premises of the owner of such dog, or upon other premises by authority of the
owner or occupant of such premises; provided, however, that, the area in which
the dog is permitted to run at large must be totally enclosed by a fence of an
adequate height to prevent the dog from escaping from the enclosed area, or the
dog must be restrained by a secure collar and leash or chain which must be
attached to a run line or to an anchor, so that the dog may not move beyond the
premises or the dog must be in the actual charge, custody or control of some
responsible person. Any dog taken outside of such an enclosed yard shall be
equipped with a secure collar and restrained upon a secure leash of not more
than six feet in length. Where a dog has been found to be a dangerous or
vicious animal, the provisions of this code which apply to such animals shall
be applicable.
(Ord. 91-02-15, passed 2-26-1991)
§ 9-3-9 IMPOUNDING; REDEMPTION.
   (A)   Licensed dogs.
      (1)   When any licensed dog shall be impounded, the Police Department
shall cause notice to be given in person or by telephone upon the registered
owner of any licensed dog impounded.
      (2)   If such dog is without a collar or harness with the current license
attached, it shall be deemed a licensed dog, for the purpose of this section,
if satisfactory proof is given to the Police Department by the owner or keeper
that such dog is licensed and that a collar, or harness with a current license
tag attached thereto, was placed on such dog, but had subsequently been lost or
taken from such animal.
      (3)   A licensed dog may be redeemed by the registered owner or agent
upon payment to the village of a fine of the sum of $10 for violation of §
9-3-8, in addition to any fees charged by the DuPage County Animal Control for
the cost of keeping such dog while impounded.
   (B)   Unlicensed dogs. An unlicensed dog may be redeemed as provided in
division (A) of this section; however, the owner or agent of such dog shall
further be required to purchase the annual license fee provided in §
9-3-3.
§ 9-3-10 ANIMAL BITES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any dog or other
animal when notified that such dog or animal has bitten or scratched any
person, or has otherwise injured any person so as to cause an abrasion of the
skin, or any dog or other animal suspected of having rabies, to sell or give
away such dog or animal or to permit or allow such dog or animal to be taken
away beyond the limits of the county, but it shall be the duty of such owner,
upon receiving notice of the character aforesaid, to immediately place such dog
or animal in a duly licensed veterinary hospital where such dog or animal shall
be confined for a period of at least ten days for observation, or deliver, or
cause to be delivered, any such dog or animal to the Police Department for such
placement. In case such dog or animal is delivered to a veterinary hospital,
notice of the name and location of such hospital shall be immediately furnished
to the Police Department by the owner of such dog or animal, and upon receipt
of such dog or animal, the veterinary hospital shall submit to the Police
Department a certificate stating that such dog or animal either shows no
symptoms of rabies or does show symptoms of rabies. If, at the expiration of
the ten days of confinement in such veterinary hospital, the veterinary
hospital shall submit to the Police Department a second certificate stating
that the dog or animal does not have rabies, the dog or animal may then be
released by the Police Department.
   (B)   If such dog or animal should die during the interval of observation,
the intact brain shall forthwith be delivered to the laboratory of the State
Department of Public Health.
   (C)   If, however, evidence is presented that such dog or animal has been
inoculated against rabies within the time prescribed by law prior to the
biting, such dog or animal shall be confined in the house of its owner or in a
manner that will prohibit such dog or animal from biting any person for a
period of ten days, unless in the judgment of the Police Department or a
licensed veterinarian, circumstances are such that the dog or animal should be
confined elsewhere. Such dog or animal so confined shall be examined by a
licensed veterinarian on the first, fifth and tenth day during confinement. If,
at the expiration of the ten day confinement, the veterinarian shall submit a
certificate stating that the dog or animal does not have rabies, the dog or
animal may then be released by the Police Department.
   (D)   Any expense incurred in the handling of any dog or other animal under
this section shall be borne by the owner.
§ 9-3-11 REGULATION OF DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   The owner of a dangerous, vicious or ferocious dog which may cause
annoyance or reason-able fear of bodily injury to a person by attacking such
person, shall keep the same confined in a secure enclosure or on a leash
controlled by the owner or keeper of such dog at all times, and shall not
permit such dog to be at large within the village.
   (B)   If any dangerous dog, when it is necessary for the protection of any
person or property, cannot safely be taken up and impounded, such dog may be
slain by any police officer of the village; provided, however, that in all
cases where any dog so slain has bitten any person or caused an abrasion of the
skin of any such person, it shall be the duty of the Police Department slaying
such dog to immediately deliver the carcass and brain of such dog to the State
Department of Public Health.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall supersede any other provisions
contained within the village code; provided, however, that, the provisions
relating to animal pens shall be in addition to any other provisions contained
within the village code.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
       ANIMAL. Any warm or cold blooded non-human mammal, bird or reptile, the
keeping of which is not prohibited by §
9-3-18 of the village code.
      DANGEROUS ANIMAL. Any individual animal which, if a dog, when unmuzzled
and unleashed, or in case of another animal when unrestrained in a vicious or
terrorizing manner, approaches any person in an apparent attitude of attack,
whether or not the animal completes its attack, or on more than one occasion
causes property damage anywhere within the village or within one and one-half
miles of the boundaries of the village other than the owners.
      OWNER. Any person, partnership, corporation, or any other entity owning,
keeping, harboring or having care, custody or possession of an animal whether
temporary or permanent.
      VICIOUS ANIMAL.
         (a)   1.   Any individual animal that when unprovoked inflicts
physical injury on a human being or other animal either on public or private
property;
            2.   Any individual animal with an observable propensity, tendency
or disposition to attack without provocation, to cause injury or to otherwise
endanger the safety of human being or other animals;
            3.   Any individual animal which attacks a human being or other
animal without provocation;
            4.   Any individual animal which has been found to be a “dangerous
animal” on two separate occasions;
            5.   Any individual animal owned or harbored primarily or in part
for the purpose of animal fights;
            6.   Any individual animal which, upon the complaint or complaints
of citizens or upon an observation of an official of the village, based upon
its temperament when put into contact with human beings, or other animals, is
reasonably believed to be an animal with vicious tendencies:
            7.   Any individual animal which has been found to be a vicious
animal in another jurisdiction; and
            8.   A VICIOUS ANIMAL shall be one which exhibits the actions
provided within this section within the village or within one and one-half
miles of the boundaries of the village.
         (b)   Each act specified in divisions (a)1. through (a)7. of this
definition shall itself be sufficient to bring the act within the definition of
VICIOUS ANIMAL, and each such occurrence shall be a separate event upon which
an offense can be based.
         (c)   An animal shall not be found to be a dangerous or VICIOUS ANIMAL
if the behavior of the animal is exhibited only when it is teased, tormented,
abused or assaulted or when a trespass, tort or crime occurs on the premises
where the animals located at the time the action takes place or where the
animal is protecting or defending a human being within the immediate vicinity
from an attack or assault. Nor shall it apply to dogs while utilized by any
police department or any law enforcement official in the performance of police
work.
   (E)   The owner of an animal believed to be a dangerous or VICIOUS ANIMAL
shall be served a written notice by the village that it wishes to classify such
animal as dangerous or VICIOUS ANIMAL, the notice shall contain the
restrictions and requirements to be imposed upon the owner. The owner can
accept the classification of the animal, or within seven days after the receipt
of such notice may request a hearing before an official of the village or at
the election of the Village President, a person selected by the Village
President to serve as a Hearing Officer to determine whether the animal should
be classified as a dangerous or vicious animal. At such hearing, the official
or Hearing Officer shall receive the evidence presented by the village as well
as other evidence as to the reasons why the animal should be declared a
dangerous or vicious animal. At that hearing either party may present any
competent evidence including the testimony of a person experienced in the
handling and temperament of animals. The official or Hearing Officer shall
within ten days after the hearing issue a written decision and order. That
order shall not be further appealed to any other person or body within the
village, but either the corporate authorities of the village or the owner of
the animal may seek whatever judicial review is available of that decision.
   (F)   It shall be a violation of this code, punishable by a fine, for a
person to own an animal within the jurisdiction stated in this code, which
exhibits the characteristics of a dangerous animal. If the official or Hearing
Officer should find that a person is the owner of such an animal, he or she
shall assess the owner of that animal the amount of not less than $100 for a
first offense and $250 for a second offense. Each instance in which an animal
shall exhibit the characteristics of a dangerous animal shall be deemed a
separate offense. A person so assessed shall have the option of paying to the
village the sum assessed or requiring the village to seek a judicial
determination that a violation of this code has occurred. Upon such a judicial
determination that the offense of owning an animal which exhibits the
characteristics of dangerous animal has occurred, the offense shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than $300, nor more than $750, for each
offense proven to have occurred.
   (G)   If the official or Hearing Officer should find that a person is the
owner of a vicious animal, he or she has an incidence to the privilege of
ownership or possession of the vicious animal, (which may be regulated through
the power of the village to license and regulate the ownership or keeping of
animals), may require one or more of the following, which is found to be
reasonable necessary to protect the public safety and welfare:
      (1)   The placement in a prominent location on the property of the owner
of a clearly visible warning sign in specified size indicating that there is a
vicious animal on the premises and if a pen is required, a sign may be required
to be posted on that pen;
      (2)   A requirement that the animal, in order to go beyond the premises
of the owner, must be securely muzzled and restrained by a chain or leash or
its power to attack otherwise restrained and under the physical restraint of a
person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner which will not cause injury to the
animal or interfere with its vision or aspiration but shall prevent it from
biting any human or other animal;
      (3)   Presentation to the village of a photograph, which, at the request
of the village, may be taken by a village photographer, of the animal along
with a requirement that the animal be permanently required to wear a collar or
other means of identification through which it can be determined that the
animal in question has been classified as a vicious animal;
      (4)   The construction of a pen at a fixed location on the property of
the owner which pen may be required to be at least six feet in height forming
or causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and
suitable to confine a vicious animal in conjunction with other measures which
may be taken by the owner such as tethering of a vicious animal. Such pen shall
be securely enclosed and locked and designed with secure sides, and bottom, and
may be required to have a top and to be embedded into the ground and shall be
designed to prevent the animal from escaping. The construction of a pen shall
conform to the requirements of a dog run contained in §
6-12-12 of the village code;
      (5)   A requirement that if the animal is allowed to go out of doors on
the property of the owner that it will always be tied in place with either a
chain or a leash having a tensile strength of at least 300 pounds;
      (6)   The owner of a vicious animal may be allowed to take the vicious
animal out of doors when not within a pen or on a runline if it is necessary
for the owner to obtain veterinary care for the vicious animal or to comply
with the order of a court of competent jurisdiction. In such case, the vicious
animal must be securely muzzled and restrained with a chain or leash having a
tensile strength of at least 300 pounds and not exceeding five feet in length;
and the vicious animal shall during all such times be under the direct control
and supervision of the owner or keeper specifically chosen by the owner;
      (7)   To undertake any other reasonable restrictions and requirements
which will make the ownership or keeping of a vicious animal consistent with
the health and safety of the citizens of the village;
      (8)   The owner of a vicious animal may be required to present to the
village a certificate of insurance indicating that the owner has then in force
a liability or a homeowner’s insurance policy providing that the insurance
company will indemnify or pay on behalf of the owner any damages or personal
injuries caused by the vicious animal. Such insurance policy shall contain such
coverage in an amount of not less than $100,000 and shall be issued by an
insurance company approved by the Village Attorney, who shall consider the
financial capabilities of the company, and shall, thereafter, be kept in full
force; and
      (9)   At intervals of no more often than one year, the official or
Hearing Officer may receive a petition from the owner affected seeking to
modify the conditions imposed.
   (H)   It shall be a violation of this code for a person to own or keep a
vicious animal or, after an animal is found to be a vicious animal, to fail to
take the corrective measures which are ordered as an incident of the power to
license and regulate acts possessed by the village. Upon a judicial
determination that a violation of this code has occurred, the offense shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than $400, nor more than $2,500, for each
offense proven to have occurred.
   (I)   No owner or keeper of a vicious animal shall sell or give away any
vicious animal unless the person receiving the animal is given a written notice
that the animal has been found to be a vicious animal.
   (J)   If an animal is believed to be a vicious animal or is found to be a
vicious animal and is not being kept under the restrictions and requirements
previously imposed, the individual animal in question my be immediately seized
and impounded. If an animal is seized and impounded, and the owner of the
animal can be determined, a post-seizure hearing will be held within ten days
by an official of the village or the Hearing Officer appointed by the Village
President. At that hearing, it shall be determined if the animal seized poses
an imminent threat to human beings or domestic animals or a continuing threat
to property or whether the owner of the animal is unable or unwilling to take
the precautions necessary to prevent the animal from posing the threat or to
follow the restrictions and requirements previously ordered. Within seven days
after the hearing, the village official or Hearing Officer shall render a
written decision. That decision may be appealed to the Village Board and
thereafter in such manner as such manner decisions may be destroyed, require
the animal to be permanently removed from the village, or such other action as
may be deemed adequate to alleviate the imminent threat. If a determination is
made that the animal does not pose an imminent threat, or has not violated the
provisions of previously imposed restrictions and requirements, then the
village shall pay all expenses, including shelter, food, veterinary expenses.
But if the determination is that the actions of the animal do pose an imminent
threat, or that a violation of the previously imposed restriction and
requirements have taken place, then the owner shall pay such expenses. When an
animal is impounded, pursuant to this section, at the owner’s request and
expense, such impoundment may, at the election of the village, be at a
veterinary and/or licensed kennel of the owner’s choosing.
§ 9-3-12 LIMITATION OF ANIMALS.
   No person shall permit more than three dogs, excluding puppies under four
months of age, nor more than four cats or other domestic animals to be or
remain in or about any premises, building or lot within the village under his
or her control at any one time, except in veterinary hospitals, pet shops,
kennels or dog pounds. The payment of a license or licenses on dogs shall not
be construed to allow the keeping of more than the number of dogs as herein
provided.
§ 9-3-13 NUISANCES.
   (A)   It is hereby prohibited and it shall be deemed to be a public nuisance
for any person to cause or permit any animal, listed below, owned or kept by
him or her to do the following:
      (1)   To permit a dog to be at large as provided in this article;
      (2)   To suffer or permit such dog to disturb the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood by barking, making other loud or unusual noises, or by running
through or across cultivated gardens or fields;
      (3)   To defecate or urinate upon any public place, or upon any premises
not owned or controlled by the person owning or keeping the dog or cat;
provided, however, that shall any such defecation be completely and promptly
removed by the owner or keeper of such dog or cat, the terms of this section
shall not be found applicable;
      (4)   To use property under such person’s ownership or control in a
manner to allow dog or cat defecation to accumulate so as to constitute a
nuisance in fact; and/or
      (5)   To bring or cause to be brought into any shop, store or retail
place of business wherein the public is invited to do business with the
management thereof, during such hours as the public is invited, or to bring or
cause to be brought into any public building at any time any dog, unless such
dog is under control and is brought for the purposes of conducting business or
inquiry wherein the physical presence of the dog is required.
   (B)   The provisions of division (A)(5) of this section shall not apply to
blind persons led by guide dogs.
(Ord. 92-05-51, passed 5-12-1992)
§ 9-3-14 CONTROL OF DEFECATION.
   (A)   Device for removing excrement. It shall be unlawful for any person to
cause or permit a dog or cat under his or her ownership or control to be on any
property, public or private, not owned or possessed by such person unless such
person shall have in his or her immediate possession a device for the complete
removal of any excrement which might be deposited by such a dog or cat upon the
aforesaid public or private property.
   (B)   Removal of excrement. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or
controls a dog or cat which deposits excrement upon any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by such person to fail to promptly remove such
excrement to a proper receptacle located upon property owned or possessed by
such person.
   (C)   Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
deemed to be guilty of an offense and shall be punished by a fine of not less
than $20 for the first offense, $30 for the second offense, $60 for the third
offense and $120 for the fourth offense and for each offense thereafter. If a
person shall be found to have violated division (B) of this section by not
promptly removing such excrement, then each day after the day upon which the
person was notified to remove such excrement by a village official shall be
deemed a separate offense and subject to the progressive penalties contained
herein.
(Ord. 92-05-51, passed 5-12-1992)
§ 9-3-15 PROVISIONS NOT APPLICABLE.
   The provisions of this article relating to registration and licensing of
dogs shall not apply to dogs of non-residents remaining temporarily in or
passing through the village; provided that, such dogs are licensed by some
other jurisdiction and provided the owner or keeper of the dog complies with
all other provisions of this article.
§ 9-3-16 HUMANE TREATMENT OF BIRDS AND ANIMALS.
   Owners or keepers of dogs, birds and other animals shall provide same with
sufficient good and wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection
from weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering and with humane
care and treatment. No person shall beat, cruelly ill-treat, torment, overload,
overwork or otherwise abuse or abandon any dog, bird or other animal.
§ 9-3-17 BIRDS.
   No person shall kill or wound, or attempt to kill or wound, any game or
songbird, or take or destroy the eggs or young of any such bird.
§ 9-3-18 PROHIBITIONS; EXCEPTIONS.
   No animal, with the exception of domesticated cats, dogs, small aquatic
animals, small birds and a type of small domesticated animal commonly kept as a
household pet in a small indoor cage, shall be kept within the corporate
limits; provided, however, that, farm animals may be kept, but only on land
zoned as an agricultural and used for such purpose. For purposes of this
section, FARM ANIMALS shall mean and include cattle, hogs, pigs, sheep, goats
or horses, or any chickens, geese, pigeons or other poultry, or any animal
which is principally raised for the sale of a product made by or from the
animal; and KEPT shall mean and include owned, harbored, raised, cared for or
possessed, whether on a temporary or long-term basis.
(Ord. 99-02-14, passed 2-16-1999)
§ 9-3-19 HORSES, RIDING OF.
   It shall be unlawful to ride a horse or other animal within the village on
any public property other than dedicated street pavements within the village.
ARTICLE 4: TREES
Section
   
9-4-1    Purpose and intent
   
9-4-2    Public nuisances prohibited
   
9-4-3    Inspection of public nuisance
   
9-4-4    Abatement
   
9-4-5    Penalty
§ 9-4-1 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to promote the health,
safety and general welfare by providing for the regulation of the maintenance
and removal of trees within the village.
   (B)   Intent. This article is intended to promote:
      (1)   The maintenance and survival of desirable trees within the village;
and
      (2)   The protection of village residents from personal injury and
property damage, and the protection of Carol Stream from property damage,
caused or threatened by the improper maintenance or removal of trees located
within the village.
(Ord. 2014-02-08, passed 2-18-2014)
§ 9-4-2 PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Nuisances declared. The following are hereby declared public nuisances
under this section:
      (1)   Any dead tree;
      (2)   Any tree, whether on public or private property, that harbors
insects or diseases which reasonably may be expected to harm any other tree,
such as Dutch elm disease, oak wilt, emerald ash borer, gypsy moth, Asian
longhorned beetle and any other insect or disease deemed a public nuisance by
the Village Manager or his or her designee;
      (3)   Any tree, or portion thereof, whether on public or private
property, that is substantially dead or in deteriorated or unstable condition
and which presents a hazard to persons or property;
      (4)   Any tree, whether on public or private property, that overhangs and
because of its deteriorated condition may fall onto another’s private property
or onto the public right-of-way and constitutes a danger to the health, safety
or welfare of the public;
      (5)   Any tree, whether on public or private property, that obstructs or
interferes with the free and safe passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
   (B)   Unlawful to maintain public nuisance. It shall be unlawful for the
owner of any lot or parcel of land, or a tenant upon the land, in the village
to permit or maintain on any such lot or parcel of land a public nuisance as
identified in division (A) of this section. It shall be the duty of such owners
or tenants to promptly abate any such public nuisance in accordance with the
provisions of §
9-4-4.
   (C)   Boundary trees. A BOUNDARY TREE is hereby defined as a tree that has
any portion of its trunk column located on a property line between private
property and village property or village right-of-way. A boundary tree
generally is, by operation of law, co-owned by the village and the owner of the
abutting private property. It shall be the duty of the village to promptly
abate any public nuisance pertaining to a boundary tree. The Village Manager,
or his or her duly authorized representative, shall serve or cause to be served
upon the person that is the owner or tenant of the lot or parcel of land on
which any portion of such boundary tree is located, a written notice of the
village's intention to abate such public nuisance in compliance with the
provisions of this article.
(Ord. 2014-02-08, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 2014-08-40, passed 8-18-14)
§ 9-4-3 INSPECTION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   In order to carry out the purposes of this article and to implement the
enforcement thereof, the Village Manager, or his or her duly authorized
representative, is hereby authorized and empowered to request permission from
the owner or tenant of the lot or parcel of land at all reasonable hours to
inspect any tree or deadwood situated thereon. The Village Manager, or his or
her duly authorized representative, is hereby authorized and empowered to seek
from any court of competent jurisdiction an order permitting a search of
private property in the event that the village has a reasonable basis to
believe that a public nuisance exists on the property or that the ordinances of
the village are being otherwise violated. Either with permission or pursuant to
a court order, the Village Manager, or his or her duly authorized
representative, may remove specimens from such tree for the purpose of
laboratory or other analysis, or to determine whether such tree is infested or
is otherwise a nuisance because it is dead or substantially dead, and may serve
as a breeding place for a fatal tree disease. It shall be unlawful for any
person to hinder the Village Manager, or his or her duly authorized
representative, in the performance of any of his or her duties provided for
under the provisions of this article.
(Ord. 2014-02-08, passed 2-18-2014)
§ 9-4-4 ABATEMENT.
   (A)   If a laboratory or other analysis of specimens removed from any tree
by the Village Manager, or his or her duly authorized representative,
determines that such tree is a public nuisance pursuant to this article, or if
the Village Manager determines that any dead or substantially dead tree, or
deadwood, is a public nuisance as provided in this article, the Village Manager
shall serve or cause to be served upon the person that is the owner or tenant
of the lot or parcel of land on which such tree or deadwood is located, a
written notice requiring such owner or tenant to comply with the provisions of
this article.
   (B)   If the person upon whom such notice is served fails, neglects or
refuses to remove and destroy such tree or deadwood, or treat for the purpose
of eradication of a destructive pest within ten calendar days or within any
additional reasonable time as permitted in writing by the Village Manager, or
his or her duly authorized representative, after service of such notice, the
Village Manager, or his or her duly authorized representative, may proceed to
abate the nuisance in accordance with the non-summary abatement provisions of
Chapter 14, Article 3  of the Carol Stream Municipal Code.
   (C)   Whenever, in the opinion of an officer of the village possessing
police powers, the maintenance or continuation of a tree is determined to be a
public nuisance pursuant to this article, and such nuisance creates an imminent
threat of serious injury to persons or serious damage to persons or real
property, such officer shall proceed with an initial summary abatement of the
nuisance in accordance with §
14-3-11  of the Carol Stream Municipal Code.
(Ord. 2014-02-08, passed 2-18-2014)
§ 9-4-5 PENALTY.
   If the person so served and notified does not abate the public nuisance
within the specified reasonable time, the corporate authorities may proceed to
abate the nuisance in any or all manner allowable by law, including, without
limiting the generality thereof, the following:
   (A)   Seeking to impose a monetary penalty as defined by §
1-1-9  of this code by instituting an ordinance enforcement action.
   (B)   Seeking to enjoin the continuation of the nuisance by the filing of a
lawsuit in a court of competent jurisdiction.
ARTICLE 5: FEEDING OF WILD ANIMALS PROHIBITED
Section
   
9-5-1   Purpose
   
9-5-2   Definitions
   
9-5-3   Prohibitions
   
9-5-4   Violation and enforcement
§ 9-5-1 PURPOSE.
   The intent of this article is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of
the community and its wildlife by prohibiting the feeding of wild animals and
waterfowl on public and private property in the village. The feeding waterfowl
and other wild animals increases the potential for damage to public parks and
private property. It also elevates the potential for the spread of disease in
people and companion animals. In addition, it is the intent of this article to
protect the welfare of the waterfowl and wild animals themselves. Wildlife
studies have shown that feeding waterfowl and other wild animals can interrupt
their normal migration patterns, can make them more aggressive in demanding
food, cause nutritional problems, expose them to danger by eliminating their
natural fear of predators, and promote the spread of diseases and disease-
carrying parasites.
(Ord. 2017-06-23, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 9-5-2 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
   BIRD FEEDER. A container, receptacle or apparatus designed for the feeding
of songbirds or other backyard birds.
   FEED. To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material which can be utilized for consumption by wild animals. Feeding does
not include baiting for the legal taking of fish and/or game.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
   WATERFOWL. Wildfowl of the order Anseriformes, especially members of the
family Anatidae which includes any bird that swims, frequents the water, or
lives about rivers, lakes, or other bodies of water, including but not limited
to ducks, geese, swan and gulls.
   WILD ANIMAL. Any animal, which is not normally domesticated in this state,
including but not limited to coyotes, deer, feral cats, foxes, groundhogs,
squirrels, chipmunks, mice, rats, rabbits, opossums, raccoons, skunks, and
waterfowl.
(Ord. 2017-06-23, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 9-5-3 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No person shall purposely or knowingly, feed or in any manner provide
access to food to any wild animal or waterfowl within the corporate limits of
the village, on lands either publicly or privately owned. Feeding does not
include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
   (B)   Feeding of songbirds and other backyard birds, not including
waterfowl, shall be permitted outdoors at such times and in such a manner that:
      (1)   The feeding does not create an unreasonable disturbance with
wildlife;
      (2)   Any feed must be placed within a bird feeder with a maximum volume
of not more than one cubic foot, placed at least four feet above ground.
      (3)   Bird feeders are placed where wildlife other than songbirds and
backyard birds are unable to eat from them and do not become an attractant for
wild animals.
(Ord. 2017-06-23, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 9-5-4 VIOLATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   Any violation of the prohibitions in §
9-5-3 shall be subject to a fine of $25 and for the first violation of §
9-5-3, and not less than $100 or more than $750 for the second and each
subsequent violation. Each ongoing day of the violation(s) shall constitute a
separate offense. In addition to the financial penalties so provided, the
violator shall be subject to an injunctive order to cease the violation and
conduct any required clean-up.
(Ord. 2017-06-23, passed 6-5-2017)
CHAPTER 10: BUSINESS LICENSING AND REGULATION
      Article
         
1.   ADMINISTRATION
         
2.   AMUSEMENTS
         
3.   ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS
         
4.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
         
5.   RAFFLES
         
6.   SCAVENGERS
         
7.   SECONDHAND SALES
         
8.   (RESERVED)
         
9.   TOBACCO PRODUCTS
         
10.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
         
11.   PYROTECHNIC FIREWORKS DISPLAY
         
12.   RESIDENTIAL RENTAL LICENSE
         
13.   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
         
14.   VIDEO GAMING
ARTICLE 1: ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
10-1-1   License required; subjects of licensing authority
   
10-1-2   Registration of businesses required
   
10-1-3   Applications
   
10-1-4   Investigation
   
10-1-5   Approval; disapproval
   
10-1-6   License term; expiration; renewal
   
10-1-7   Licenses not assignable; unlawful use
   
10-1-8   Building and premises; zoning
   
10-1-9   Location
   
10-1-10   Nuisances prohibited
   
10-1-11   Evidence of county health certificate required
   
10-1-12   Penalty; enforcement
   
10-1-13   Suspension, revocation of license or permit
   
10-1-14   Appeal
   
10-1-15   License to be posted; destruction; removal of license
   
10-1-16   Business vehicles
   
10-1-17   Adoption by reference
   
10-1-18   License fees
   
10-1-19   Fee schedule
§ 10-1-1 LICENSE REQUIRED; SUBJECTS OF LICENSING AUTHORITY.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall conduct, engage in, maintain,
operate, carry on or manage any business, occupation, activity or
establishment, either by himself, herself or itself, or through an agent,
employee or partner, for which a license is required by this code or by any
village ordinance, without first having obtained a license for such business,
occupation, activity or establishment.
   (B)   Whenever a license or permit is required for the maintenance,
operation or conduct of any business or establishment, or for doing business or
engaging in any activity or occupation, any person, firm or corporation shall
have violated the requirements of this code, if, by himself, herself or itself,
or through an agent, employee or partner, he, she or it is held forth as being
engaged in the business, activity or occupation, or if he, she or it solicits
patronage therefor, actively or passively, or if he, she or it performs or
attempts to perform any part of such business, activity or occupation in the
village.
§ 10-1-2 REGISTRATION OF BUSINESSES REQUIRED.
   (A)   All businesses operating within the village, for which a business
license is not specifically required by this code, shall register with the
Village Clerk, upon forms provided for that purpose. For the protection of the
health, welfare and safety of the community, registration of businesses is
hereby required in order to assist the village in determining the name of the
owner and/or operator of such business, the address of the person in charge of
conducting such business, the type of business being conducted and whether the
business is in compliance with the Zoning Code and other ordinances of the
village and state statutes.
   (B)   Such information is required by the village for a number of reasons,
including the ability to give notice in the case of emergencies, planning Fire
Department strategies and planning periodic inspections.
   (C)   For the clerical cost of maintaining a list of businesses within the
village, a nominal fee, as required in the fee schedule at §
10-1-19, shall be charged to the applicant at the time of registration.
§ 10-1-3 APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Applications for all licenses, permits and registrations shall be made
to the Village Clerk in writing on a form provided for that purpose, except as
otherwise provided.
   (B)   If the applicant is an individual (sole proprietorship), the
application shall contain his or her name, address and telephone number. If the
applicant is a partnership or other non-corporate business entity, the
application shall contain the name, address and telephone number of the
principal partner or member thereof. If the applicant is a corporation, the
application shall contain the name, address and telephone number of the
principal officer and the registered agent thereof.
   (C)   Each application shall also contain:
      (1)   A designation of the type or kind of license or permit desired;
      (2)   The location or proposed location of the place of business,
occupation or activity;
      (3)   The applicable fee to be paid as provided in §
10-1-19;
      (4)   The number of the certificate of registration required under the
Retailer’s Occupation Tax Act, being 35 ILCS 120/1 et seq., Service Occupation
Tax Act, being 35 ILCS 15/1 et seq. and/or Use Tax Act, being 35 ILCS 105/1 et
seq., if applicable;
      (5)   Such additional information as may be needed for the proper
guidance of village officials in the evaluation of such application, including
proof of any insurance policy or bond required by this code.
(Ord. 2023-07-35, passed 7-17-2023)
§ 10-1-4 INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   Where this code authorizes or necessitates an investigation or
inspection by any department or official of the village before the issuance of
a license, permit or registration, and requires the approval by such department
or official regarding the proper location or condition of the premises in which
the business, occupation or activity for which a license is applied is to be
managed, conducted, operated or carried on, or regarding the condition and
nature of the equipment and methods intended to be used by the applicant in
such business, occupation or activity, then the license application shall be
transmitted to the appropriate official or department with such information
necessary for the required investigation or inspection.
   (B)   The designated official or department shall make all necessary
investigations and inspections, and the results thereof shall be reported in
writing to the Village Manager.
§ 10-1-5 APPROVAL; DISAPPROVAL.
   (A)   After due consideration of the information contained within the
application and related investigative reports, the Village Manager shall
determine whether the application is satisfactory. If satisfactory, the
license, permit or registration shall be signed by the Village President,
attested by the Village Clerk, and then issued to the applicant.
   (B)   If, after due consideration of the information contained within the
application and related investigative and inspection reports, the Village
Manager shall determine that matters concerning the application are
unsatisfactory, he or she shall disapprove the application, indicating the
reasons therefor. Thereupon, the Clerk shall notify the applicant that the
application has not been approved and that no license or permit will be issued.
§ 10-1-6 LICENSE TERM; EXPIRATION; RENEWAL.
   (A)   Each license shall indicate its term. All annual licenses, permits and
registrations shall be operative and the license, permit or registration year
for the village shall commence on January 1 of each year. No license shall be
granted for a period longer than one year. Except where otherwise provided
herein, every license shall expire on December 31 following the date of
issuance.
   (B)   The Clerk shall endeavor to notify each annual licensee of the
expiration of time of the license held by the licensee at least 21 days prior
to such expiration date; provided, however, that a failure to make such
notification or the licensee’s failure to receive it, shall not exclude the
licensee from the obligation to obtain a new license or a renewal.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided herein, each license may be renewed upon
proper application and payment of the required fee. The requirements and
procedures for granting and issuing a license renewal shall be the same as the
requirements and procedures for granting a new license.
§ 10-1-7 LICENSES NOT ASSIGNABLE; UNLAWFUL USE.
   (A)   No license, permit or registration may be assigned, sold, loaned,
transferred, used as collateral or otherwise encumbered. No person, firm or
corporation shall use or display any license certificate, tag, badge or sticker
which has been improperly acquired.
   (B)   No person, firm or corporation shall alter, deface, forge or
counterfeit any license, permit, registration, certificate, plate, tag, badge
or sticker issued by the village.
§ 10-1-8 BUILDING AND PREMISES; ZONING.
   (A)   No license, permit or registration shall be issued for the conduct of
any business, purpose or activity if the premises and building to be used for
the purpose do not fully comply with all applicable ordinances and regulations
of the village or any other governmental body.
   (B)   No license, permit or registration shall be issued for the conduct of
any business or performance of any act which would constitute a violation of
the Zoning Code.
§ 10-1-9 LOCATION.
   (A)   No license, permit or registration for the operation of a business
establishment or activity in the village shall be construed to permit its
operation in more than one location in the village; a separate license, permit
or registration shall be required for each location. For the purpose of this
code, the existence of a single location shall be evidenced by the fact that
all buildings containing the principal or accessory uses shall be connected or
shall be located on the same lot or parcel; shall be operated and managed by
the same person or owner; and shall be an establishment with the same
classification.
   (B)   The location of any licensed or registered business or occupation,
other than the sale of alcoholic liquors, or the location of any permitted act,
may be changed; provided that, the village shall be given sufficient notice of
such intended change in location to determine that the operation for which the
license is required conforms with all applicable ordinances and regulations of
the village at its new location.
§ 10-1-10 NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   No business or establishment, whether or not licensed or registered, shall
be so conducted or operated as to constitute a nuisance in fact; and no
building, vehicle, structure, yard, lot, premises or part thereof, shall be
used, kept, maintained or operated in connection with a business or
establishment so as to occasion any nuisance, or so as to be dangerous to life
or detrimental to health. Any charge of conducting or operating a nuisance may
be made under this chapter or under the provisions of the code prohibiting
nuisances generally.
§ 10-1-11 EVIDENCE OF COUNTY HEALTH CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.
   Prior to the issuance of a business license or registration of a business,
all food related businesses shall provide evidence of the necessary health
certificates issued by the DuPage County Health Department.
§ 10-1-12 PENALTY; ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Unless otherwise expressly provided, any person, firm or corporation
convicted of violating any provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less
than $50, and not more than $750; except that, the third and all subsequent
convictions within any 12-month period shall be deemed to be misdemeanors, and
the person, firm or corporation guilty thereof may be fined not less than $50,
and not more than $750, and imprisoned for a period not exceeding six months.
   (B)   Whenever a person, firm or corporation shall neglect or refuse to
procure any license, permit or registration required by this code, or otherwise
violates the terms of this chapter, the Village President is authorized to
cause appropriate legal action and proceedings to be instituted to enforce
these provisions.
   (C)   The village shall take all necessary and appropriate action to compel
compliance with the regulatory provisions of this chapter. When necessary and
expedient, the Chief of Police may be called upon to assist in such
enforcement, and it shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to perform such
enforcement acts as may be required of him or her. All village employees duly
authorized and acting as license inspectors shall be conservators of the peace
with police powers for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this code and
other village ordinances relating to the licensing of business and occupations
and their regulations.
§ 10-1-13 SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT.
   (A)   When the conduct or operation of any business, occupation, activity or
establishment, whether licensed or unlicensed, shall constitute a nuisance in
fact and a clear and present danger to the public health, safety or general
welfare, or where the holder of any license shall have refused to allow an
inspection of his or her premises or has refused to furnish a sample of his or
her goods for testing, the Village President shall be authorized to summarily
order the cessation of business and the closing of the premises until the
danger no longer exists.
   (B)   Within eight days after a license or permit is suspended, the Village
President shall call a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not
the license or permit should be revoked.
   (C)   Licenses and permits issued by the village, unless otherwise provided,
may be revoked by the Village President after notice and hearing, as provided
in this section, for any of the following causes:
      (1)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for the license or permit;
      (2)   Any violation by the licensee or permittee of provisions of this
code or other ordinances of the village relating to the license or permit, the
subject matter of the license or permit or the premises occupied;
      (3)   Conviction of the licensee or permittee of any felony or of a
misdemeanor where such conviction indicates his or her inability to operate a
safe, honest and legitimate business operation within the village;
      (4)   Failure of the licensee or permittee to pay any fine, penalty or
charge owed to the village;
      (5)   Refusal to permit an inspection or sampling or any interference
with a fully authorized village officer or employee while in the reasonable
performance of his or her duties in making inspections;
      (6)   Any violation of health or safety standards established by the
DuPage County Health Department, or the sale of any unwholesome or polluted
food or drink, or the maintenance of a place of business in an unclean and
unsanitary manner so as to endanger public health or safety; and
      (7)   Such revocation, if ordered, shall not preclude prosecution and
imposition of any other penalties provided for the violation of other
applicable provisions of this code or other ordinances of the village.
   (D)   Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license or permit shall be
given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and
the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail
(return receipt requested) to the licensee or permittee at his or her last
known address, at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing. If the
licensee shall request a continuance in the date of the hearing, the ten-day
suspension shall be in effect until two days after the final hearing date.
   (E)   At the hearing, the Village Prosecutor shall present the complaint and
shall represent the village. The licensee or permittee shall be permitted
counsel and shall have the right to submit evidence and cross-examine
witnesses. The Village President shall preside and shall render the decision.
   (F)   A stenographic or electronically recorded record of the hearing shall
be kept. The village shall pay the cost of attendance fees of the reporter and
the costs of the transcript, if such transcript shall be ordered by the
village. The licensee or permittee shall pay the cost of any transcript ordered
by him or her.
   (G)   Within a reasonable time after the conclusion of the hearing, but not
later than 30 days after such conclusion, the Village President shall file a
written decision in which he or she has summarized the evidence and has stated
the reasons for his or her decision.
§ 10-1-14 APPEAL.
   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Village President in regard to
the denial of an application for a business license, as provided in this code,
or in connection with the revocation of a license or permit, or the closing of
an establishment dangerous to the public, as provided in this code, shall have
the right to appeal to the corporate authorities. Such appeal shall be taken by
filing with the Village Clerk, within ten days after notice of a denial of an
application or a revocation of a license or permit, a written statement under
oath setting forth specifically the grounds for appeal. The corporate
authorities shall thereupon set the time and place for a hearing on such
appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant or licensee
or permittee in the same manner as provided in §
10-1-13. The decision of the corporate authorities on such appeal shall be
final.
§ 10-1-15 LICENSE TO BE POSTED; DESTRUCTION; REMOVAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of any person conducting a permitted business in
the village to keep his or her license, permit or registration displayed at all
times in a prominent place on the premises, machine or vehicle used for such
business.
   (B)   No person shall destroy, obliterate, take, remove or carry away
without the consent of the owner any license, certificate, plate or sticker
which has been issued by the village, except when such license, certificate,
plate or sticker has been discontinued or the licensed premises have been
abandoned. Nothing herein shall prevent the Village President or his or her
duly authorized representative from removing any license, certificate, plate or
sticker from the possession of a former licensee, his or her premises, any
vehicle or any machine when such license has been revoked under the provisions
of this code.
§ 10-1-16 BUSINESS VEHICLES.
   Whenever the number of vehicles used is the basis, in whole or in part, for
a license fee, the village shall furnish the licensee with a tag or sticker for
each vehicle covered by the license, and such tag or sticker shall be posted or
affixed in a conspicuous place on each such vehicle.
§ 10-1-17 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   Whenever within this chapter any regulation or public record is adopted and
incorporated by reference, the manner of their adoption and incorporation shall
have complied with the provisions of the state law allowing such incorporation
and adoption.
§ 10-1-18 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   License, permit and registration fees under the terms of this chapter,
for the businesses, occupations, activities and uses set forth, shall be as
provided in the fee schedule which is a part of this chapter at §
10-1-19. License, permit and registration fees shall be paid annually unless
otherwise provided, and proof of any bond or liability insurance policy
required by this chapter shall be provided with the license fee.
   (B)   No refund shall be given in the event that a license is voluntarily
terminated or revoked.
§ 10-1-19 FEE SCHEDULE.
 License Fee
                                                                                 License Fee
Article 1: Registration of Businesses                                            $25 per year ($12.50 after June
                                                                                 30)
Article 2: Amusements
(A) Automatic amusement devices, including pool tables and game rooms
   (1) Owner of game room                                                     $200 per year
                                                                                 After June 30, ½ of annual fee
In addition to the annual license fee for amusement devices, an annual amusement tax is hereby imposed upon any
amusement device, pool table, jukebox or children’s coin-operated rides, as follows:
   (2) Each amusement device                                                  $55 per year
   (3) Each pool table                                                        $40 per year
   (4) Each jukebox or similar machine or mechanism designed to produce or    $25 per year
reproduce music
   (5) Transfer fee: In the event that the device upon which an amusement tax
was imposed is to be permanently withdrawn from the village, another machine may $5 each
be permanently substituted in its place, upon application and payment of the
transfer fee
(B) Public places of amusement:
   (7) Carnivals and menageries                                               $20 per day
   (8) Temporary places of amusement
      (a) Per day                                                          $20
      (b) Per year                                                         $100
Article 3: Electrical Contractors                                                $25 per year
(if not registered in another municipality)
Article 4: Peddlers and Solicitors
(A) Commercial solicitation
                                                                                 $25/applicant
                                                                                 $25 administrative processing
   (1) Non-refundable application fee                                         charge in addition to the
                                                                                 current cost of a fingerprint
                                                                                 check
   (2) Permit fee
      (a) Per day                                                          $10 per person
      (b) Per week                                                         $30 per person
      (c) Per month                                                        $50 per person
      (d) Per year                                                         $100 per person
(B) Religious or charitable solicitation                                         No fee
(C) Illinois licensed insurance agent/broker                                     No fee
Article 5: Raffles
(A) Class a, per raffle                                                          $10
(B) Class b, per raffle                                                          $20
(C) Class c, per raffle                                                          $50
(D) Class d, per raffle                                                          $100
Article 6: Scavengers                                                            $750 per year
Article 7: Secondhand Dealers                                                    $25 per year
Article 9: Tobacco License                                                       $100 per year
                                                                                 $100 per event, to be paid upon
Article 11: Pyrotechnic Fireworks Display                                        application; a separate permit
                                                                                 shall be required for each
                                                                                 event
Article 13: Massage Establishment License                                        $500/year plus $150 per
                                                                                 criminal background check
Article 14: Video Gaming - Terminal Operator                                     $500 per video gaming terminal
 
(Ord. 98-03-22, passed 3-16-1998; Ord. 2003-12-78, passed 12-1-2003; Ord. 2004-
05-31, passed 5-17-2004; Ord. 2005-01-01, passed 1-3-2005; Ord. 2008-02-05,
passed 2-19-2008; Ord. 2010-03-09, passed 3-15-2010; Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-
7-2018; Ord. 2020-09-29, passed 9-21-2020; Ord. 2023-07-35, passed 7-17-2023;
Ord. 2023-11-49, passed 11-6-2023)
ARTICLE 2: AMUSEMENTS
Section
   
10-2-1   Definitions
   
10-2-2   License required
   
10-2-3   Applications; generally
   
10-2-4   Applications; game rooms
   
10-2-5   Applications; carnivals
   
10-2-6   Investigation fee; carnivals
   
10-2-7   Worker permit required
   
10-2-8   Inspection accessibility
   
10-2-9   Carnival permit revocation
   
10-2-10   Carnival workers living on premises
   10-6-11   Investigation fee; game rooms
   
10-2-12   Regulations; amusements
   
10-2-13   Regulations; game rooms
   
10-2-14   Inspections
   
10-2-15   Bond required for golf ranges
Cross-reference:
   Gross receipt tax for certain exhibitions, see §
5-6-2
   Raffles, see
Ch. 10, Art. 5
§ 10-2-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMUSEMENT.
      (1)   Any amusement park, arcade, golf driving range, golf course,
miniature or otherwise, public skating rink (ice or roller), “go-kart” tracks,
public dance hall, pool or billiards hall, bowling alley or shooting gallery;
      (2)   Any theater, indoor or outdoor, displaying film, television or live
dramatic performances;
      (3)   Any concert, athletic contest or exhibition, public picnic, circus,
carnival, flower, animal or dog show; and
      (4)   Any other location or event where, for the purpose of pleasure,
persons engage in or observe a game, physical activity or performance.
   AMUSEMENT DEVICE. Any machine, game, table or device which is designed,
intended, displayed or kept as an amusement game, which is dependent upon the
skill or dexterity of the player, and may be operated by the public upon the
insertion of coin, slug, token, plate, disc or the use of which is made
available for any valuable consideration; it is operated by the manipulation of
buttons, dials, balls, wheels, trigger devices or electrical impulses, whether
or not registering a score, offering a prize or offering free replays. The term
AMUSEMENT DEVICE shall include, but not be limited to, devices commonly known
as pinball machines, marble machines, video games, electronic games, skill ball
and all games, operations or transactions similar thereto, the outcome of which
is dependent upon the skill or dexterity of the player, under whatever name
they may be indicated.
   AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT MACHINE. Any mechanical amusement machine or device, the
operation of which is governed or controlled by the deposit of a coin or token,
including, without being limited to, any such coin controlled instrument or
device capable of producing any vocal or instrumental sounds, including
jukeboxes, and any coin-operated mechanical or electronic machine or similar
types of machines which are intended for and generally used by children and
referred to as a “children's ride”.
   GAME ROOM. Any business establishment having six or more amusement devices,
whether or not operated as a principal use.
   OPERATOR. Any person or entity which leases or operates a business
establishment which is or has contained within it a game room, or any other
amusement.
   OWNER. Any person or entity who owns a building or a portion of a building
which is utilized for a game room, or which houses an amusement.
   YOUTH LOCK IN. Any event hosted by a game room operator after 11:00 p.m. for
the sole benefit of youths under 21 years of age.
(Ord. 99-04-27, passed 4-19-1999; Ord. 2019-06- 20, passed 6-3-2019; Ord. 2023-
07-35, passed 7-17-2023)
§ 10-2-2 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall own, promote, operate, conduct, control, manage,
produce, present, sponsor or permit, for gain or profit, any amusement without
first having obtained a license as provided herein.
   (B)   No person shall install, keep, maintain or use, or permit the
installation, keeping, maintenance or use upon his or her premises of any
automatic amusement machine or amusement device for which a license has not
been issued.
   (C)   No person shall own or operate a game room without first having
obtained a license to do so, nor shall he or she own or operate a game room
which does not comply with the provisions of this code.
§ 10-2-3 APPLICATIONS; GENERALLY.
   (A)   An application for an amusement license or an automatic amusement
machine license shall be made in conformity with the general requirements of
this code relating to applications for licenses. Such application shall be
signed by the owner or lessee of the property in his or her own proper person
or in his or her name by his or her duly authorized agent, verified by oath or
affidavit.
   (B)   The application shall set forth a description of the property used or
intended for use as a public place of amusement, indicating the seating
capacity and the floor area or ground area of the place, and such other
information as the village may require.
   (C)   Each application and all information required to be furnished in
connection therewith, or a copy thereof, shall be referred to the Chief of
Police and any other appropriate village official. Each official shall certify
to the Village Manager whether or not the applicant is qualified to receive the
license applied for and whether or not the place complies in every respect with
the applicable provisions of this code relating to his or her department.
   (D)   The application shall also contain a statement that the applicant is
aware of an amusement tax and athletic contests tax provided for within this
code, and a statement that the applicant agrees to make payments of such tax as
therein provided.
§ 10-2-4 APPLICATIONS; GAME ROOMS.
   In addition to the requirements set forth above, applications for a license
to conduct a game room shall contain the following information:
   (A)   The name and address of the applicant’s business or, if a proposed
business, the name and address of the proposed game room;
   (B)   If applicable, the date of the filing of the “assumed name” of the
business with the County Clerk;
   (C)   A drawing of the proposed layout of the premises drawn to scale and
showing the location of amusement devices, aisles, counters and other
significant details;
   (D)   In case of co-partnership, the date of the formation of the
partnership; in the case of an Illinois corporation, the date of its
incorporation; or in the case before incorporation, the state where it was
incorporated and the date of its becoming qualified under the Illinois Business
Corporation Act, being 805 ILCS 5/1.05 et seq., to transact business in the
state;
   (E)   If the applicant is an owner, the name and address of the proposed
operator;
   (F)   If the applicant is an operator, the name and address of the proposed
owner;
   (G)   Whether the applicant is an owner or operator of any other game room
within the state and, if so, the name and address of such other operation;
   (H)   If the game room is not to operate as the principal business at the
location, a statement as to the type of business which will be the principal
business at the location in question;
   (I)   Whether the applicant is delinquent in the payment of any retailer’s
occupation tax and, if so, the reasons therefor;
   (J)   Whether the applicant has made an application in another municipality
for a liquor license or a game room license and whether such application has
been denied and if so, the reasons therefor;
   (K)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a gambling offense or
felony and, if so, the particulars thereof; and
   (L)   The applicant’s name, sex, date of birth, Social Security number,
position and percentage of ownership in the business; the name, sex, date of
birth, Social Security number, position and percentage of ownership in the
property if an owner, or in the business if an operator of every sole owner,
partner, corporate officer, director, manager and any person who owns 5% or
more of the shares of the applicant business entity or parent corporations of
the applicant business entity. Where the applicant is a corporation or
partnership, the answers to each question relating to this application shall be
given with regard to any person who owns or controls an interest of more than
5% within the partnership or corporation.
§ 10-2-5 APPLICATIONS; CARNIVALS.
   (A)   An application for an amusement license for a carnival shall be made
in conformity with the general requirements of this code relating to
applications for licenses no less than 90 days in advance of the requested
event. Such application shall be signed by the owner or lessee of the property
in his or her own proper person or in his or her name by his or her duly
authorized agent, verified by oath or affidavit.
   (B)   The application shall set forth a description of the property used or
intended for use as a carnival, indicating ground area of the place, proposed
layout of the premises and such other information as the village may require.
   (C)   The application shall identify by legal name, date of birth, address
and Social Security number of all employees who will work on the premises
during the carnival. All registered employees shall also submit their
fingerprints for the purpose of a criminal history check at the time of
application.
   (D)   Each application and all information required to be furnished in
connection therewith, or a copy thereof, shall be referred to the Chief of
Police and any other appropriate village official. Each village official shall
certify to the Village Manager whether or not the applicant is qualified to
receive the license applied for and whether or not the place complies in every
respect with the applicable provisions of this code relating to his or her
department.
   (E)   The application shall also contain a statement that the applicant is
aware of an amusement tax and athletic contests tax provided for within this
code, and a statement that the applicant agrees to make payments of such tax as
therein provided.
(Ord. 2002-06-35, passed 6-17-2002)
§ 10-2-6 INVESTIGATION FEE; CARNIVALS.
   There shall be filed with each application for a license to operate a
carnival, a non-refundable investigation and permit fee of $500, and $25 per-
employee administrative processing fee, in addition to the cost of a criminal
background and fingerprint check.
(Ord. 2002-06-35, passed 6-17-2002; Ord. 2012-02-03, passed 2-6-2012)
§ 10-2-7 WORKER PERMIT REQUIRED.
   All carnival workers must be qualified and receive a Village of Carol Stream
carnival worker permit and wear the photo identification prominently when
working at the carnival. No carnival employee without a village carnival worker
permit will be permitted to work on the premises. No carnival worker permit may
be issued to any person who:
   (A)   Is a registered child sex offender;
   (B)   Has been convicted of a felony in the past five years;
   (C)   Has been convicted of any other crime involving moral turpitude or
violence; or
   (D)   Is identified as a known gang member in the Illinois State Police
LEADS system.
(Ord. 2002-06-35, passed 6-17-2002)
§ 10-2-8 INSPECTION ACCESSIBILITY.
   Police officers and all other village officials shall have free access to
the grounds and all booths, shows and concessions on such grounds at all times
to ensure that the carnival is in compliance with the provisions of this code.
(Ord. 2002-06-35, passed 6-17-2002)
§ 10-2-9 CARNIVAL PERMIT REVOCATION.
   The Village Manager may revoke a carnival amusement permit or a carnival
worker permit at any time and demand immediate cessation of the carnival based
upon violations of this code, on-premises criminal acts by the carnival
employees or when the carnival presents an endangerment to public safety.
(Ord. 2002-06-35, passed 6-17-2002)
§ 10-2-10 CARNIVAL WORKERS LIVING ON PREMISES.
   No employee, agent or other representative of the carnival may live, sleep
or otherwise reside on the premises of the carnival.
(Ord. 2002-06-35, passed 6-17-2002)
§ 10-2-11 INVESTIGATION FEE; GAME ROOMS.
   There shall be filed with each application for a license to operate a game
room a non-refundable investigation fee of $375. No investigation fee shall be
required for the license of an owner of a game room. The investigation fee
shall not be required for any applicant who then holds a valid liquor license
with the village.
§ 10-2-12 REGULATIONS; AMUSEMENTS.
   (A)   No person conducting or operating a billiard or poolroom shall allow
or permit any screens, curtains, blinds, partitions or other obstructions to be
placed between the front windows and back or rear wall of such room, but an
unobstructed view of the entire interior must be maintained at all times.
   (B)   Unless otherwise permitted by law, it is unlawful for any licensee to
conduct or permit to be conducted any raffle or lottery upon the licensed
premises.
   (C)   No carnival, exhibition, show or other amusement licensed herein shall
offer and give as a prize in any game of skill or chance any object or item
having a retail value of more than $25 or a cash prize in any amount. Rules for
all games must be prominently displayed and only one prize may be offered to
win per game.
   (D)   All public places of amusement, except those holding licenses under
this code for the sale of alcoholic beverages or food, shall cease operations
for all purposes between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. each day, except
as specifically provided else-where in this code.
   (E)   No carnival, exhibition, show or other amusement which takes place in
whole or in part outdoors shall operate earlier than 10:00 a.m. or later than
11:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday, or from 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight on
Friday or Saturday.
   (F)   Except for vehicular parking, no portion of a carnival, exhibition,
show or other amusement which takes place in whole or in part outdoors shall be
located nearer than 200 feet from the nearest lot line of a lot in residential
use.
   (G)   No carnival, exhibition, show or other amusement which takes place in
whole or in part outdoors shall, without written authorization from the
village, place its facilities upon any required paved parking areas within a
shopping center or plaza. Required paved parking spaces shall mean the minimum
number of parking spaces required to be provided for the uses within the
shopping center or plaza.
   (H)   No carnival, exhibition, show or other amusement which is scheduled to
last more than one day shall be granted a license until the Chief of Police
shall approve a parking and security plan submitted by the applicant. The Chief
of Police shall review the plan to make certain that adequate provision has
been made for the safe ingress and egress of vehicles to the site and to and
from parking areas, the marking of parking areas and maneuvering lanes and
lighting for evening events. The plan shall also contain advanced planning for
crowd control, safety of parked vehicles, security patrols and a disaster plan.
The plan shall be tailored to the size of the event and the particular
location.
§ 10-2-13 REGULATIONS; GAME ROOMS.
   In addition to such regulations or conditions as may be contained within a
special use permit for a game room, or such other special conditions as may be
imposed by the Village President at the time that the license is issued, the
following items shall constitute rules and regulations for the operation of any
game room operating within the village. Neither the owner nor operator of a
game room shall cause or permit the operation of a game room to take place
contrary to these regulations.
   (A)   A manager over 25 years of age shall be present in the game room
during all of its hours of operation.
   (B)   If the game room is not an incidental use to a business which
possesses a liquor license, no alcoholic beverages shall be sold or consumed in
the game room.
   (C)   No cigarettes or other smoking product shall be sold in the area
devoted to the game room.
   (D)   Signs shall be posted in the game room denoting any curfew law then in
force within the village.
   (E)   The manager or other security personnel shall periodically inspect the
area outside of the entrance and, where applicable, parking lot adjacent to the
premises to assure that persons are not allowed to congregate in such areas
where the congregation of such persons takes place under conditions which cause
disturbance to patrons of other business establishments, nearby residents or
property owners. The owner or operator of the game room or his or her agent
will direct such persons to leave the premises and, absent their compliance
with that order, he or she will swear out a complaint for trespass or other
applicable violation of the laws of the state or village with the Police
Department.
   (F)   All game rooms will close not later than 11:00 p.m., except as
follows: where the game room is located in a premises where alcoholic liquors
are sold in, the game room may continue in operation until the closing hour of
that establishment; or where the game room is hosting an all night youth lock
in that has been approved by the Chief of Police, the game room may continue in
operation until the conclusion of the youth lock in.
   (G)   No gambling shall take place within the game room.
   (H)   No cash prizes shall be awarded within the game room.
   (I)   Neither the owner, nor operator, of the game room shall cause or
permit loud noises or disturbances to take place within the game room. Persons
who cause such loud noises or disturbances shall be promptly expelled by the
game room management.
   (J)   Amusement devices within game rooms shall be placed so that the
manager shall have a clear and unobstructed view of all amusement devices. The
placement of such devices may not obstruct entrances or aisles. There shall be
devoted a minimum of 40 square feet for each amusement device. The owner or
applicant shall submit at the time of application a drawing indicating the
proposed location of amusement devices within the game room. Once the game room
license is issued, the location of machines may be changed; provided, however,
that, the new placement of machines must be in compliance with those standards
set forth within this section.
(Ord. 99-04-27, passed 4-19-1999)
§ 10-2-14 INSPECTIONS.
   The Chief of the Police Department or any other village officer designated
shall, to the extent permissible by law, have the authority to inspect any
amusement, automatic amusement machine or device, and the locations thereof.
§ 10-2-15 BOND REQUIRED FOR GOLF RANGES.
   No permit shall be issued to a golf driving range unless the person or
persons making application for the permit shall purchase a public liability
insurance policy covering any personal injury or damage to property suffered as
a result of the operation in the amount of $300,000 for any one occurrence and
$100,000 for injury to any one person or any one person’s property.
ARTICLE 3: ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS
Section
   
10-3-1   “Electrical contractor” defined
   
10-3-2   Registration
Cross-reference:
   Electrical Code, see
Ch. 6, Art. 2
   Electrical Commission, see
Ch. 3, Art. 4
§ 10-3-1 “ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR” DEFINED.
   The term ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR, as used in this article, shall mean any
person engaged in the business of installing or altering, by contract,
electrical equipment for the utilization of electricity supplied for light,
heat or power, not including radio apparatus or equipment for wireless
reception of sounds and signals, conductors and other equipment installed for
or by public utilities, including common carriers which are under the
jurisdiction of the Illinois Commerce Commission, for use in their operation as
public utilities; but the term ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR does not include employees
employed by such contractor to do or supervise such work.
§ 10-3-2 REGISTRATION.
   Electrical contractors registered in the village prior to 12-31-1989 may
renew their electrical contractor’s license each succeeding January 1.
ARTICLE 4: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
10-4-1   Definitions
   
10-4-2   Solicitation permit required
   
10-4-3   Permit issuance; denial
   
10-4-4   Display of permit
   
10-4-5   Permit revocation
   
10-4-6   Permit renewal
   
10-4-7   Permit applications
   
10-4-8   Application and permit fees
   
10-4-9   Village policy on soliciting and trespassing
   
10-4-10   Notice regulating soliciting
   
10-4-11   Duty of solicitors to obey notices or to leave when requested
   
10-4-12   Uninvited solicitors prohibited
   
10-4-13   Time limit on soliciting
   
10-4-14   Prohibited acts
   
10-4-15   Appeal of permit denial or revocation
§ 10-4-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, company,
association or joint stock association, church, religious sect, religious
denomination, society, organization or league, and including any trustee,
receiver, assignee, agent or other similar representative thereof.
   SOLICITING or SOLICITATION.
      (1)   Any one or more of the following activities by a person on streets,
highways, sidewalks and at residences without invitation:
         (a)   The sale of, offer or attempt to sell, or seeking to obtain
orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuff, consulting
services or services of any kind, character or description, for any kind of
consideration whatever;
         (b)   The sale of, offer or attempt to sell, or seeking to obtain
prospective customers for any application or purchase of insurance of any type,
kind or character;
         (c)   The sale of, offer or attempt to sell, or seeking to obtain
subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers or any type kind of
publication; and
         (d)   The request, directly or indirectly, for money, credit,
property, financial assistance or other thing of value on the plea or
representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or other
thing of value will be used for a political, religious or charitable purpose.
      (2)   SOLICITATION shall be deemed completed when made, whether or not
the person making the same receives any contribution or makes any sale referred
to in this section.
(Ord. 92-11-117, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. 2002-06-34, passed 6-17-2002; Ord.
2003-02-07, passed 2-18-2003)
§ 10-4-2 SOLICITATION PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in solicitation without
securing a required permit or to solicit in a manner inconsistent with the
issuance of the permit.
   (B)   Every person desiring to engage in solicitation, as defined in this
article, from persons in residences, on streets, highways or sidewalks located
in the village, except for a merchant conducting a sale on the sidewalk as
permitted under the village’s Zoning Code, is hereby required to make written
application for a solicitation permit as hereinafter provided, and obtain such
permit prior to engaging in solicitation within the village.
   (C)   Application for solicitation permits shall be made upon a form
provided by, and shall be submitted to, the Village Manager, and shall be
accompanied by such other documentation as is required herein.
   (D)   All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in
connection therewith shall be under oath.
   (E)   The Village Manager and the Chief of Police shall cause to be kept in
their offices an accurate record of every application received and acted upon,
together with all other information and data pertaining thereto, and copies of
all solicitation permits issued under the provisions of this article.
Applications for permits shall be numbered in consecutive order, as filed, and
every permit issued and any renewal thereof shall be identified with the
duplicate number of the application upon which it was issued.
   (F)   No solicitation permit shall be issued to any person who has been
convicted of soliciting without a permit within the village or in any other
jurisdiction or of a violation of any of the provisions of this article, nor to
any person whose solicitation permit issued hereunder has previously been
revoked, as herein provided, for a period of two years from the date of such
conviction or revocation.
(Ord. 92-11-117, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. 97-12-85, passed 12-15-1997; Ord.
2003-02-07, passed 2-18-2003)
§ 10-4-3 PERMIT ISSUANCE; DENIAL.
   (A)   Permit issuance. If the applicant has complied with all the provisions
of this article, the solicitation permit shall be issued forthwith.
   (B)   Permit denial.
      (1)   The Village Manager, within ten business days of filing of the
application, after consideration, investigation and review of the application
and all information obtained relative thereto, shall deny the application if
the applicant is not entitled to a permit, pursuant to the provisions of this
article, or if the application does not contain all of the information and
documentation as required herein.
      (2)   Endorsement shall be made by the Village Manager on the application
of the reason for the denial of the application.
      (3)   If the application is denied, the license fee shall be deemed to
have covered the cost of investigation and shall not be returned.
(Ord. 92-11-117, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. 2003-02-07, passed 2-18-2003)
§ 10-4-4 DISPLAY OF PERMIT.
   (A)   A solicitation permit shall be a photo I.D. card, approximately three
inches by four inches, containing the name of the soliciting organization or
company, the product, if any, being offered for sale, the name of the
solicitor, the date solicitation shall occur in the village, and the effective
dates of the permit, in easily readable form.
   (B)   All permits shall bear the name of the village and the signature of
the Village Manager or Assistant Village Manager designated to examine
applications for and issue such permits.
   (C)   Each person engaged in solicitation shall prominently display the
solicitation permit issued hereunder on his or her person while so soliciting
within the village.
(Ord. 92-11-117, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. 2003-02-07, passed 2-18-2003; Ord.
2003-12-78, passed 12-1-2003)
§ 10-4-5 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   (A)   (1)   Any solicitation permit issued hereunder shall be revoked by the
Village Manager, if the holder of the permit or anyone soliciting under the
permit is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article, or
has made a false material statement in the application, or otherwise becomes
disqualified for the issuance of a solicitation permit under the terms of this
article.
      (2)   Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be
given by the Village Manager to the holder of the permit in person, or by
United States mail, return receipt requested, addressed to his or her residence
set forth in the application.
   (B)   The permit shall become null and void upon the first to occur of the
following:
      (1)   Actual notice of revocation to the individual or organization; and
      (2)   Return of the return receipt of the mailed notice to the individual
or organization, whether or not delivered to the permit holder personally.
(Ord. 92-11-117, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. 2003-02-07, passed 2-18-2003)
§ 10-4-6 PERMIT RENEWAL.
   (A)   Upon expiration of a solicitation permit, the holder shall be entitled
to renew the permit; provided that, the application for renewal continues to
satisfy all conditions and requirements necessary to obtain an original permit,
and provided any changes in the information originally submitted in the initial
application, if any, are made.
   (B)   The applicant for a renewal of a solicitation permit shall also pay
the fee required for a permit.
(Ord. 92-11-117, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. 2003-02-07, passed 2-18-2003)
§ 10-4-7 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Solicitation permits. An application for a commercial solicitation
permit shall contain the following information regarding the applicant:
      (1)   The name and address of the organization making the application and
the name under which it intends to solicit;
      (2)   The name and address of the person in charge of solicitation in the
village;
      (3)   The names and addresses of all the persons who will solicit in the
village;
      (4)   Such additional information which the Village Manager may require;
      (5)   The dates such solicitation shall be conducted; provided that, the
maximum time period for which the permit shall be issued shall not exceed 30
days, and provided that permit renewals shall not exceed 30 days;
      (6)   Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of
the soliciting in which the applicant will engage;
      (7)   For charitable solicitation permits, a written statement of recent
date by the Attorney General of Illinois that the organization is in compliance
with the provisions of An Act to Regulate Solicitation and Collection of Funds
for Charitable Purposes, 225 ILCS 460/1, and such statute as it may hereafter
be amended;
      (8)   A written statement from the Internal Revenue Service that the
organization is a tax exempt organization under § 501(c)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code of the United States, and the organization’s federal Employer
Identification Number;
      (9)   Illinois Retail Sales Tax Identification Number, if applicable;
      (10)   When solicitation will be conducted by an itinerant vendor
utilizing a motorized vehicle, a valid and current DuPage County Health
Department permit is required to be submitted along with a certificate of
insurance issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in this state
shall be provided, insuring the solicitors and their organization for liability
for damages for personal injury and property damage causally related to an act
of ordinary negligence of the soliciting agent. The certificate must state that
is shall not be canceled during the period of solicitation, and will provide at
least the following coverage:
 
Personal injury $500,000 per person
                $1,000,000 per occurrence
Property damage $100,000
 
      (11)   Information as to whether a solicitation permit has been
previously issued to the applicant, and if so, whether the permit was ever
revoked;
      (12)   Information as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of
a violation of any of the provisions of this article or any similar law in any
jurisdiction; and
      (13)   All prospective solicitors/peddlers whose products is insurance or
insurance-related services must produce a current valid insurance license
issued by the Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation’s
Insurance Division. Failure to provide a current and valid Illinois insurance
license will be cause for permit denial.
   (B)   Scope. Nothing in the foregoing sections shall be construed to give
permission to any solicitor to enter into traffic intersections for the purpose
of soliciting in contravention of any state law or local ordinance prohibiting
such intersection solicitation.
(Ord. 92-11-117, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. 97-12-85, passed 12-15-1997; Ord.
2003-02-07, passed 2-18-2003; Ord. 2008-02-05, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 10-4-8 APPLICATION AND PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   Original permit.
      (1)   The fees to be charged for a solicitation permit shall be as
follows:
 
                                   Whose fee includes a $25 administrative
(a) Non-refundable application fee processing charge in addition to the current
                                   cost of a fingerprint check
(b) Permit fee
   1. Per day                   $10 per person
   2. Per week                  $30 per person
   3. Per month                 $50 per person
   4. Per year                  $150 per person
 
      (2)   A permit shall be required for each vehicle used for solicitation.
   (B)   Replacement card. The fee to be charged for the issuance of a
replacement card shall be $5.
   (C)   Religious, charitable or Illinois licensed insurance agent/broker
application and permit fee: exempt.
(Ord. 92-11-117, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. 2003-02-07, passed 2-18-2003; Ord.
2003-12-78, passed 12-1-2003; Ord. 2004-05-31, passed 5-17-2004; Ord. 2008-02-
05, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 10-4-9 VILLAGE POLICY ON SOLICITING AND TRESPASSING.
   It shall be the policy of the governing body of this village that the
occupant or occupants of any residence located within the village shall make a
determination of whether solicitors or any person shall be or shall not be
invited to their respective residences.
(Ord. 92-11-117, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. 2003-02-07, passed 2-18-2003)
§ 10-4-10 NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING.
   (A)   When any solicitation is conducted by an organized group, the group
shall appoint a group representative who shall provide the Police Department,
before 10:00 a.m. on the day of the solicitation, a list of names of the
solicitors and the geographic area of the village in which the solicitation
will be conducted.
   (B)   Any person may give notice of the determination of the refusal of
invitation to solicitors to any residence by displaying a card upon or near the
main entrance door to the residence containing such language as “No
Solicitors”, “No Solicitors Invited” or such other language as would indicate
that solicitors are not to enter or engage in solicitation on the premises.
   (C)   Such card so exhibited shall constitute notice to any solicitor of the
determination by the occupant of the residence of the information contained
thereon.
(Ord. 92-11-117, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. 2003-02-07, passed 2-18-2003)
§ 10-4-11 DUTY OF SOLICITORS TO OBEY NOTICES OR TO LEAVE WHEN REQUESTED.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any
premises in the village upon which a residence is located to first examine the
notice provided by herein, if any is attached, and be governed by the statement
contained thereon.
      (2)   If the notice states “No Solicitors” or “No Solicitors Invited” or
other language as would indicate that solicitors are not to enter or engage in
solicitation on the premises, the solicitor shall immediately and peacefully
depart from the premises.
   (B)   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether or not
invited, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant.
(Ord. 92-11-117, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. 2003-02-07, passed 2-18-2003)
§ 10-4-12 UNINVITED SOLICITORS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance and a trespass for any
person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door,
create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the
occupant of such residence for the purpose of securing an audience with the
occupant thereof and engage in solicitation as defined in this article, when
notice is exhibited at the residence in accordance with the provisions of §
10-4-10(B).
(Ord. 92-11-117, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. 2003-02-07, passed 2-18-2003)
§ 10-4-13 TIME LIMIT ON SOLICITING.
   It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to go
about any residence and ring the doorbell, or rap or knock upon any door, or
create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the
occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the
occupant thereof and engage in solicitation, as defined in this article, at any
time on a Sunday or on a state or national holiday; or before the hour of 10:00
a.m., or after the hour of 9:00 p.m.
(Ord. 92-11-117, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. 2003-02-07, passed 2-18-2003; Ord.
2005-04-20, passed 4-18-2005)
§ 10-4-14 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to file an application for permit
which contains false, misleading or untrue information.
   (B)   Nothing contained in this article shall release or relieve any person
from complying with any additional license requirement established by the
village.
(Ord. 92-11-117, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. 2003-02-07, passed 2-18-2003; Ord.
2004-08-44, passed 8-16-2004)
§ 10-4-15 APPEAL OF PERMIT DENIAL OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   (1)   The Village President shall hear appeals on the denial of an
application for a solicitation permit or revocation of a permit by the Village
Manager.
      (2)   A written appeal must be filed in the Village Manager’s office
within 21 days after the date of denial of the application or revocation of the
permit by the Village Manager, and shall contain a specific request for or
waiver of a hearing before the Village President.
   (B)   Where a hearing is waived, the appealing party shall submit what
documentation it desires to have the Village President consider with the
written appeal, and the Village President shall render a decision within 14
days of the filing of the written appeal.
   (C)   (1)   If a hearing is requested, the Village President shall schedule
a hearing to be held within 30 days of receipt of the written appeal.
      (2)   The appealing party shall have the right to file additional
documents, amend the written appeal and to appear at such hearing in person, or
by attorney, or otherwise to examine and cross-examine witnesses.
   (D)   The Village President shall not be bound by the rules of evidence
prevailing in the courts of law, but shall, in ascertaining the conditions and
practices involved in the decision appealed, take into account all reliable,
probative and substantial evidence produced at the hearing relating to the
denial of the application or revocation of the permit.
   (E)   The appealing party may supply, at its own cost, a court reporter.
   (F)   The written decision of the Village President shall be made available
to the appealing party not later than ten days after the hearing on the appeal
is concluded.
(Ord. 92-11-117, passed 11-10-1992; Ord. 2003-02-07, passed 2-18-2003)
ARTICLE 5: RAFFLES
Section
   
10-5-1   Definitions
   
10-5-2   License required
   
10-5-3   Authority for issuance
   
10-5-4   Licenses
   
10-5-5   Application for license
   
10-5-6   License fee
   
10-5-7   Restrictions on licenses
   
10-5-8   Conduct of raffles
   
10-5-9   Manager; bond
   
10-5-10   Raffle tickets
   
10-5-11   Prizes
   
10-5-12   Records
   
10-5-13   Regulations
   
10-5-14   Auxiliary or affiliates
   
10-5-15   Construction
§ 10-5-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHARITABLE. An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit
an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those eligible for
benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.
   EDUCATIONAL. An organization or institution organized and operated to
provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods common
to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope
and intensity with the course of study presented in tax-supported schools.
   FRATERNAL. An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary
interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and to provide
assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of
government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for by the
government.
   LABOR. An organization composed of workers organized with the objective to
better of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and the development
of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective operations.
   NON-PROFIT. An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not-
for-profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of the
operation.
   RAFFLE. A form of lottery, as defined in the Criminal Code of the Illinois
Compiled Statutes, conducted by an organization licensed under this article in
which:
      (1)   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance,
represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by
some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning
chance; and
      (2)   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some
other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part
of persons conducting or connected with the lottery; except that, the winning
chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting
contest.
   RELIGIOUS. Any church, congregation, society or organization founded for the
purpose of religious worship.
   VETERANS. An organization or association, comprised of members of which
substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows or
widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of
its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to
confer a public benefit.
§ 10-5-2 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person, firm or corporation shall conduct a raffle without first having
obtained a license pursuant to this article.
§ 10-5-3 AUTHORITY FOR ISSUANCE.
   The Village Manager shall have the authority to issue licenses for raffles
subject to the limitations set forth in this article.
(Ord. 2025-05-16, passed 5-5-2025)
§ 10-5-4 LICENSES.
   Licenses for raffles shall be issued only to religious, charitable, labor,
fraternal, educational or veterans' organizations which operate without profit
to their members and which have been in existence continuously for a period of
five years immediately before making application for a license, and have had
during that entire five-year period a bona fide membership engaged in carrying
out their objectives. A license issued by the village shall authorize the sale
of raffle chances only within the borders of the village. The Village Manager
shall act on a license application within 30 days from the date of a properly
filed application.
(Ord. 2025-05-16, passed 5-5-2025)
§ 10-5-5 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Application for a license shall be made in writing, no fewer than 30
days before the intended sale of raffle chances, on forms provided by the
Village Manager's office.
   (B)   Each license and application for license shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   The area within the village in which the raffle chances will be
sold and issued;
      (3)   The time period during which raffle chances will be sold or issued;
      (4)   The date, time, manner and locations of determining the winning
chances;
      (5)   The total value of all cash or non-cash prizes to be awarded;
      (6)   A sworn statement attesting to the non-profit character of the
applicant, signed by its presiding officer and secretary;
      (7)   A copy of the applicant's articles of incorporation and/or charter;
      (8)   A sworn statement attesting that no person who may participate in
the management or operation of the raffle has been convicted of a felony within
the past five years; and
      (9)   Such other information as the Village Manager may require.
   (C)   Each license issued under this article shall be valid for one raffle,
except as noted under § 10-5-6 herein.
(Ord. 2000-04-27, passed 4-3-2000; Ord. 2025- 05-16, passed 5-5-2025)
§ 10-5-6 LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   The fee for each single event license shall be as set forth in the
following schedule.
      (1)   Class A. Where the aggregate value of all prizes awarded in any
raffle does not exceed $6,000, there shall be no license fee.
      (2)   Class B. Where the aggregate value of all prizes awarded in any
raffle is greater than $6,000 but does not exceed $50,000, the license fee
shall be $50.
      (3)   Class C. Where the aggregate value of all prizes awarded in any
raffle is greater than $50,000, the license fee shall be $100.
   (B)   The fee for a raffle license may be waived by the Village Manager for
a bona fide religious, charitable, governmental or veterans' organization
provided that all proceeds of the raffle shall benefit the residents of the
Village of Carol Stream and that the organization submits all appropriate
documentation as required in this article. A maximum of three licenses per non-
profit organization per year shall be eligible for the fee waiver.
(Ord. 92-06-65, passed 6-9-1992; Ord. 2000-04-27, passed 4-3-2000; Ord. 2009-
06-31, passed 6-15-2009; Ord. 2025-05-16, passed 5-5- 2025)
§ 10-5-7 RESTRICTIONS ON LICENSEES.
   No raffle license shall be issued to:
   (A)   Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
   (B)   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter;
   (C)   Any person who is not of good moral character;
   (D)   Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in divisions (A),
(B) or (C) of this section has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or
in which such person is active or employed;
   (E)   Any organization in which a person defined in divisions (A), (B) or
(C) of this section is an officer, director or employee, whether compensated or
not; and
   (F)   Any organization in which a person defined in divisions (A), (B) or
(C) of this section is to participate in the management or operation of a
raffle as defined in this article.
§ 10-5-8 CONDUCT OF RAFFLES.
   The conducting of raffles in the village is subject to the following.
   (A)   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to
the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that game.
   (B)   No person, except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization,
may participate in the management or operation of the raffle.
   (C)   No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in
the management or operation of the raffle.
   (D)   The maximum fee which may be charged for each raffle chance sold or
issued shall not exceed $100. All such fees shall be paid in currency or by
check.
   (E)   A licensee may rent a premises in which to determine the winning
chance or chances in a raffle only from an organization which is also licensed
under this article.
   (F)   Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified on
the license and winning chances may be determined only at those locations
specified on the license.
   (G)   No person under the age of 18 years may participate in the conducting
of raffles or chances. A person under the age of 18 years may be within the
area where winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by his or
her parent or guardian.
§ 10-5-9 MANAGER; BOND.
   (A)   All operation of and the conduct of raffles shall be under the
supervision of a single raffle manager designated by the organization. The
manager shall give a fidelity bond in the sum of $5,000 or of the aggregate
value of the prizes to be awarded, whichever is higher, in favor of the
organization conditioned upon his or her honesty in the performance of his or
her duties. Terms of the bond shall provide that notice shall be given in
writing to the village not less than 30 days prior to its cancellation.
   (B)   The village may waive the bond requirement for a manager of an
organization applying for an annual raffle license, if the organization, by the
unanimous vote of its members present requests such a waiver in writing at the
time of the license application.
(Ord. 2000-04-27, passed 4-3-2000)
§ 10-5-10 RAFFLE TICKETS.
   (A)   Each raffle ticket, chance or other raffle token shall state, on its
face, the name and address of the licensee, the date or dates of the drawings,
and the prize or prizes to be awarded; provided, however, that this requirement
shall not apply to any raffle in which prizes in the aggregate value of under
$50 are awarded, or to any raffle in which raffle chances are sold only on the
date of the drawing during the event at which the drawing is to be conducted.
No such ticket, chance or token shall be sold or issued more than 90 days
before the determination of the winning chance or chances.
   (B)   If any raffle for which a license is issued under this article is
canceled, or if any such raffle is not conducted on the date contained in the
application for license, the licensee shall refund all money paid for any
raffle chances issued or sold to the persons to whom such raffle chances were
issued or sold within 45 days after the date on which the raffle was to be
conducted or within 45 days after cancellation of the raffle, whichever is
sooner.
§ 10-5-11 PRIZES.
   The maximum cash prize awarded in any raffle shall be $100,000; the maximum
retail value of non-cash prizes awarded in any raffle shall be $100,000. The
aggregate value of all prizes awarded in any raffle shall not exceed $200,000.
§ 10-5-12 RECORDS.
   (A)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep
records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single
gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions
from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented
with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the
purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the recipient.
The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, amount and date
of payment.
   (B)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall, for each and
every raffle, keep records of the name and address of each person to whom a
raffle chance has been sold or issued, and the number of raffle chances sold or
issued to such person.
   (C)   Gross receipts from the operation of raffle programs shall be
segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross
receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same non-profit organization
pursuant to license therefor issued by the State Department of Revenue, and
placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have separate records of
its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses and net
proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same person who
accounts for other revenues of the organization.
   (D)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report monthly or
at least semi-annually in the case of an annual raffle license holder
permitting multiple raffle events to its membership, and to the village, its
gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from raffles, and the distribution of
net proceeds itemized as required in this section.
   (E)   Records required by this section shall be preserved for three years,
and organizations shall make available their records relating to operation of
raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places.
(Ord. 2000-04-27, passed 4-3-2000)
§ 10-5-13 REGULATIONS.
   The corporate authorities of the village, or its designated agent, may
publish rules and regulations consistent with this article or state law
governing the conduct of raffles licensed hereunder.
§ 10-5-14 AUXILIARY OR AFFILIATES.
   Whenever used in this article, the word ORGANIZATION shall include an
auxiliary or affiliate of a licensee.
§ 10-5-15 CONSTRUCTION.
   Nothing in this article shall be construed to authorize the conducting or
operating of any gambling scheme, enterprise, activity or device other than a
raffle provided for herein.
ARTICLE 6: SCAVENGERS
Section
   
10-6-1   Definitions
   
10-6-2   License required; application; number of licenses limited; terms and
conditions
   
10-6-3   Duty of scavengers
   
10-6-4   Equipment, prohibited use
   
10-6-5   Disposal, storage of refuse restricted
   
10-6-6   Enforcement
   
10-6-7   Bond required
§ 10-6-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OFFAL SCAVENGER. Any person engaged in the business of collecting, gathering
or transporting butcher’s offal, calfskins, hotel or restaurant bones, grease,
glue, stock or kindred refuse, by wagon, cart or otherwise, or to drive any
wagon or vehicle for such purpose through the public ways of the village.
   PRIVATE SCAVENGER. Any person engaged in the removal and disposal of wastes
resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food;
wastes from the handling, storage and sale of produce, animals and fish or
poultry; non-combustible refuse, including, but not limited to, metals, tin
cans, metal furniture, dirt, rock and pieces of concrete, glass, crockery,
other mineral waste; street rubbish, including, but not limited to, street
sweepings, dirt, leaves, catch basin dirt, content of litter receptacles,
manure, ashes and cinders; combustible refuse, including, but not limited to,
paper, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, tree branches, yard trimmings,
wood furniture and bedding.
      (1)   COMMERCIAL OFFICE, INDUSTRIAL AND INSTITUTIONAL SCAVENGER. A
private scavenger who provides solid waste collection to commercial, office,
industrial and institutional properties within the village.
      (2)   MULTI-FAMILY SCAVENGER. A private scavenger who provides solid
waste collection to properties within the village with more than one
residential living unit which does not receive curbside collection and are part
of a larger complex which are serviced by a centralized dumpster/refuse
collection area.
   SEWER AND CATCH BASIN CLEANER. Any person engaged in the business of
cleaning, collecting, or transporting the contents of catch basins or sewers by
vehicle or otherwise, or in any way engage in the business of cleaning catch
basins and sewers; provided that, licensed plumbers or licensed sewer builders
who may clean catch basins or sewers as an incident to the repair of such catch
basins or sewers shall not be included in such definition.
(Ord. 2000-02-10, passed 2-7-2000)
§ 10-6-2 LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION; NUMBER OF LICENSES LIMITED; TERMS AND
CONDITIONS.
   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of private scavenger, offal
scavenger or sewer and catch basin cleaner without first obtaining a license to
do so as provided in this code.
   (B)   Application for such license shall be made in conformity with the
requirements of this code relating to applications for licenses, and shall set
forth the nature of the business to be carried on.
   (C)   There shall be issued in the village not more than 15 regular
licenses. Such regular licenses shall allow the license holder to solicit for
any scavenger service within the village with the exception that the corporate
authorities may enter into a contract with a single regularly licensed
scavenger for the collection of refuse from single-family residences within the
village.
   (D)   The granting of a license to engage in the business of scavenger or
the collection or disposal of garbage, refuse and ashes shall not preclude the
corporate authorities from entering into a separate contract or contracts for
the collection within the village of refuse and/or recyclable materials
including but not limited to newspapers, glass and metals.
(Ord. 90-11-99, passed 11-27-1990; Ord. 91-07-51, passed 7-23-1991; Ord. 92-01-
10, passed 1-28-1992; Ord. 92-07-80, passed 7-14-1992)
§ 10-6-3 DUTY OF SCAVENGERS.
   (A)   General duties. It shall be the duty of every contractor, scavenger
and person, his or her agents and employees, who has contracted or undertaken
to remove any diseased or dead animal, offal, rubbish, garbage, dirt, street
sweepings or other filthy, offensive or noxious substance, or is engaged in any
such removal or in the loading or unloading of any such substance, to do the
same with dispatch and in every particular in a manner as cleanly and free from
offense and with as little danger and prejudice to life and health as possible.
   (B)   Private scavenger duties and requirements.
      (1)   The term of a private scavenger license is for an entire calendar
year beginning January 1 and expiring on December 31 of that same year.
      (2)   A company issued a private scavenger license shall submit and
operate a recycling program which includes the following elements:
         (a)   Proper site and design criteria for collection areas;
         (b)   Collection processes;
         (c)   Container specifications;
         (d)   Data collection and reporting method; and
         (e)   Promotional and educational program materials.
      (3)   Recycling collection area shall be conveniently located, screened
from view and maintained in a clean, sanitary and litter-free manner within
both common areas and in or near the building.
      (4)   (a)   A private scavenger license holder shall submit a quarterly
report to the village that contains the following program data:
            1.   The weight of recyclables, refuse and yard waste collected
from each property; and
            2.   The summary of multi-family recycling services that includes,
but is not limited to, frequency of collection, method of collection and the
name and location of the processing facility for recyclable materials.
         (b)   Reports shall be due no later than 15 days after the close of
the quarter (first quarter - April 15; second quarter - July 15; third quarter
October 15; and fourth quarter - January 15).
      (5)   All private scavenger license holders shall provide to the village
an annual report listing the village customer accounts serviced by the licensee
which shall include:
         (a)   Name and address of the property owner or property management
company;
         (b)   Name and address of the current village solid waste collection
accounts; and
         (c)   The customer list is to be submitted with the formal scavenger
license application.
      (6)   License holders shall provide the following services to all village
properties serviced by the licensee:
         (a)   Collection of newspapers, corrugated cardboard, paperboard,
magazines, catalogues and phone books, mixed paper, high-grade paper, glass,
aluminum, tin, steel and bi-metal empty aerosol cans, polyethylene
terephthalate (PET) #1, plastic bottles and containers, high-density
polyethylene (HDPE) #2 plastic bottles and containers and six and 12-pack
beverage rings; and
         (b)   At least semi-annually, the scavenger licensee shall distribute
promotional and educational materials to property accounts serviced by the
licensee.
(Ord. 2000-02-10, passed 2-7-2000)
§ 10-6-4 EQUIPMENT, PROHIBITED USE.
   (A)   Any vehicle used by such scavenger in his or her business shall be
water-tight and equipped with airtight covers for such portions as are used for
the transportation of refuse. It shall be unlawful for any such vehicle to be
driven over or through any street in the village during or on a Sunday.
   (B)   Regulated collection hours. Commercial scavengers licensed by the
village may only collect, remove or dispose of refuse anywhere in the village
from Monday through Friday between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
Commercial scavenger service may be extended to Saturdays between 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m. during those weeks which contain a nationally observed holiday.
(Ord. 2016-07-32, passed 7-18-2016)
§ 10-6-5 DISPOSAL, STORAGE OF REFUSE RESTRICTED.
   It shall be unlawful for any scavenger to dispose of or to store any refuse
in any place within the corporate limits or within one mile thereof, excepting
with the permission of the corporate authorities.
§ 10-6-6 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Police Department shall enforce the provisions of this article and shall
issue such reasonable orders in connection with the carrying on of the business
of a licensed scavenger as it deems necessary to protect the health of the
public. It shall be the duty of such licensed scavengers to comply with such
orders and to perform the work required of them in such a way that no nuisance
will be created thereby.
§ 10-6-7 BOND REQUIRED.
   All persons, firms or corporations licensed as scavengers by the village
shall give bond to the village in the penal sum of $10,000 with surety to be
approved by the Village President, conditioned to keep and save harmless the
village from any and all damage that may result to pavements, sidewalks or
other public property of the village resulting from the use of its streets or
other public property in connection with such business, and further, to save
and keep harmless the village from damages to persons or property arising from
suits or claims resulting from obstructions or materials deposited or dropped
upon the streets or other public places in the village by such scavenger.
ARTICLE 7: SECONDHAND SALES
Section
   
10-7-1   License required; exceptions
   
10-7-2   Application; investigation
   
10-7-3   Records to be kept by licensee; inspection
   
10-7-4   Purchase from minors prohibited; exception
§ 10-7-1 LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   No person shall engage in the business of a secondhand dealer without first
obtaining a license therefor for each separate place, premises or location
where such business is to be carried on; provided, however, that, the words
SECONDHAND DEALER as used in this section shall not include itinerant dealers
in secondhand clothes, secondhand bottle dealers or exchangers, pawnbrokers or
junk dealers, or sales or exchanges of used articles and materials conducted by
charitable or religious organizations. The business of a salvage dealer or
salvage store shall be included in the business of SECONDHAND DEALER and shall
obtain a license under the provisions of this article.
(Ord. 2009-08-36A, passed 8-3-2009)
§ 10-7-2 APPLICATION; INVESTIGATION.
   An application for license as a secondhand dealer shall be made in
conformance with the general requirements of this code relating to applications
for licenses. When an application for such license is made, the Chief of Police
shall cause an investigation to be made to ascertain whether the applicant has
complied with the state laws and the provisions of this article applicable to
such business, and whether the applicant has been convicted of any crime in the
past five years. Any person convicted in the past five years of a felony or any
other crime, including in its essential elements the possession of stolen
property, shall not be issued a license under this article.
(Ord. 2009-08-36A, passed 8-3-2009)
§ 10-7-3 RECORDS TO BE KEPT BY LICENSEE; INSPECTION.
   (A)   Every secondhand dealer shall keep a book in which there shall be
made, at the time of the transaction, a record in English of every article
received, purchased, sold or exchanged by him or her, setting forth the
following: the date of the transaction, the name and residence of the purchaser
or seller, and a brief description of the article sold or purchased, including
identification numbers thereon, if any.
   (B)   Such record shall at all reasonable times be open to the inspection of
the Police Department.
(Ord. 2009-08-36A, passed 8-3-2009)
§ 10-7-4 PURCHASE FROM MINORS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   No secondhand dealer shall purchase any secondhand article whatsoever from
any minor without the written consent of the parents or guardians of such
minor.
(Ord. 2009-08-36A, passed 8-3-2009)
ARTICLE 8: (RESERVED)
ARTICLE 9: TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Section
   
10-9-1   Definitions
   
10-9-2   License required
   
10-9-3   Prohibited sales; delivery signs
   
10-9-4   Minimum age to sell tobacco products
   
10-9-5   (Reserved)
   
10-9-6   License limited to place of business
   
10-9-7   Vending machines; locking devices
   
10-9-8   Responsibility for agents and employees
   
10-9-9   Use of premises after revocation
   
10-9-10   Village President’s power to fine
Cross-reference:
   Possession of tobacco by a minor, see §
14-2-31
§ 10-9-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS. A product or devise not consisting of or
containing tobacco that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine,
whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting,
sniffing, or by any other means. ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS does not include
cigarette, tobacco product, electronic cigarette, or any product approved by
the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation
product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is
being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose.
   ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE. Any device that employs a battery or other mechanism
to heat a solution or substance to produce a vapor or aerosol intended for
inhalation; any cartridge or container of a solution or substance intended to
be used with or in the device or to refill the device; or any solution or
substance, whether or not it contains nicotine intended for use in the device.
ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE includes, but is not limited to, any electronic nicotine
delivery system, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe,
electronic hookah, vape pen, or similar product or device, and any components
or parts that can be used to build the product or device. ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE
does not include cigarette, tobacco product, alternative nicotine product, or
any product approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale
as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other
medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved
purpose, or any therapeutic product approved for use under the Illinois
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act.
   NICOTINE. Any form of the chemical nicotine, including any salt or complex,
regardless of whether the chemical is naturally or synthetically derived.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any product containing or made from tobacco that is
intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed,
dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means,
including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing
tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff, snus, and any other smokeless tobacco product
which contains tobacco that is finely cut, ground, powdered, or leaf and
intended to be placed in the oral cavity. TOBACCO PRODUCT includes any
component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product, whether or not sold
separately. TOBACCO PRODUCT does not include electronic cigarette, alternative
nicotine product, or any product approved by the United States Food and Drug
Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence
product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely
for that approved purpose.
   VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electric or electronic, self-service device
which, upon insertion of money, tokens, credit card, debit card, or any other
form of payment, dispenses tobacco products.
(Ord. 92-10-116, passed 10-27-1992; Ord. 2014-01-01, passed 1-6-2014; Ord.
2017-05-22, passed 5-1-2017; Ord. 2019-08-29, passed 8-5-2019)
§ 10-9-2 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail, to give
away, other than a situation where the gift is made by one who does not also
sell tobacco products or alternative nicotine products, deliver or to keep with
the intention of selling at retail, giving away or delivering tobacco products
or alternative nicotine products within the village without having first
obtained a tobacco dealer's license pursuant to this article.
   (B)   Such license shall be in addition to any other license required by
this code.
(Ord. 92-10-116, passed 10-27-1992; Ord. 2014-01-01, passed 1-6-2014)
§ 10-9-3 PROHIBITED SALES; DELIVERY SIGNS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, including any licensee, to sell,
offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco products, electronic cigarettes or
alternative nicotine products, coupons for tobacco products, electronic
cigarettes or alternative nicotine products, or to provide tobacco product
samples or free promotional items relating to tobacco products, electronic
cigarettes or alternative nicotine products, to any person under the age of 21
years.
   (B)   The sale of tobacco products, electronic cigarettes or alternative
nicotine products unpackaged shall be prohibited.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to display tobacco products, electronic
cigarettes or alternative nicotine products together with counter displays of
candy or other similar products.
   (D)   Signs informing the public of the age restriction provided for herein
shall be posted by every licensee and on every display of tobacco products,
electronic cigarette or alternative nicotine products for sale.
      (1)   Each such sign shall be plainly visible and shall state:
         “THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS, ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES AND ALTERNATIVE
NICOTINE PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW.”
      (2)   The text of such signs shall be in red letters on a white
background; such letters to be at least five-eighths inch high. The sign will
be provided by the village free of charge.
(Ord. 92-10-116, passed 10-27-1992; Ord. 93-02-20, passed 2-23-1993; Ord. 2014-
01-01, passed 1-6-2014; Ord. 2019-08-29, passed 8-5-2019)
§ 10-9-4 MINIMUM AGE TO SELL TOBACCO PRODUCTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any licensee and/or any officer, associate member,
representative, agent or employee of such licenses to engage, employ or permit,
suffer or allow any person under 16 years of age to sell tobacco products,
electronic cigarette or alternative nicotine products or to offer tobacco
products, electronic cigarette or alternative nicotine products for sale. This
section shall not apply to a family-owned business which can prove that the
sales clerk is a son or daughter of the owner.
(Ord. 92-10-116, passed 10-27-1992; Ord. 2014-01-01, passed 1-6-2014; Ord.
2019-08-29, passed 8-5-2019)
§ 10-9-5 (RESERVED)
§ 10-9-6 LICENSE LIMITED TO PLACE OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   Any license issued shall specify the specific location to which the
license shall refer and the license shall only be valid at that location.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, a vendor whose services include the
delivery of tobacco, electronic cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, and
other consumer products to customers at the customer’s address pursuant to
telephonically or electronically transmitted orders, may deliver tobacco
products, electronic cigarettes and alternative nicotine products to the
customer’s address, provided however, that the vendor’s delivery employee shall
determine that the person receiving the delivery of the tobacco products,
electronic cigarette or alternative nicotine products is not under the age of
21 years. Such determination shall be made by:
      (1)   Examining from any person that appears to be under 30 years of age
a government issued photographic identification that establishes the person
receiving delivery is at least 21 years of age; or
      (2)   For sales made through the Internet or other remote sales methods,
performing age verification through an independent, third-party age
verification services that compares information available from public records
to the personal information entered by the person during the ordering process,
that establishes the person is 21 years of age or older.
(Ord. 92-10-116, passed 10-27-1992; Ord. 2000-04-31, passed 4-17-2000; Ord.
2014-01-01, passed 1-6-2014; Ord. 2019-08-29, passed 8-5-2019)
§ 10-9-7 VENDING MACHINES; LOCKING DEVICES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or offer for sale, give
away, deliver or to keep with the intention of selling, giving away or
delivering tobacco products, electronic cigarette or alternative nicotine
products by use of a vending machine, unless such vending machine is equipped
with a manual, electric or electronic locking device controlled by the licensee
so as to prevent its operation by persons under the age of 21 years. The
locking device shall be activated and operational at all times.
   (B)   All vending machines with tobacco products, electronic cigarette or
alternative nicotine products shall be placed in an area within which the
licensee’s personnel have a clear view and access and where the machines can
only be activated where the person selling the tobacco products, electronic
cigarette or alternative nicotine products has determined by a visual
inspection and where necessary through identification that the person
purchasing the tobacco products, electronic cigarette or alternative nicotine
products is not under the age of 21.
   (C)   Any premises where access by persons under the age of 21 years is
prohibited and where vending machines are strictly for the use of employees of
business located at such premises, shall be exempt from the requirements of
division (A) and (B) of this section.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to have or permit on its
premises any vending machine, which sells both non-tobacco products and tobacco
products or alternative tobacco products.
(Ord. 92-10-116, passed 10-27-1992; Ord. 2014-01-01, passed 1-6-2014; Ord.
2019-08-29, passed 8-5-2019)
§ 10-9-8 RESPONSIBILITY FOR AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES.
   Every act or omissions of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of any
of the provisions of this article by any officer, director, manager or other
agent or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of
such licensee; and such licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if
such act or omissions had been done or omitted by the licensee personally.
(Ord. 92-10-116, passed 10-27-1992)
§ 10-9-9 USE OF PREMISES AFTER REVOCATION.
    When any license shall have been revoked for cause pursuant to §
10-1-13, no license shall be granted to licensee for a period of six months
thereafter for the business of selling tobacco products as required in §
10-9-2 for the premises described in such revoked license.
(Ord. 92-10-116, passed 10-27-1992)
§ 10-9-10 VILLAGE PRESIDENT’S POWER TO FINE.
   In addition to the powers of the Village President to suspend or revoke a
tobacco products license, the Village President may instead levy a fine on the
licensee. The fine imposed shall not be less than $50, nor more than $750, for
each violation. Each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense. No such fine shall be imposed, however, unless, after a
hearing conducted by the Village President, with at least seven days prior
notice, the Village President shall determine that a provision of this code or
of the state statutes has been violated. The advance notice provision shall
begin following delivery by certified mail or by personal service. The Village
President shall, within seven days after the hearing, if he or she determines
that the licensee should be fined, state the reason for such determination in a
written order and the amount of the fine and shall serve a copy of such order
upon the licensee within seven days after the order has been entered.
(Ord. 92-11-119, passed 11-10-1992)
ARTICLE 10: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
   
10-10-1   Purpose
   
10-10-2   Findings
   
10-10-3   Definitions
   
10-10-4   Sexually oriented business license required
   
10-10-5   Sexually oriented business employee license required
   
10-10-6   Sexually oriented business license application
   
10-10-7   Issuance of a sexually oriented business license
   
10-10-8   Sexually oriented business employee license application
   
10-10-9   Issuance of a sexually oriented business employee license
   
10-10-10   Fees
   
10-10-11   Expiration and renewal of license
   
10-10-12   Suspension
   
10-10-13   Revocation
   
10-10-14   Appeal rights
   
10-10-15   Transfer of license
   
10-10-16   Additional regulations concerning the operation of sexually oriented
businesses
   
10-10-17   Penalty
   
10-10-18   Injunction
   
10-10-19   Effect of partial invalidity
Cross-reference:
   Sexually oriented business zoning regulations, see
Ch. 16, Art. 19
§ 10-10-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations to minimize and control the negative secondary effects of sexually
oriented businesses within the municipality in order to promote the health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of the municipality. The provisions of this
article have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing a limitation or
restriction on the content of any communicative materials or communication,
including sexually oriented entertainment. Similarly, it is not the purpose nor
effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually
oriented entertainment protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by
distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their
intended market. Furthermore, it is not the intent or effect of this article to
condone or legitimize the distribution or exhibition of entertainment that is
obscene.
(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002)
§ 10-10-2 FINDINGS.
   Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of sexually
oriented businesses presented to the municipality from findings incorporated in
the cases of City of Erie v. Pap’s A.M., 529 U.S. 277, 120 S. Ct. 1382 (2000),
Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), City of Renton v. Playtime
Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theaters, 426 U.S.
50 (1976), Berg v. Health and Hospital Corporation 865 F.2d. 797 (7th Cir.
1989), Ellwest Stereo Theaters v. Wenner, 681 F.2d. 1243 (9th Cir. 1982), Bamon
Corp. v. City of Dayton, 730 F.Supp. 80 (S.D. Ohio, 1990), and EWAP, Inc. v.
City of Los Angeles, 97 Cal. App. 3d 179, 158 Cal. Rptr. (1979), and on studies
in other cities including the Report of the Attorney General’s Working Group on
the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses (Minnesota, 1989), Memorandum
re: Adult Entertainment Ordinance, of the Assistant Chief of Police of Tucson,
Arizona (May 1, 1990), Hecht, Peter R., Ph.D., Report to the American Center
for Law and Justice on the Secondary Impacts of Sex Oriented Businesses (March
31, 1996), Adult Entertainment Businesses in Indianapolis, An Analysis (1984),
and McCleary,
Richard, Ph.D., and Meeker, James W., Ph.D., Final Report to the City of Garden
Grove: The Relationship Between Crime and Adult Business Operations on Garden
Grove Boulevard, (Garden Grove, CA, October 23, 1991), the President and Board
of Trustees find as follows.
   (A)   Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and
unhealthy activities.
   (B)   Sexual acts, including masturbation, oral sex and anal sex, occur at
sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or semi-
private booths or rooms for viewing films, videos or live sexually oriented
entertainment. Such activities may result in spreading communicable diseases
such as syphilis, gonorrhea and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
   (C)   Offering sexually oriented entertainment under conditions that
encourage such activities creates unhealthy conditions.
   (D)   Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are
unhealthy, in part because of the failure of owners and operators to regulate
those activities and maintain their facilities.
   (E)   Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in
the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view sexually oriented
films concealed from public view.
   (F)   The findings noted in divisions (A) through (E) above raise compelling
and substantial governmental concerns.
   (G)   Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which
should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those compelling and
substantial governmental concerns.
   (H)   A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place
the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and operators of
sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will place a
heretofore non-existent incentive on operators to see that sexually oriented
businesses are run in a manner consistent with the health, safety and welfare
of patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the municipality. It is
appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual
operator of the sexually oriented business and fully in possession and control
of the premises and activities occurring therein.
   (I)   The regulation of nudity, semi-nudity and physical contact between
employees and patrons in sexually oriented businesses will further the
compelling and substantial governmental interests in preventing prostitution
and other sex-related crimes, including illegal sex acts, and protecting the
public health, safety and welfare.
   (J)   Requiring open sight lines in sexually oriented businesses and
requiring sufficient lighting will advance the compelling and substantial
governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity
occurring in sexually oriented businesses and will facilitate enforcement of
the provisions of this article and other federal, state and local laws, thereby
furthering the compelling and substantial governmental interest in protecting
the public health, safety and welfare.
   (K)   The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately
responsible for the day to day operation and maintenance of sexually oriented
businesses, and by employees of such businesses, will facilitate the
enforcement of the provisions of this article and other federal, state and
local laws, and will thereby further the compelling and substantial government
interest in protecting the public health, safety and welfare.
   (L)   A person who recently has been convicted of a sexually related crime
is not an appropriate individual to operate or be employed in a sexually
oriented business.
   (M)   Barring such individuals from the management of and employment in
sexually oriented businesses for a period of years serves as a deterrent to and
prevents the commission of sexually related criminal acts, including conduct
which leads to the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases.
   (N)   Studies in other cities have demonstrated a correlation between
sexually oriented businesses and crime, including sex-related crimes like
prostitution, obscenity and sexual assault. This correlation is especially
acute when more than one sexually oriented business is located in a
neighborhood and when a sexually oriented business is located near a business
licensed to serve alcoholic beverages.
   (O)   Studies conducted in other cities have demonstrated a connection
between sexually oriented businesses and organized crime.
(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002)
§ 10-10-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EMPLOYEE. A natural person who performs any service or work on the premises
of a sexually oriented business, including, but not limited to, providing
entertainment, performing work of a management or supervisory nature, or
performing support functions, on a full-time, part-time or contract basis,
whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor,
agent or otherwise and whether or not the person is paid a salary, wage or
other compensation by the operator of the business. EMPLOYEE does not include a
person on the premises exclusively for repair or maintenance of the premises or
equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
   EMPLOYEE STATION. An area on the premises of a sexually oriented business
designated for occupancy exclusively by one or more employees whose duties
include assuring compliance with the provisions of this article.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The Village Manager of the municipality, or any person
employed by the municipality whom the Village Manager assigns to perform the
duties of the Enforcement Officer in the Village Manager’s absence.
   EXCRETORY FUNCTIONS. Urination, defecation, lactation, ejaculation and
menstruation. It shall not mean urination and defecation performed in a public
or employee-only restroom in the manner in which those facilities are intended
to be used, and when not performed or presented for a commercial purpose. It
shall not mean lactation as part of breast-feeding an infant, unless performed
or displayed for a commercial purpose other than education and training in the
art, science or technique of breast-feeding an infant.
   LICENSEE. With respect to a sexually oriented business license issued under
this article, a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented
business has been issued, as well as the individual(s) designated on the
license application as principally responsible for the operation of the
sexually oriented business. With respect to a sexually oriented business
employee license issued under this article, LICENSEE means a natural person in
whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in a sexually
oriented business.
   MUNICIPALITY. The Village of Carol Stream, an Illinois municipal
corporation.
   NUDITY or NUDE. Exposing to view specified anatomical areas or any device,
costume or covering that gives the appearance of or simulates any specified
anatomical areas.
   OPERATE or CAUSE TO BE OPERATED. To control or hold primary responsibility
for the operation of a sexually oriented business, either as a business entity,
as an individual, or as part of a group of individuals with shared
responsibility. It shall also mean to cause to function or to put or keep in
operation. A person may be found to be OPERATING or CAUSING TO BE OPERATED a
sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner
or licensee of the business.
   OPERATOR. Any person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually
oriented business.
   PATRON. Any natural person who is not an employee.
   PERSON. A natural person, proprietorship, partnership, limited liability
company, firm, association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation or
combination of individuals of whatever form or character.
   SEMI-NUDITY or SEMI-NUDE. Exposing to view, with less than a fully opaque
covering, any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or any
portion of the buttocks. This definition shall include the entire lower portion
of the female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the
female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit or
other clothing; provided that, the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.
      (1)   Any of the following when done in a place where the public is
invited or permitted, or when done for any commercial purpose including sale
and rental, regardless of who pays or receives the consideration therefor, and
regardless of the form of consideration:
         (a)   The live exhibition or display of a natural person or people in
the state of nudity or semi-nudity, or engaged in specified sexual activities
or excretory functions;
         (b)   Engaging in, promoting or permitting a natural person or people
to engage in specified sexual activities or excretory functions;
         (c)   The offering of physical contact in the form of wrestling or
tumbling between natural persons of the opposite sex when one or more of the
person is nude or semi-nude;
         (d)   The offering of products, services or activities by or with a
natural person or people when one or more of the people, whether a patron,
agent, employee or otherwise, is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity;
         (e)   Displaying or offering to others any recorded depiction of a
natural person, or created image or character, as in cartoons and animation, by
any medium, including without limitation: film, videotape, closed-circuit
television, digital video disc (DVD), laser disc, compact disc (CD), floppy
disc, photograph, slide, television, book, magazine and computer software,
which is:
            1.   Characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction
or description of specified sexual activities, excretory functions or specified
anatomical areas; or
            2.   Advertised or otherwise held out to the public as being
characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities, excretory functions or specified anatomical
areas, including without limitation, the use of the term “adult” and the use of
the designation of one or more “X” such as, but not limited to, “XXX”.
         (f)   The display and offering to others of novelties, instruments,
devices or paraphernalia that are designed primarily for use in connection with
specified sexual activities or that give the appearance of or simulate any of
the specified anatomical areas.
      (2)   The term SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS shall exclude the following:
         (a)   The display and offering to others of condoms, spermicides or
other non-prescription contraceptives, in and of themselves, unless displayed
and offered to others on the premises of a business which would otherwise be
considered a sexually oriented business;
         (b)   The display and offering to others of drugs, instruments or
devices which require a prescription, that are designed primarily for use in
connection with specified sexual activities, and which are in fact dispensed by
or under the supervision of a pharmacist licensed by the state;
         (c)   The display and offering to others of instruments, devices or
paraphernalia that are designed primarily for use in connection with specified
sexual activities if they are displayed and offered to others on the premises
where a pharmacist licensed by the state is employed to dispense prescription
drugs, instruments or devices;
         (d)   Breast-feeding an infant, unless performed or displayed for a
commercial purpose other than education and training in the art, science or
technique of breast-feeding an infant;
         (e)   The display and offering to others of motion pictures, by any
format, which have received a rating from the Motion Picture Association of
America of G, PG, PG-13, R or NC-17, when offered or displayed substantially in
their entirety;
         (f)   Libraries and museums funded in whole or in part by federal,
state or local governmental funds.
         (g)   The display and offering to others of items described in
division (2)(f) of this definition, if and only if the display and offering are
done for a commercial purpose, and all of the following apply to the business
displaying and offering such items to others:
            1.   Less than 25% of its gross income comes from the sale, rental
or exhibition of the following types of items:
               a.   Items which are characterized or distinguished by an
emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities,
excretory functions, or specified anatomical areas or any combination thereof;
and
               b.   Items which are advertised or otherwise held out to the
public as being characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction
or description of specified sexual activities, excretory functions or specified
anatomical areas or any combination thereof, including, without limitation, the
use of the term “adult” and the use of the designation of one or more “X” such
as, but not limited to, “XXX”.
            2.   Less than 25% of its display space is used for the sale,
rental or exhibition of the items described in divisions (2)(g)1.a. and (2)
(g)1.b. above; and
            3.   Less than 25% of the items it offers to others are the items
described in divisions (2)(g)1.a. and (2)(g)1.b. above.
      (3)   Certain uses which fall within the definition of SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS may also constitute uses which are illegal under local, state or
federal law, such as obscenity or child pornography. Even if such illegal uses
constitute a SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS under the definition set forth in this
article, they shall not be permitted to receive a SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
license.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. The human genitals, pubic area, perineum, anus,
anal cleft or cleavage, pubic hair, any portion of the areola of the female
breast if less than a fully and opaquely covered; and the male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state, even if entirely covered by an opaque covering. In
determining whether any of the foregoing portions of the anatomy are fully and
opaquely covered, coverage by make-up, paint or similar matter applied directly
to the skin, shall not be considered to be fully and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY.
      (1)   Any of the following offenses, as set forth in the State Criminal
Code of 1961, as amended, or any substantially similar offenses to those set
forth below under the criminal or penal code of any local jurisdiction, state,
country or international law: indecent solicitation of a child, indecent
solicitation of an adult, adultery, fornication, public indecency, sexual
exploitation of a child, custodial sexual misconduct, presence within school
zone by child sex offenders prohibited, sexual relations within families,
bigamy, marrying a bigamist, prostitution, solicitation of a sexual act,
soliciting for a prostitute, soliciting for a juvenile prostitute, pandering,
keeping a place of prostitution, keeping a place of juvenile prostitution,
patronizing a prostitute, patronizing a juvenile prostitute, pimping, juvenile
pimping, exploitation of a child, obscenity, child pornography, commercial film
and photographic print processor - reports, harmful material, tie-in sales of
obscene publications to distributors, criminal sexual assault, aggravated
criminal sexual assault, predatory criminal sexual assault of a child, criminal
sexual abuse, aggravated criminal sexual abuse, criminal transmission of HIV,
ritualized abuse of a child, female genital mutilation, violation of the Sex
Offender Registration Act, stalking (if the basis of the conviction is the
threat of immediate or future sexual assault, or placing a person in reasonable
apprehension of immediate or future sexual assault), first degree murder (if
the basis for the conviction is 720 ILCS 5/9-1(a)(1), commonly known as felony
murder, where the predicate felony is any felony otherwise set forth in this
definition), burglary (if the basis for the conviction is an intent to commit
any felony otherwise set forth in this definition), residential burglary (if
the basis for the conviction is an intent to commit any felony otherwise set
forth in this definition), armed violence (if the basis for the conviction is
an intent to commit any felony otherwise set forth in this definition), attempt
to commit any of the foregoing crimes, conspiracy to commit any of the
foregoing crimes, and any other felony or misdemeanor for which an element of
the offense is the commission of any of the foregoing crimes or an intent to
commit any of the foregoing crimes.
      (2)   For which:
         (a)   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is
the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor, business offense or
petty offense; or
         (b)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the
later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense.
      (3)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall not prevent such
conviction from constituting a  SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY as defined in this
article.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Any of the following, whether actual or
simulated:
      (1)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
area, perineum, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic hair, buttocks or female
breasts, regardless of whether the performer or recipient is clothed, in a
state of nudity or in a state of semi-nudity;
      (2)   The manipulation of the human body of another, including massage,
by the use of any portion of manipulator’s body, whether covered or uncovered,
or by any device, if the person performing the manipulation or the person
receiving the manipulation is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity;
      (3)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, heterosexual, homosexual or
bisexual, including without limitation intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus,
analingus, masturbation, bestiality, sodomy, bondage and discipline, sadism and
masochism, and any other act intended to cause sexual arousal; and
      (4)   Sex acts between animals when offered or displayed for the purpose
or with the intent of causing the sexual arousal of a human viewer.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.
      (1)   The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
      (2)   The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest
in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device
which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfers
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing
the ownership or control.
(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002)
§ 10-10-4 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall operate a sexually oriented business without a valid
sexually oriented business license issued by the municipality pursuant to this
article.
   (B)   No person shall, in connection with operating a sexually oriented
business, retain the services of a person as an employee who is not licensed as
a sexually oriented business employee by the municipality pursuant to this
article.
(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002)
§ 10-10-5 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall act as an employee on the premises of a sexually oriented
business without having secured a sexually oriented business employee license
pursuant to this article.
(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-00; Am. Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-02)
§ 10-10-6 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   An application for a sexually oriented business license shall be
submitted to the municipality’s Clerk on a form provided by the Enforcement
Officer. The application may request and the applicant shall provide such
information as reasonably necessary (including fingerprints) to enable the
municipality to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications
established in this article.
   (B)   An application for a sexually oriented business license shall identify
the following persons and be signed under oath by the persons that the
information contained therein is true:
      (1)   If the business entity is a sole proprietorship, that sole
proprietor;
      (2)   If the business entity is a corporation, each officer and Director
of the corporation and each individual with a 10% or greater ownership interest
in the corporation;
      (3)   If the business entity is a partnership, each general partner, and
each limited partner who owns 10% or more of total limited partnership
interest; and
      (4)   If the business is a limited liability company, each manager and
each member with a 10% or greater ownership interest in the company. If the
limited liability company does not have any managers, then each member.
   (C)   An application for a sexually oriented business license must designate
one or more natural person who are to be principally responsible for the
operation of the proposed sexually oriented business, if a license is granted.
At least one natural person so designated must be involved in the day to day
operation of the proposed sexually oriented business on a regular basis. Each
natural person so designated, as well as the business entity itself, shall be
considered a license applicant, must qualify as a licensee under this article,
and shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.
   (D)   An application for a sexually oriented business license shall be
completed according to the instructions of the application form, which shall
require the following:
      (1)   If the applicant is:
         (a)   An individual, state the legal name, address, date of birth,
Social Security number and any aliases of such individual;
         (b)   A partnership, state the complete name of the partnership and
all of its partners and whether the partnership is general or limited, and
provide a copy of the partnership agreement, if any, and the information
specified in division (A) above for each partner;
         (c)   A corporation, state the complete name of the corporation and
the date of its incorporation, provide evidence that the corporation is in good
standing under the laws of its state of incorporation and of the state, and
state the names and capacity of all officers and directors, all persons owning
10% or more of the stock of the corporation, the name of the registered
corporate agent, the address of the registered office for service of process
and the information specified in division (A) above for each officer, director
and owner of 10% or more of the stock; and
         (d)   A limited liability company, state the complete name of the
company and the date of its organization, provide evidence that the company is
in good standing under the laws of its state of organization and the state, and
state the names and capacity of all members, owners and managers, the name of
the registered agent, the address of the registered office for service of
process, and the information specified in division (A) above for each member,
owner and manager.
      (2)   If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business
under a name other than that of the applicant, state the fictitious name to be
used and submit copies of documentation evidencing the registration of the
business name under applicable laws;
      (3)   State whether any applicant has been convicted of a specified
criminal activity and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved and the
date, place and jurisdiction of each such conviction;
      (4)   State whether any applicant has had a previous license under this
article or other similar regulation of another jurisdiction denied, suspended
or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business
for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of
the denial, suspension or revocation; and state whether the applicant has been
a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or 10% or greater owner of a
corporation, or a member or manager of a limited liability company, licensed
under this article whose license has previously been denied, suspended or
revoked, including the name and location of the business for which the permit
was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or
revocation;
      (5)   State whether any applicant holds any other licenses under this
article or other similar regulation from this or another jurisdiction and, if
so, the names and locations of other such licensed businesses;
      (6)   State the nature of the sexually oriented business for which the
applicant is filing;
      (7)   State the location of the proposed sexually oriented business,
including a legal description of the property (i.e., block and lot), street
address, telephone number(s), email address and Internet website URL, if any;
      (8)   State the mailing address and residential address of each applicant
and each person signing the application;
      (9)   Submit a recent photograph of each applicant who is a natural
person;
      (10)   Submit the fingerprints of each applicant who is a natural person,
recorded by the Police Department;
      (11)   For any applicant who is a natural person, describe and identify
the location of any tattoos on such person’s face, arms, legs or hands, or any
other anatomical area that normally would be visible when such person is on the
premises of the proposed sexually oriented business;
      (12)   State the driver’s license number of each applicant who is a
natural person and each person signing the application or, for an applicant
that is not a natural person, the applicant’s federally issued tax
identification number;
      (13)   Submit proof that each applicant who is a natural person is at
least 18 years old; and
      (14)   Submit a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the
premises of the sexually oriented business, including the location of all
stages, walls, partitions, designated sales areas, book cases and patron
seating, and a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The
diagram shall also designate the place at which the sexually oriented business
license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. The sketch or diagram need
not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a designated scale or
drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of
plus or minus one foot.
(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002)
§ 10-10-7 ISSUANCE OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a completed application for a sexually oriented
business license, the municipality’s Clerk shall immediately file a copy of the
completed application with the Enforcement Officer.
   (B)   Upon receipt of a copy of a completed application for a sexually
oriented business license, the Enforcement Officer, or any peace officer
designated by the Enforcement Officer, shall promptly investigate the
information provided in the application concerning the criminal background of
the applicants and shall record the results of the investigation in writing
within five days of the completion of the investigation. If the investigation
is done by a peace officer designated by the Enforcement Officer, then the
written results of the investigation shall also be filed with the Enforcement
Officer within five days of the completion of the investigation.
   (C)   Within five days of receipt of a copy of a completed application for a
sexually oriented business license, the Enforcement Officer shall notify the
Fire Chief of the Fire Protection District and the Village Community
Development Director of such application. In making such notification, the
Enforcement Officer shall request that the Fire Chief and the Community
Development Director promptly inspect the premises for which the sexually
oriented business license is sought to assess compliance with the regulations
under their respective jurisdictions.
   (D)   The Fire Chief shall provide to the Enforcement Officer a written
certification of whether the premises are in compliance with the Fire Code
within five days of completing the inspection.
   (E)   The Community Development Director shall provide the Enforcement
Officer a written certification of whether the premises are in compliance with
the Building Code, the Planning and Zoning Code and the provisions of this
article related to physical characteristics of the premises within five days of
completing the inspection.
   (F)   The Enforcement Officer shall approve the issuance of a license to an
applicant unless the Enforcement Officer determines by a preponderance of the
evidence that one or more of the following findings is true:
      (1)   An applicant is a natural person is under 18 years of age;
      (2)   An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary
for issuance of the license as requested on the application form or has
provided false information;
      (3)   An applicant has been denied a sexually oriented business license
or has had a license to operate a sexually oriented business revoked within the
preceding 12 months by any jurisdiction;
      (4)   An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity;
      (5)   The proposed sexually oriented business or the premises on which it
would operate would violate or fail to be in compliance with any provisions of
the Zoning Code, the provisions of this article related to physical
characteristics of the premises or any state or federal law;
      (6)   The application and investigation fee required by this article has
not been paid; or
      (7)   An applicant is otherwise in violation of or is not in compliance
with any provision of this article.
   (G)   If the Enforcement Officer determines that no grounds for denial of a
license exist under this section, the Enforcement Officer shall not delay
approval of the application.
   (H)   A sexually oriented business license, if granted, shall state on its
face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration
date, and the address of the licensed sexually oriented business. All sexually
oriented business licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near
the entrance to the business so that they may be easily read at any time.
   (I)   The Enforcement Officer shall advise the applicant in writing of the
reasons for any license denial. The written license denial shall be either
served on the applicant personally or by placing it in a sealed envelope,
addressed to the applicant at the address set forth in the application, and
depositing it with the United States Postal Service, proper first class postage
prepaid. The Enforcement Officer may, but is not required to serve the written
license denial by certified or registered mail, as set forth above.
(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002)
§ 10-10-8 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   An application for a sexually oriented business employee license shall
be submitted to the municipality’s Clerk on a form provided by the Enforcement
Officer. The application may request and the applicant shall provide such
information as reasonably necessary (including fingerprints) to enable the
municipality to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications
established in this article.
   (B)   An application for a sexually oriented business employee license shall
be completed according to the instructions of the application form, signed by
the applicant under oath that the information contained therein is true, and
shall require the following:
      (1)   State the applicant’s name and any other names (including “stage”
names) or aliases used by the applicant;
      (2)   State the applicant’s date and place of birth;
      (3)   State the applicant’s height, weight and hair and eye color;
      (4)   Submit a recent photograph of the applicant which clearly shows the
applicant’s face;
      (5)   Submit the applicant’s fingerprints, recorded by the Police
Department;
      (6)   Describe and identify the location of any tattoos on the
applicant’s face, arms, legs or hands, or any other anatomical area that
normally would be visible when the applicant is on the premises of the proposed
sexually oriented business;
      (7)   State the applicant’s present residence address and telephone
number;
      (8)   State the applicant’s present and intended business address and
telephone number, identifying the sexually oriented business at which the
applicant intends employment;
      (9)   State the applicant’s driver’s license number;
      (10)   Submit proof that the applicant is at least 18 years old;
      (11)   Provide a statement detailing the sexually oriented business
employee license history of the applicant for the five years immediately
preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such
applicant previously operated or is seeking to operate a sexually oriented
business, in this or any other jurisdiction, and whether the applicant has ever
had a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business
employee license, permit or authorization to do business denied, revoked or
suspended by this or any other jurisdiction. In the event of any such denial,
revocation or suspension, state the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction
and describe in full the reason for the denial, revocation or suspension.
Attach a copy of any order of denial, revocation or suspension; and
      (12)   State whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified
criminal activity and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved and the
date, place and jurisdiction of each such conviction, and the date of release
from confinement, if any, for such conviction.
(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002)
§ 10-10-9 ISSUANCE OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a completed application for a sexually oriented
business employee license, the municipality’s Clerk shall immediately file a
copy of the completed application with the Enforcement Officer.
   (B)   Upon receipt of a copy of a completed application for a sexually
oriented business employee license, the Enforcement Officer, or any peace
officer designated by the Enforcement Officer, shall promptly investigate the
information provided in the application concerning the criminal background of
the applicant and shall record the results of the investigation in writing
within five days of the completion of the investigation. If the investigation
is done by a peace officer designated by the Enforcement Officer, then the
written results of the investigation shall also be filed with the Enforcement
Officer within five days of the completion of the investigation.
   (C)   The Enforcement Officer shall approve the issuance of a license to an
applicant unless the Enforcement Officer determines by a preponderance of the
evidence that one or more of the following findings is true:
      (1)   The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably
necessary for issuance of the license as requested on the application form, or
has given false information;
      (2)   The applicant is under 18 years of age;
      (3)   The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity;
      (4)   The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for
employment in a business prohibited by local, state or federal law, statute,
rule or regulation;
      (5)   The sexually oriented business where the applicant intends
employment is not a licensed sexually oriented business pursuant to this
article; or
      (6)   The applicant has been denied a sexually oriented business license
or a sexually oriented business employee license, or has had a sexually
oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license
revoked within the preceding 12 months by any jurisdiction.
   (D)   The Enforcement Officer shall advise the applicant in writing of the
reasons for any license denial. The written license denial shall be either
served on the applicant personally or by placing it in a sealed envelope,
addressed to the applicant at the address set forth in the application, and
depositing it with the United States Postal Service, proper first class postage
prepaid. The Enforcement Officer may, but is not required to serve the written
license denial by certified or registered mail, as set forth above.
(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002)
§ 10-10-10 FEES.
   (A)   Every application for a new sexually oriented business license shall
be accompanied by a $500 non-refundable application and investigation fee.
   (B)   Every application for renewal of a sexually oriented business license
shall be accompanied by a $250 non-refundable application and investigation
fee.
   (C)   In addition to the application and investigation fee required in
divisions (A) or (B) above, every applicant that is granted a sexually oriented
business license (new or renewal) shall pay to the municipality an annual, non-
refundable license fee of $250 prior to or at the time of issuance or renewal.
   (D)   In addition to the application and investigation fee required in
divisions (A) or (B) above, and the license fee required by division (C) above,
every applicant that is granted a sexually oriented business license (new or
renewal) shall pay to the municipality, prior to or at the time of issuance or
renewal, an annual amusement tax upon any and all sexually oriented amusement
device, at the rate scheduled for amusement devices in §
10-1-19, as amended from time to time.
   (E)   Every application for a new sexually oriented business employee
license shall be accompanied by an annual, non-refundable application,
investigation and license fee of $100.
   (F)   Every application for renewal of a sexually oriented business employee
license shall be accompanied by an annual, non-refundable application,
investigation and license fee of $50.
(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002)
§ 10-10-11 EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Each license issued pursuant to this article shall expire one year
from the date of issuance and may be renewed by making application as provided
in this section. Application for renewal shall be made no more than 90 days and
no less than 28 days before the expiration date. If application is made less
than 28 days before the expiration date, the license will not be extended
pending a decision on the application, but will expire on its normal expiration
date.
   (B)   An application for renewal of a sexually oriented business license or
sexually oriented business employee license shall be submitted to the
municipality’s Clerk on a form provided by the Enforcement Officer. The renewal
application may request and the applicant shall provide such information as
reasonably necessary to enable the municipality to determine whether the
applicant meets the qualifications established in this article. The completed
renewal application shall describe any changes or additions to, or deletions
from, the information provided in the applicant’s initial license application.
The completed renewal application shall be accompanied by copies of any
document or material submitted in connection with the initial license
application that has been revised or requires revision to reflect any change in
circumstances or conditions. Sketches or diagrams submitted with an initial
sexually oriented business license application may be resubmitted with
subsequent renewal applications; provided that, the applicant certifies in
writing that the sketch or diagram still depicts the premises accurately.
   (C)   The Enforcement Officer shall make the determination concerning the
approval of license renewals based on the same criteria and using the same
procedures used to evaluate applications for new licenses under this article.
   (D)   The Enforcement Officer shall advise the applicant in writing of the
reasons for any renewal denial, and shall issue the written renewal denial on
the applicant in the same manner as a denial of an initial application.
   (E)   When the Enforcement Officer denies an application for renewal of a
license, the applicant shall not be issued another license for one year from
the date of denial.
(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002)
§ 10-10-12 SUSPENSION.
   (A)   The Enforcement Officer shall suspend a sexually oriented business
license for a period not to exceed 30 days if the Enforcement Officer
determines that a licensee:
      (1)   Has violated or is not in compliance with any section of this
article, except as set forth in §
10-10-13(B); or
      (2)   Has knowingly allowed an employee to violate or fail to comply with
any section of this article.
   (B)   The Enforcement Officer shall suspend a sexually oriented business
employee license for a period not to exceed 30 days if the Enforcement Officer
determines that a licensee has violated or is not in compliance with any
section of this article, except as set forth in §
10-10-13(C).
   (C)   The Enforcement Officer shall advise the licensee in writing of the
reasons for any suspension. The written suspension shall be either served on
the applicant personally on or before five days before the suspension is to
take effect, or by placing it in a sealed envelope, addressed to the licensee
at the address set forth in the application and depositing it with the United
States Postal Service, proper first class postage prepaid, on or before five
days before the suspension is to take effect. The Enforcement Officer may, but
is not required to serve the written suspension by certified or registered
mail, as set forth above.
(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002)
§ 10-10-13 REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Enforcement Officer shall revoke a sexually oriented business
license or sexually oriented business employee license if a cause of suspension
under §
10-10-12 occurs and the license has been suspended two times within the
preceding 12 months.
   (B)   The Enforcement Officer shall revoke a sexually oriented business
license if he or she determines that the licensee:
      (1)   Gave false or misleading information in the material submitted
during the application or renewal process;
      (2)   Has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled
substances on the premises;
      (3)   Has knowingly allowed any specified criminal activity or the
commission of any felony on the premises;
      (4)   Knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period
of time when the licensee’s license was pending initial application, expired or
suspended;
      (5)   Has knowingly allowed one or more specified sexual activities or
excretory functions to occur in or on the licensed premises;
      (6)   Has been convicted of a specified criminal activity during the term
of the license; or
      (7)   Is delinquent in payment to the municipality for any taxes or fees
past due that were assessed or imposed in relation to any business or business
property.
   (C)   The Enforcement Officer shall revoke a sexually oriented business
employee license if he or she determines that the licensee:
      (1)   Gave false or misleading information in the material submitted
during the application or renewal process;
      (2)   Has knowingly acted as an employee on the premises of a sexually
oriented business during a period of time when the licensee’s license was
pending initial application, expired or suspended; or
      (3)   Has been convicted of a specified criminal activity during the term
of the license.
   (D)   The Enforcement Officer shall advise the licensee in writing of the
reasons for any revocation. The written revocation shall be either served on
the applicant personally on or before five days before the revocation is to
take effect, or by placing it in a sealed envelope, addressed to the licensee
at the address set forth in the application, and depositing it with the United
States Postal Service, proper first class postage prepaid, on or before five
days before the revocation is to take effect. The Enforcement Officer may, but
is not required to, serve the written revocation by certified or registered
mail, as set forth above.
   (E)   When the Enforcement Officer revokes a license, the licensee shall not
be issued another license for one year from the date the revocation became
effective.
(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002)
§ 10-10-14 APPEAL RIGHTS.
   (A)   Any denial, suspension or revocation of a new or renewal license under
this article may be appealed to the Mayor by written notice filed with the
municipality’s Clerk within ten days of the effective date of such denial,
suspension or revocation.
   (B)   The Mayor shall notify the appellant in writing of the date for the
hearing on the appeal. The written notice shall be either served on the
appellant personally on or before five days before the hearing, or by placing
it in a sealed envelope, addressed to the appellant at the address set forth in
the application, and depositing it with the United States Postal Service,
proper first class postage prepaid, on or before seven days before the hearing.
The Mayor may, but is not required to, serve the written notice by certified or
registered mail, as set forth above.
   (C)   The Mayor shall conduct a hearing on the appeal within 14 days of
receipt of the written notice of appeal by the municipality’s Clerk, at which
hearing the appellant may present witnesses or other evidence opposing the
denial, suspension or revocation. The Enforcement Officer may also present
witnesses or other evidence supporting the denial, suspension or revocation.
Both parties shall have the right to cross-examine witnesses.
   (D)   The Mayor shall determine whether the preponderance of the evidence
presented at the hearing supported the decision of the Enforcement Officer to
deny, suspend or revoke the license of the appellant.
   (E)   The Mayor shall issue a written decision setting forth his or her
findings regarding the evidence presented at the hearing, and his or her
decision to affirm or overrule the decision of the Enforcement Officer. The
Mayor shall serve a copy of his or her written decision on the appellant and
the Enforcement Officer in writing. The written decision shall be either served
on the parties personally on or before five days after the date of the hearing,
or by placing it in a sealed envelope, addressed to the respective parties at
the address set forth in the application and at the Enforcement Officer’s
ordinary business address, and depositing it with the United States Postal
Service, proper first class postage prepaid, on or before five days after the
hearing. The Mayor may, but is not required, to serve the written decision by
certified or registered mail, as set forth above.
   (F)   The written decision of the Mayor shall be considered a final
decision.
(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002)
§ 10-10-15 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   (A)   A sexually oriented business license is not transferable from one
licensee to another or from one location to another. Any purported transfer of
a sexually oriented business license shall automatically and immediately void
that license.
   (B)   A sexually oriented business employee license is not transferable from
one licensee to another, but the use of the license by the individual to whom
it was issued may be transferred from one licensed sexually oriented business
to another such licensed establishment during the term of the license; provided
that, the licensee gives written notice of such transfer to the Enforcement
Officer within 15 days after such transfer.
(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002)
§ 10-10-16 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS CONCERNING THE OPERATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESSES.
   (A)   No employee on the premises of a sexually oriented business may engage
in any specified criminal activity, specified sexual activities or excretory
functions.
   (B)   Any employee appearing on the premises of a sexually oriented
business, in a place that can be viewed by patrons, when said employee is in a
state of nudity or semi-nudity must be on a stage that is at least 45 inches
from the floor, and at a distance at least 72 inches from all parts of a
clearly designated area in which patrons will be present, and no patron shall
be permitted in any area closer than 72 inches from the stage.
   (C)   No employee appearing on the premises of a sexually oriented business
in a state of nudity or semi-nudity may intentionally or knowingly touch a
patron or a patron's clothing or permit himself or herself to be touched by a
patron or a patron's clothing. No employee may intentionally or knowingly touch
a patron's genitals, pubic area, perineum, anus, anal cleft or cleavage,
buttocks, pubic hair or female breast either directly or through clothing or
other covering. No employee may intentionally or knowingly permit a patron to
touch the employee's genitals, pubic area, perineum, anus, anal cleft or
cleavage, buttocks, pubic hair or female breast either directly or through
clothing or other covering. For purposes of this section, touching need not be
accomplished by the hand, and includes the touching by any part of the
toucher's body, clothing or device held by the toucher.
   (D)   All sexually oriented businesses that offer live entertainment must
provide separate dressing room facilities for female and male employees and
which shall not be occupied or used in any way by anyone other than employees.
   (E)   No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted on the premises
of a sexually oriented business. Mistake of age is not a defense to a charge
under this section, unless the person under the age 18 who was permitted on the
premises exhibited to the employee a driver's license, or other apparently
official government-issued identification card bearing the patron's photograph,
and purporting to show that the person was 18 years of age or over, and the
employee to whom that document was exhibited did not otherwise have reasonable
cause to believe that the person seeking admittance was under 18 years.
   (F)   No sexually oriented business shall remain open at any time between
the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays, and 12:00 a.m.
and noon (12:00 p.m.) on Sundays, nor shall any entertainment, service or
product be provided to a patron on the premises of a sexually oriented business
during those hours.
   (G)   Minimum lighting level.
      (1)   The premises of every sexually oriented business shall be equipped
with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every
place to which patrons are permitted access, including restrooms, at an
illumination level of not less than 150 foot-candles as measured at floor
level.
      (2)   The illumination described in division (G)(1) above shall be
maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. In the
event of a power failure, the business shall stop operating immediately and all
patrons shall be cleared from the premises. The premises shall not be reopened
until the minimum illumination level is restored.
   (H)   No sexually oriented business shall be operated in any manner that
permits the observation from outside the premises of any image, material or
entertainment depicting or describing excretory functions, specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas or any person in a state of nudity or
semi-nudity, whether by means of display, decoration, sign, window or any other
means.
   (I)   No alcoholic liquor shall be delivered, received, sold, purchased,
provided or consumed at any time on the premises of any sexually oriented
business.
   (J)   No massage services shall be provided on the premises of any sexually
oriented business.
   (K)   No gambling or video gaming machines shall be allowed upon the
premises of any sexually oriented business.
(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002; Ord.
2016-07-31, passed 7-18-2016)
§ 10-10-17 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates or who intentionally or knowingly permits the
violation of any section of this article shall be fined the amount of $750 and
may additionally be sentenced to a term of incarceration not to exceed six
months.
   (B)   Each day that a sexually oriented business or employee operates in
violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense or violation.
(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002)
§ 10-10-18 INJUNCTION. 
   Any person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business in violation of this article is subject to a suit for injunction as
well as prosecution for ordinance violations as provided in §
10-10-17.
(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002)
§ 10-10-19 EFFECT OF PARTIAL INVALIDITY. 
   If any section, division, clause or phrase of this article shall be deemed
to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the validity of the remaining
sections, divisions, clauses and phrases shall not be affected.
(Ord. 2000-10-80, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 2002-05-26, passed 5-20-2002)
ARTICLE 11: PYROTECHNIC FIREWORKS DISPLAY
Section
   
10-11-1   Definition
   
10-11-2   Sale, use or explosion prohibited; public displays; permits
   
10-11-3   Permit requirements
   
10-11-4   Fire Code review
   
10-11-5   Permit approval notification and required public notice
   
10-11-6   Permit restrictions
   
10-11-7   Interpretation and penalty
§ 10-11-1 DEFINITION.
   PYROTECHNIC FIREWORKS are those outdoor fireworks using professional,
proximate audience or flame effect displays.
(Ord. 2010-03-09, passed 3-15-2010)
§ 10-11-2 SALE, USE OR EXPLOSION PROHIBITED; PUBLIC DISPLAYS; PERMITS.
   It shall be an offense for any person to use or explode any pyrotechnic
fireworks within the corporate limits without a permit. A permit for a
pyrotechnic fireworks display may be granted by the Village Manager. Every such
display, which must be performed outdoors, shall be conducted and performed
only by a licensed individual designated by the Office of the State Fire
Marshal and shall be of such a character and so located, discharged or fired as
not to be hazardous to property or endanger any person or persons.
(Ord. 2010-03-09, passed 3-15-2010)
§ 10-11-3 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   With the exception of the Village/Park Districts’ annual Independence
Day fireworks show, any other desired pyrotechnic fireworks display in the
village will require a permit application from a pyrotechnics distributor
licensed by the Illinois Office of the State Fire Marshal pursuant to the
pyrotechnic distributor and operator licensing rules (41 Ill. Adm. Code 230)
which shall be submitted with the appropriate $100 permit fee to the village no
later than 30 days prior to the proposed display date.
   (B)   The application shall contain:
      (1)   Proof of possession of an Illinois state pyrotechnic distributor
license in accordance with 41 Ill. Adm. Code 230;
      (2)   Identification of the lead pyrotechnic operator that will supervise
the set-up and firing of the display and proof of that person’s possession of a
state pyrotechnic operator license in accordance with 41 Ill. Adm. Code 230.
The operator must have the type of license which will permit the operator to
perform the planned outdoor display;
      (3)   Proof of a current valid pyrotechnic operator’s insurance
certificate of not less than $1,000,000 in product liability insurance,
$1,000,000 in general liability insurance, and workers’ compensation insurance,
as required pursuant to the pyrotechnic distributor and operator licensing
rules (41 Ill. Adm. Code 230) and pyrotechnic and consumer display permitting
rules (41 Ill. Adm. Code 235);
      (4)   Identification of any assistants to be used and proof that those
assistants are not less than 18 years of age;
      (5)   A site plan/map which displays the location of the fireworks
display and the setbacks;
      (6)   A list of the specifics applicable to the display to include
numbers, types and sizes of shells;
      (7)   Evidence that the owner of the property upon which the display will
be conducted maintains comprehensive general liability insurance with limits of
liability of not less than $1,000,000 liability insurance; and
      (8)   A copy of the letter to be sent to the neighbors, if any residing
within 1,000 feet of the closest point of the launch site, notifying them of
the display should the application be determined to be acceptable.
(Ord. 2010-03-09, passed 3-15-2010)
§ 10-11-4 FIRE CODE REVIEW.
   (A)   Following receipt of the application by the village, it shall request
the Carol Stream Fire Protection District to determine that the proposed set-up
and display meet the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Standard 1123
in all aspects, including display, buffer distances, clearing distances, safety
rules and operations as well as those related provisions of the Internal Fire
Code, and to visit and inspect the proposed launching site, and the places
where persons will be permitted to observe the display.
   (B)   The Village Manager shall make an independent decision on the issuance
of the permit and any conditions to be imposed after having received the
recommendation of the Fire Protection District.
(Ord. 2010-03-09, passed 3-15-2010)
§ 10-11-5 PERMIT APPROVAL NOTIFICATION AND REQUIRED PUBLIC NOTICE.
   Within 20 days of receipt of the application, the village shall advise the
applicant in writing of one of the following:
   (A)   The application is denied and the reason;
   (B)   (1)   The application is preliminarily approved. If preliminary
approved, the applicant will be required to provide proof of written
notification about the fireworks display to the neighbors within at least 1,000
feet from the closest point of the launch site. Proof of written notification
and a copy of the letter must be submitted to the Village Manager within 14
days of receipt of the preliminary approval notification. Proof of notification
can include a sworn affidavit indicating the letter was sent and to whom, or a
receipt from the post office along with a listing of recipients. Once the proof
of notification is received, the application will be considered by the Village
Manager for final approval and public comment. The notice to the neighbors
shall include:
         (a)   Date of the display and expected starting time;
         (b)   Identification of the owner of the property;
         (c)   Identification of the host of the event;
         (d)   Anticipated length of time of the display;
         (e)   General location of the launch site;
         (f)   Contact information so that questions may be addressed; and
         (g)   Date and time of Village Board meetings prior to the date of the
event.
      (2)   Notification to the applicant that the application is preliminarily
approved shall also include notice that standby Carol Stream Fire Protection
District personnel and firefighting equipment may be required with the cost for
such personnel and equipment to be borne by the applicant hosting the fireworks
display. The payment of such cost must be made before a final permit is issued.
   (C)   Issued permits shall be kept on the designated premises at all times
and shall be readily available for inspection by a village or Fire Code
official.
(Ord. 2010-03-09, passed 3-15-2010)
§ 10-11-6 PERMIT RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   The Village Manager is authorized to revoke a permit issued under the
provisions of this code or to refuse to issue a new permit when it is found by
inspection or otherwise that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation as to the material facts in the application or construction
documents on which the permit or approval was based including, but not limited
to, any one of the following:
      (1)   The permit is intended to be or is used for a location or
establishment other than that for which it was issued;
      (2)   The permit is intended to be or is used for a condition or activity
other than that listed in the permit;
      (3)   Conditions and limitations set forth in the permit have been
violated;
      (4)   There have been any false statements or misrepresentations as to
the material fact in the application for permit or plans submitted or a
condition of the permit;
      (5)   The permit is intended to be or is used by a different person or
firm than the name for which it was issued;
      (6)   The permittee failed, refused or neglected to comply with orders or
notices duly served in accordance with the provisions of this code within the
time provided therein; and
      (7)   The permit was issued in error or in violation of an ordinance,
regulation or this code.
   (B)   The village is authorized to limit the quantity of explosives,
explosive materials or fireworks permitted at a given location. No person,
possessing a permit for storage of explosives at any place, shall keep or store
an amount greater than authorized in such permit. Only the kind of explosives
specified in such a permit shall be kept or stored. The permit holder shall
follow directions from the Village Police Department or the Fire Protection
District in the set-up or performance of the pyrotechnic fireworks.
(Ord. 2010-03-09, passed 3-15-2010)
§ 10-11-7 INTERPRETATION AND PENALTY.
   All questions pertaining to the meaning or applicability of this article
should be submitted in writing to the Village Manager. The Village Manager will
provide a written interpretation to all inquiries. In addition to the penalty
for the violation of any provision of the code, a person or entity found to
have violated the conditions of a permit shall not receive a new permit for a
period of 24 months after the date of the finding that a violation has occurred
or an admission of a violation.
(Ord. 2010-03-09, passed 3-15-2010)
ARTICLE 12: RESIDENTIAL RENTAL LICENSE
Section
   
10-12-1    Purpose
   
10-12-2    Interpretation and application of code
   
10-12-3    Definitions
   
10-12-4    Residential rental license required
   
10-12-5    Nuisance residential rental property
   
10-12-6    Enforcement procedures
§ 10-12-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to provide for the annual licensing of
residential rental property, so as to protect the public health, safety and
welfare of the village, including but not limited to:
   (A)   Providing minimum standards for the maintenance, operation, use and
appearance of residential rental properties.
   (B)   Preventing living conditions that adversely affect or are likely to
affect the life, safety, health and general welfare of persons occupying rental
dwelling units.
   (C)   Preserving the value of land and buildings throughout the village.
   (D)   Reducing and preventing crimes from occurring within residential
rental properties and throughout the village.
(Ord. 2014-09-46, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 10-12-2 INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION OF CODE.
   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of the Code or
Ordinances shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the protection
of the public health, safety, and welfare. This Code and The International
Property Maintenance Code, latest edition adopted by the village, shall apply
as minimum standards for maintenance of residential rental housing. Where the
requirements of this Code vary from any other lawfully adopted state laws,
rules, regulations, ordinances, codes, deed restrictions or covenants, the more
restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern. The village
does not enforce any private covenants between land owners or tenants or
finally determine conflicts between neighboring property owners.
(Ord. 2014-09-46, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 10-12-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete independent living
facilities for one or more persons, in accordance with occupancy limitations,
including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and
sanitation.
   OPERATE. To own, manage, maintain, rent, lease, advertise, or offer for rent
or lease any residential rental property or any dwelling unit therein for the
purpose of renting to others.
   OWNER. The person or persons, jointly or severally, that hold legal or
equitable title to a parcel of property, including a mortgage holder in
possession.
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, corporation, business trust, estate,
trust, beneficial interest holder, association or any other legal or commercial
entity.
   PROPERTY. Any unimproved or improved real property or portion thereof,
situated in the village and includes the buildings or structures located on the
property regardless of condition.
   PROPERTY AGENT. A person designated in writing to the village as having
authority to manage a residential rental property including the authority to
receive notices or citations.
   RENT. To provide or offer for possession or occupancy a dwelling unit to a
person who is not the legal owner of record thereof, pursuant to an agreement,
written, oral or implied, for consideration or pursuant to articles of
agreement for deed or similar agreement, if not recorded with the Recorder of
Deeds of DuPage County, Illinois.
   RENTAL LICENSE. A license required for any owner of a residential building,
structure, dwelling or dwelling unit who rents, leases, or controls any portion
of the property, building, or structure to another person, business,
corporation, or entity for any fixed period of time.
   RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY. A dwelling unit that is rented to persons other
than the person(s) holding legal or equitable title to the property. A dwelling
unit occupied by a purchaser under the provisions of articles of agreement for
deed or similar agreement shall be considered a residential rental property
unless the articles of agreement or similar agreement have been recorded with
the Recorder of Deeds of Du Page County, Illinois. There shall be a presumption
that any dwelling unit that is not occupied by the owner is a residential
rental property.
(Ord. 2014-09-46, passed 9-15-2014)
§ 10-12-4 RESIDENTIAL RENTAL LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall operate a residential rental property, or shall rent
any residential property, without having obtained a license for such property,
as provided by this article. Each license shall be issued only for the premises
and to the owner named in the application and shall not be transferable or
assignable.
   (B)   This licensing requirement shall not apply to:
      (1)   Single family dwellings occupied by a member of the owner's
immediate family.
      (2)   Hotels and motels.
      (3)   Nursing homes, retirement centers, rest homes, or hospices
licensed, inspected and governed by state or federal laws, rules or
regulations.
      (4)   Group homes governed by 405 Illinois Compiled Statutes 35/1 et
seq., as amended, Specialized Living Centers Act, dealing with the
developmentally disabled, or other similar uses governed by state or federal
laws, rules or regulations.
   (C)   Each applicant for a residential rental license shall file a written
application and shall submit the following information on an application
provided by the village:
      (1)   Name, address, and home and business telephone numbers of the owner
of the property and, if property is held in trust, the name, address, home and
business telephone numbers of the beneficiaries and the percentages of
ownership of all the beneficiaries of the trust, appropriate corporate or
partnership information, including the name of the registered agent, president,
manager or managing partner. The name, address, and phone number of the
property manager or management company representing the owner.
      (2)   Name, address (no P.O. boxes), business, and home telephone numbers
of the owner and property agent to be contacted when potential violations of
municipal ordinances occur.
      (3)   Telephone number of the owner or agent to be contacted when an
emergency exists.
      (4)   An acknowledgment that the agent or owner shall be reasonably
accessible to the village and have a telephone number which shall be available
to the village at any time. The owner or property manager shall have a local
office available for contact in Illinois.
      (5)   In the event any of the information requested should change, it
shall be the obligation of the owner to notify the village in writing within
ten days of the change.
      (6)   No license shall be issued or renewed unless the owner or operator
agrees in their application to inspection pursuant to this article as the
Village Manager may require to determine whether the location in connection
with which such license is sought is in compliance with the applicable
provisions of the this article and with the applicable provisions of the Code
of Ordinances.
   (D)   License fee. The cost of an annual license shall be as follows:
      (1)   Single family dwelling unit: $75 per residential dwelling unit; and
      (2)   Apartment and multi-family buildings, (more than one unit per
building): $100 per residential building.
   (E)   Crime free housing seminar required for residential property owners.
All persons applying for a rental license for residential property shall have
successfully completed a mandatory crime free housing seminar, administered by
the Police Department, prior to issuance of the license. The seminar may be
attended after an application has been submitted. The license will be issued
only after successful completion of the seminar.
   (F)   Crime free lease addendum.
      (1)   Any owner or property agent entering into leases regarding
residential rental property shall utilize a crime-free lease addendum or have a
clause in the lease substantially similar to a crime-free lease addendum.
Samples of crime-free lease addendums shall be available from the Police
Department. The Department shall review any clauses within actual leases to
determine if the clause is substantially similar to the required crime-free
lease addendum. All owners or property agents shall advise prospective tenants
of the required crime free lease addendum prior to entering into any lease or
rental agreement. The crime free lease addendum shall make criminal activity a
lease violation and shall specify that criminal activity is not limited to
violent criminal activity or drug-related criminal activity engaged in by,
facilitated by, or permitted by the tenant, a member of the household, a guest,
or any party under the control of the tenant. The term CRIMINAL ACTIVITY shall
mean a violation of the Criminal Code of 2012, of the Cannabis Control Act, of
the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, or of the Methamphetamine Control and
Community Protection Act. The operator or property agent shall take all
reasonable action to enforce the terms of the crime free housing addendum by
initiating an eviction proceeding as specified in the Illinois Forcible Entry
and Detainer Statutes. Proof of criminal activity shall not require a criminal
conviction, but shall only require proof by a preponderance of the evidence.
      (2)   It shall not be a violation of a crime free lease addendum and no
owner or property agent shall take any action to evict a tenant based upon:
         (a)   Contact made to the police or seeking other emergency services,
if (a) the contact was made with the intent to prevent or respond to domestic
violence or sexual violence; (b) the intervention or emergency assistance was
needed to respond to or prevent domestic violence or sexual violence; or (c)
the contact was made by, on behalf of, or otherwise concerns an individual with
a disability and the purpose of the contact was related to that individual's
disability;
         (b)   An incident or incidents of actual or threatened domestic
violence or sexual violence against the tenant, household member, or guest
occurring in the rental unit or on the premise; or
         (c)   Criminal activity occurring in the rental unit or on the
premises that is directly relating to domestic violence or sexual violence,
engaged in by a tenant, member of a tenant's household, guest, or other party,
and against a tenant, household member, guest or other party.
      (3)   It shall constitute a violation of this article for any owner or
property agent to knowingly permit any tenant to occupy any residential rental
property without entering into a crime free lease addendum or to occupy any
residential rental property in violation of any provision of the crime free
lease addendum required under this section. Any failure to include a crime-free
lease addendum or similar approved language may result in suspension or
revocation of the residential rental license. Any failure of an owner to take
reasonable action to enforce the terms of the crime free lease addendum after
having been notified by the Police Department of activity or conduct occurring
on the residential rental property in violation of the addendum, and after
having been given a reasonable opportunity to remedy such activity or conduct,
shall be sufficient grounds for the suspension or revocation of his or her
residential rental license.
   (G)   Inspections.
      (1)   In the event that the Village Manager finds that it is necessary to
determine whether the location in connection with which such license has been
requested is in compliance with this article and with the applicable
ordinances, rules and regulations of the village, an inspection may be required
prior to and as a condition of issuance of the license. After inspection, no
such license shall be issued unless the location is found to meet all
applicable requirements of this article and applicable ordinances, including
but not limited to the International Building Code, the NFPA 70 National
Electric Code, the Illinois Plumbing Code, the International Mechanical Code,
the International Fire Code, the International Residential Code, the
International Property Maintenance Code, the International Fuel Gas Code, the
International Energy Conservation Code, and the Swimming Pool and Spa Code,
latest adopted editions, and any amendments to such codes as are adopted by the
village.
      (2)   Property that changes ownership may be required to be inspected
before a new license can be issued. After inspection, no such license shall be
issued unless the location is found to meet all applicable requirements of this
article and applicable ordinances, rules and regulations of the village.
         (a)   Whenever, upon inspection of the location, the Director of
Community Development or his designee finds that conditions or practices exist
which are in violation of the provisions of this article or of any applicable
ordinances, rules and regulations, the owner shall be served with notice of
such violation in the manner hereinafter provided. Such notice shall state that
unless the violations cited are corrected within reasonable time, the license
may be suspended.
         (b)   At the end of the time allowed for correction of any violation
cited, the Director of Community Development or his designee shall re-inspect
the location, and if the re-inspection reveals that such conditions have not
been corrected, a request to the Village Manager to suspend the license may be
made.
         (c)   Any person whose license has been recommended for suspension
shall be entitled to an appeal to the Village Manager in the manner provided by
this title. Any written request for appeal shall be filed with the Village
Manager within 15 days following the issuance of the notice.
         (d)   If, upon re-inspection, the Director of Community Development or
his designee finds that the location in connection with which the notice was
issued is now in compliance with this article and with the applicable
ordinances, rules and regulations, a recommendation of the reinstatement of the
license may be made to the Village Manager.
         (e)   When the Director of Community Development or his designee
determines after an initial inspection that additional follow up inspections
are necessary for enforcement of this article, two additional follow up
inspections for noncompliance shall be granted each license holder without
charge. In the event more than two follow up inspections are needed, the
license holder shall be assessed a noncompliance inspection service charge in
the amount of $60 per division/inspection type required to make the re-
inspection. Payments must be made in full prior to the license being renewed.
Failure to pay any balance will serve as grounds to deny further permits or
licenses from being issued by the village.
   (H)   The owners and their designated property agents shall be responsible
for informing their tenants of any scheduled inspection or re-inspection of any
residential rental property; and they shall be responsible for requesting
permission from any person whose consent is necessary for village inspector to
enter the property if that person is not home at the time of the inspection or
re-inspection. The village shall provide notice to both the owner and the
tenant, on a form provided by the village, of the tenant's right to refuse
consent to the residential licensing inspection and to require the village to
obtain an administrative search warrant. If any tenant, occupant or other
person in control and/or possession and whose consent to inspect is necessary
concerning a residential rental property or a dwelling unit contained therein
fails or refuses to consent to access and entry to the property or dwelling
unit under his or her control for any residential licensing inspection required
by this article, the code official or his or her designee may apply to the
circuit court for an administrative search warrant. The application for the
administrative search warrant shall specify the basis upon which the warrant is
being sought and shall include a statement that the inspection shall be limited
to a determination whether there are any violations of the minimum standards of
the village. Nothing set forth herein shall limit the right of a tenant to
grant the village access to the dwelling unit.
(Ord. 2014-09-46, passed 9-15-2014; Ord. 2016-06-28, passed 6-6-2016)
§ 10-12-5 NUISANCE RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   It is hereby declared a nuisance and against the health, safety,
peace, and comfort of the village for any property owner or owner's agent to
allow or permit the following:
      (1)   Rental of a rental unit, or residential rental property, to a
tenant who commits or allows a member of the tenant's household, guest or other
party under the control of the tenant to commit any of the following offenses
to occur on or near the rental unit, common areas or appurtenances related to
the tenant: murder, kidnapping, sexual assault, robbery, burglary, aggravated
kidnapping, prostitution, solicitation of prostitution, pandering, obscenity,
child pornography, sale or distribution of obscene publications, criminal
housing management, possession of explosives, unlawful use of weapons, sale of
firearms, gambling, keeping a gambling place, concealing a fugitive, any
violation of the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, any violation of the
Cannabis Control Act, any violation of the Methamphetamine Control and
Community Protection Act or the commission of any other felony under Illinois
or federal law or a misdemeanor under Illinois law not specifically listed
above which by its nature or effect impact the quality of life of persons in
the area. Prohibition of these offenses applies also to members of the tenant's
household, guests or other parties under control of the tenant.
      (2)   Rental of a rental unit, or residential rental property to a tenant
who commits or allows a member of the tenant's household, guest or other party
under the control of the tenant to commit four or more village ordinance
violations in a one year period which violations by their nature or effect
impact the quality of life of persons in the area.
      (3)   The commission of any act of Criminal Housing Management as defined
in 720 ILCS 5/12-5.1, or the commission of more than four violations in a one
year period of Articles 1 through 7 of Chapter 6 of the village's Code of
Ordinances.
   (B)   Divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Contact made to the police or other emergency services, if: (a) the
contact was made with the intent to prevent or respond to domestic violence or
sexual violence; (b) the intervention or emergency assistance was needed to
respond to or prevent domestic violence or sexual violence; or (c) the contact
was made by, on behalf of, or otherwise concerns an individual with a
disability and the purpose of the contact was related to that individual's
disability;
      (2)   An incident or incidents of actual or threatened domestic violence
or sexual violence against the tenant, household member, or guest occurring in
the rental unit or on the premise; or
      (3)   Criminal activity occurring in the rental unit or on the premises
that is directly relating to domestic violence or sexual violence, engaged in
by a tenant, member of a tenant's household, guest, or other party, and against
a tenant, household member, guest or other party.
   (C)   Division (B) of this section shall not limit:
      (1)   Enforcement of Section 15.2 of the Illinois Emergency Telephone
System Act, Article 26 of the Criminal Code of 2012, or Article IX of the Code
of Civil Procedure;
      (2)   The village from enacting or enforcing its crime free housing
program and ordinance to impose penalties on the basis of the underlying
criminal activity or village ordinance violation not covered by division (A)(1)
and (A)(2) of this section and to the extent otherwise permitted by existing
state and federal law; or
      (3)   The eviction of or imposition of penalties against the perpetrator
of the domestic violence, sexual violence or other criminal activity.
   (D)   The standard of proof of one or more of the offenses described in
divisions (A)(1), (A)(2) and (A)(3) of this section shall be by a preponderance
of the evidence.
   (E)   If the residential rental property is found to be a nuisance, the
property owner can be fined pursuant as provided in the Code or Ordinances or
have his or her license suspended or revoked as provided herein.
(Ord. 2014-09-46, passed 9-15-2014; Ord. 2016-06-28, passed 6-6-2016)
§ 10-12-6 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Authority.  The Director of Community Development and his designees
are authorized to exercise the police power of the village in such manner and
to such extent as any code official determines that the character of the
violation and the interests of public health, safety and welfare warrant to
secure compliance with the provisions of this article and this Code.
   (B)   Enforcement actions.  The Director of Community Development and his
designees are authorized and shall demand compliance with the provisions of
this title and this Code through enforcement actions including, but not limited
to, the issuance of a stop work order, a determination that the dwelling unit
is uninhabitable and order the unit be vacated, notice of violation, citation
or ticket, prosecution for violations, and to recover any penalty or fine and
authorized attorney's fees and costs, the institution of the appropriate action
of law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation or to require
the removal of the unlawful use or act and the filing of liens and judgments
against property, as authorized by law. In addition, the Director of Community
Development may seek the suspension and/or revocation of any license issued
hereunder if the licensee is in continuing violation of any law or ordinance,
or that a nuisance violation pertaining to tenant activity on the premises has
or continues to occur, or that the licensee is operating in a manner not
conducive to the public health, morals or safety. Prior written notice of a
violation shall not be required for the initiation of enforcement actions. The
Director of Community Development or his designees shall institute or cause to
be instituted the appropriate legal proceedings to prosecute, restrain, correct
or abate any violation or to require removal or termination of the unlawful use
of the premises, building or structure in violation of the provisions of this
title or of any order or direction made pursuant thereto.
   (C)   Service.  Written notice of enforcement actions shall be served upon
the owner, a duly authorized agent or upon the occupant or other person
responsible for the condition that is the subject of the enforcement action
violation. If the enforcement action concerns a nuisance violation pertaining
to violations on or near the premises by the tenant, household member, guest or
other party in the control of the tenant, the village shall provide written
notice to the tenant of such enforcement action. Such notice shall be served
either by delivering a copy of same to such person or persons by ordinary mail
to the last known post office address, delivered in person or by delivering it
to and leaving it in the possession of any person in charge of the premises, or
in case such person is not found upon the premises and reasonable attempts to
locate the individual or a valid address have been unsuccessful, by affixing a
copy thereof, in a conspicuous place at the entrance door or avenue of access;
and such procedure shall be deemed equivalent of personal notice.
   (D)   Fines.  Any person or legal entity who violates any provision of this
article or provisions of this Code or fails to comply with any of the
requirements thereof shall be subject to a fine for each offense of not less
than $150 nor more than $1,000. Each day that a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense.
   (E)   Suspension or revocation of residential rental license.  Any person or
legal entity who violates any provision of the article or the provisions of
this Code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof shall be
subject to suspension or revocation of their license.
   (F)   Pre-court compliance and payment of fines. Any person charged with any
violation of this article who has since come into compliance and who desires to
pay the applicable fine in advance of a court or administrative adjudication
hearing may contact the village and request a re-inspection or shall fully
comply with the residential rental licensing provisions of this chapter. Upon
verification of compliance, the village may accept prepayment of any fine, or
may otherwise agree to dispose of the matter in advance of a court or
administrative adjudication hearing, subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   No pre-court payment shall be made more than five days from the
date on the ticket that set forth the court hearing;
      (2)   A receipt shall be issued for any pre-court payment;
      (3)   Any violation for which the fine or penalty is paid in full by pre-
court-payment as provided in this subsection shall not be subject to further
prosecution;
      (4)   If more than two violations are issued for the same property in any
one year period, only the first two violations may be subject to the pre-court
or administrative adjudication hearing payment pursuant to this subsection;
      (5)   Any violation for which a fine is sought shall be confirmed by the
code official to be in compliance no less than five days before the date of a
court hearing set for such violation at the request of the person receiving the
citation alleging the violation.
      (6)   No pre-court payment shall be available to any person who has
received a notice of suspension or revocation of their license.
      (7)   No pre-court payment shall be available to any person who has
received more than three violations issued for the same property.
(Ord. 2014-09-46, passed 9-15-2014; Ord. 2016-06-28, passed 6-6-2016)
ARTICLE 13: MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
10-13-1   Definitions
   
10-13-2   Massage business license required
   
10-13-3   Application for massage establishment business license
   
10-13-4   Issuance of license for a massage establishment
   
10-13-5   Approval or denial of application
   
10-13-6   Posting of license; photo identification card
   
10-13-7   Register of employees
   
10-13-8   Revocation of suspension of license
   
10-13-9   Revocation of massage therapist license
   
10-13-10   Facility requirements
   
10-13-11   Operating requirements
   
10-13-12   Persons under age 18 prohibited on premises
   
10-13-13   Alcoholic beverages prohibited
   
10-13-14   Hours
   
10-13-15   Employment of massage therapist
   
10-13-16   Inspections required
   
10-13-17   Unlawful acts
   
10-13-18   Massage establishment license; exemptions
   
10-13-19   Sale or transfer or change of location
   
10-13-20   Name and place of business
   
10-13-21   Joint and several liability
   
10-13-22   Public nuisance
   
10-13-23   Duty to report
   
10-13-24   Violation and penalty
§ 10-13-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   APPLICANT. Any person or entity seeking a massage establishment business
license. If it is a corporation or limited liability company, the term shall
include any stockholder holding more than 5% of the stock, and each officer and
director. If it is a partnership, it shall include each partner, including each
limited partner. It shall also include the manager or other person principally
in charge of the operation of the business.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person over 18 years of age, other than a massage therapist,
who renders any service in connection with the operation of a massage business
and receives compensation from the operator of the business or patrons.
   LICENSEE. The operator of a massage establishment.
   MASSAGE. Any method of pressure on or friction against or stroking,
kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating of the body
with the hands, elbows, feet, or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical
apparatus or appliance, with or without rubbing alcohol, liniments,
antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar
preparations used in this practice, under such circumstances that it is
reasonably expected that the person to whom treatment is provided, or some
third party on such person's behalf, will pay money or give any other
consideration or gratuity.
   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment having a fixed place of business
where any person, firm, association or corporation engages in or carries on, or
permits to be engaged in or carried on, a business of providing massages.
   MASSAGE THERAPIST. Any person who, for any consideration or gratuity
whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage and is licensed by the State of
Illinois.
   OUTCALL MASSAGE SERVICE. Any business, a function of which is to engage in
or carry on massages at a location designated by the customer or patron rather
than at a massage establishment.
   PATRON. Any person who is offered or receives a massage under such
circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he or she will pay money or
any other consideration for such massage.
   SEXUAL MISCONDUCT. Any unwelcome behavior of a sexual nature that is
committed without consent or by force, intimidation, coercion, or manipulation.
   SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA. Genitals, pubic area, anus, or perineum of any
person, or the vulva or breasts of a female.
   STATE LICENSE. A valid license issued pursuant to the Illinois Massage
Licensing Act (225 ILCS 57/1 et seq.).
(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)
§ 10-13-2 MASSAGE BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A) Massage business license required; exceptions. No person or entity shall
operate a massage establishment unless that person has a valid massage
establishment business license issued by the village pursuant to the provisions
of this article for each and every separate office or place of business in the
village. However, where individuals possessing the license required in division
(B) below perform massage in their own homes or as an outcall massage service
without a massage establishment in Carol Stream, no massage business license
shall be required for that home. When a licensee performs massage in his or her
own home, the requirements of the Carol Stream zoning code pertaining to home
occupations shall apply. All massage establishments within the village shall be
licensed on or before September 1, 2018, which licenses shall expire on
December 31, 2019. Thereafter, all licenses shall be due on or before January 1
of each year and will terminate on December 31 following such issuance, unless
sooner suspended or revoked.
   (B)   State license required. No person shall engage in massage for
compensation or other consideration, unless the person has a valid state
license issued pursuant to the Massage Licensing Act (225 ILCS 57/1 et seq.).
(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-18)
§ 10-13-3 APPLICATION FOR MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT BUSINESS LICENSE.
   (A) Every applicant for a license to maintain, operate, or conduct a massage
establishment shall file an application, under oath, with the Village of Carol
Stream upon a form provided by the Village Clerk and pay a nonrefundable annual
license fee, in the amount set forth in §
10-1-19 of this chapter. Copies of the massage establishment business license
application shall be forwarded to the Director of Community Development. The
Director of Community Development shall, within 30 days of receiving a complete
application, cause an inspection of the premises proposed to be operated as a
massage establishment and upon inspection, shall prepare a written report
concerning compliance with the applicable regulations. The complete
application, once accepted, shall also be referred to the Police Department by
the Village Clerk for investigation. The Police Department will perform the
required criminal record check. Background investigations shall require the
submission of fingerprints for the owner/applicant(s) and the manager(s). The
cost of the criminal record check and cost of fingerprint submissions shall be
borne by the applicant.
   (B) Each application shall contain the following information:
      (1)    The name under which the business will be conducted and a complete
statement of the service or services to be provided.
      (2)   The location, mailing address and all telephone numbers where the
business is to be conducted. If the premises is leased, the name and address of
the owner of the premises, and if the premises is held in a trust, the names
and addresses all owners of the beneficial interest in the trust. A copy of the
lease for the premises shall also be provided.
      (3)   Federal employer identification number (FEIN) and state of Illinois
business tax number (IBT).
      (4)   The name and residence address of each applicant (all provisions
which refer to applicant include an applicant which may be a corporation,
limited liability company or partnership).
         (a) If applicant is a corporation or limited liability company, the
term applicant includes each of the officers, directors, member or manager of
the corporation or company and of each stockholder owning more than 5% of the
stock of the corporation or company.
         (b)   If applicant is a partnership, the term applicant includes each
of the partners including limited partners.
         (c)   If the applicant is a corporation, limited liability company or
partnership, the business address of the partnership, if different from the
address of the massage establishment shall be provided.
      (5)   The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address
of each applicant.
      (6)   Proof that each applicant is at least 18 years of age.
      (7)   Copy of a government issued photo identification, such as a
driver's license or State of Illinois identification for each applicant.
      (8)   One portrait photograph of each applicant at least two inches by
two inches and a complete set of applicant's fingerprints shall be taken by the
Chief of Police or his or her agent. If the applicant is a partnership, limited
liability company, or corporation, the Chief of Police shall have the right to
require fingerprints of any and all officers, shareholders, directors,
partners, members, managers or agents of the entity along with the fee for
each.
      (9)   Business, occupation, or employment of each applicant for the three
years immediately preceding the date of application.
      (10)   The massage or similar business license history of the applicant;
whether such person, in previously operating in this or another municipality,
county or state, has had a business license revoked or suspended, the reason
for the revocation or suspension, and the business activity or occupation
subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation.
      (11)   All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic
violations, including the dates of convictions, nature of the crimes and place
convicted for each applicant.
      (12)   The name and residence address of each person who shall be
employed as massage therapists, managers, assistant managers or any other
persons principally in charge of the operation of the business, whether such
persons are employees or independent contractors. Each application shall be
accompanied by a copy of the state license issued by the State of Illinois
authorizing the practice of massage therapy under the Massage Licensing Act
(225 ILCS 57/1 et seq.). Each application shall also be accompanied by a copy
of a photo identification card such as an Illinois driver's license or Illinois
identification card for each massage therapist, manager, assistant manager or
any other person principally in charge of the operation of the business. The
business license holder shall provide the information required herein for every
new employee or independent contractor employed, to the Village Clerk, at least
ten business days prior to the person beginning work at the premises.
      (13)   The name and address of any other business owned or operated by
any person whose name is required to be given as an applicant as provided in
division (B)(4) above.
      (14)   A description of any other business to be operated on the same
premises or on adjoining premises owned or controlled by the applicant.
      (15)   Authorization of the village, its agents and employees to seek
information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set
forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the
permit. Authorization for the village or its agents to inspect the premises.
      (16)   Such other identification and information necessary to discover
the truth of the matters required to be set forth in the application.
   (C)   Upon the completion of the above provided form and the furnishing of
all foregoing information, the Village Clerk shall accept the completed
application for the necessary investigations. The holder of a massage
establishment license shall notify the Village Clerk of each change in any of
the data required to be furnished by this section within ten days after such
change occurs.
(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)
§ 10-13-4 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE FOR A MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT.
   The Village of Carol Stream shall issue a license for a massage
establishment if all requirements for a massage establishment described in this
article are met unless it finds one or more of the following:
   (A)   The license application is incomplete, is missing required
documentation, or the correct license fee or other fees or fines owed to the
Village of Carol Stream have not been tendered to the village.
   (B)   The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not
comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the village's
building, zoning, and health regulations.
   (C)   The applicant or employees, other than massage therapists, have been
found guilty of any of the following offenses or found guilty of an offense
outside the State of Illinois that would have constituted any of the following
offenses if committed within the State of Illinois:
      (1)    An offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person
of another that amounts to a felony.
      (2)   An offense enumerated in any provision of Article 11, entitled "Sex
Offenses", of the Illinois Criminal Code (720 ILCS 5/11-1 et seq.), as amended
from time to time.
      (3)   Any offense involving possession or delivery of a controlled
substance or other illegal drug offense that amounts to a felony.
      (4)    A felony offense enumerated in Article 24, "Deadly Weapons", of
the Illinois Criminal Code (720 ILCS 5/24-1 et seq.), as amended from time to
time, or any other offense that involves the use of weapons.
      (5)   Any crime of moral turpitude. The Village of Carol Stream may issue
a license to any person found guilty of (or whose employees, other than massage
therapists, have been found guilty of) any of the crimes described in division
(C)(1) through (C)(4) of this section only if it determines that such finding
of guilt occurred more than ten years prior to the date of the application and
the individual has had no subsequent felony findings of guilty of any nature
and no subsequent misdemeanor findings of guilty for a crime or crimes set
forth in this section. Further, for the purpose of this section, any finding of
guilty, including an order resulting in supervision, shall apply.
   (D)   Any applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent
statement of fact or failed to disclose or attempted to conceal required
information or a fact in the license application or in any other document
required by the village.
   (E)   Any applicant has had a massage business, massage therapy or other
similar permit or license denied, revoked or suspended by the village or any
other state, county or local agency within five years prior to the date of the
application.
   (F)   Any applicant is not 18 years of age or older.
   (G)   Copies of the state licenses of persons, who will be providing massage
services at the business establishment, including outcall services, have not
been provided.
   (H)   The business is licensed as a sexually oriented business as defined in
§
10-10-3.
(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)
§ 10-13-5 APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF APPLICATION.
   The Village of Carol Stream, through the Village Clerk or designee shall act
to approve or deny an application for a license under this article within a
reasonable period of time and in no event shall the Village of Carol Stream act
to approve or deny said license later than 90 days from the date that a full
and complete application was filed with the village.
(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)
§ 10-13-6 POSTING OF LICENSE; PHOTO IDENTIFICATION CARD.
   (A)   The state licenses issued to each massage therapist shall be posted in
the reception area for patrons, or in the therapist's work area and shall be
available for immediate inspection.
   (B)   The village's paper massage business license shall be posted in a
publicly viewable area and the village's sticker massage business license shall
be posted in a front window.
   (C)   In the event of the loss or destruction of a license issued pursuant
to this article, upon written application to the Office of the Clerk, and
payment of a fee of $5, a duplicate license will be issued, noting it is a
reissued license.
   (D)   Every massage therapist shall possess a government issued photo
identification card while on the licensed premises and produce such
identification card upon request of any representative of the Village of Carol
Stream.
   (E)   To provide outcall massage service, the massage therapist must possess
a government issued photo identification card and state license in the name of
the individual providing the service.
   (F)   Every manager, assistant manager or other person principally in charge
of the operation of the business shall possess a government issued photo
identification card while on the licensed premises and produce such
identification card upon request of any representative of the Village of Carol
Stream.
(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)
§ 10-13-7 REGISTER OF EMPLOYEES.
   The licensee or person designated by the licensee of a massage establishment
shall maintain a register of all persons employed at any time, including
massage therapists, along with their current photographs and a copy of their
licenses. Such register shall be available at the massage establishment to
representatives of the Village of Carol Stream during regular business hours.
(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)
§ 10-13-8 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Any license issued for a massage establishment may be revoked or
suspended by the Village of Carol Stream after notice and a hearing by the
Mayor or designee, for good cause, or in any case where any of the provisions
of this article are violated or where any employee of the licensee, including a
massage therapist, is engaged in any conduct which violates any of the state or
local laws or regulations at licensee's place of business. Such license may
also be revoked or suspended by the Village of Carol Stream after notice and
hearing, upon the recommendations of the inspector that such business is being
managed, conducted or maintained without regard to proper sanitation and
hygiene.
   (B)   Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license or permit shall be
given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and
the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail
(return receipt requested) to the licensee or permittee at his or her last
known address, at least three days prior to the date set for the hearing.
Notice will also be posted on a public bulletin board and the village website
no less than 48 hours before the hearing. A stenographic or electronically
recorded record of the hearing shall be kept. The village shall pay the cost of
attendance fees of the reporter and the costs of the transcript, if such
transcript shall be ordered by the village. The licensee or permittee shall pay
the cost of any transcript ordered by him or her.
   (C)   Within a reasonable time after the conclusion of the hearing, but not
later than 30 days after such conclusion, the Mayor shall file a written
decision in which he or she has summarized the evidence and has stated the
reasons for his or her decision. If a license has been revoked for any cause,
no license shall be granted to any person for the conduct of the business of a
massage establishment at that location for a period of 12 months.
   (D)   No person shall destroy, obliterate, take, remove or carry away
without the consent of the owner any license, certificate, plate or sticker
which has been issued by the village, except when such license, certificate,
plate or sticker has been discontinued or the licensed premises have been
abandoned. Nothing herein shall prevent the Mayor or his or her duly authorized
representative from removing any license, certificate, plate or sticker from
the possession of a former licensee, his or her premises, any vehicle or any
machine when such license has been revoked under the provisions of this code.
(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)
§ 10-13-9 REVOCATION OF MASSAGE THERAPIST LICENSE.
   A massage therapist license issued by the state may be revoked or suspended
in accordance with the Illinois Massage Licensing Act (225 ILCS 57/1 et seq.),
as it may be amended from time to time. The Chief of Police shall report any
and all suspected violations to the department of professional regulation.
(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)
§ 10-13-10 FACILITY REQUIREMENTS.
   Every location for which a massage establishment license is sought shall, in
addition to meeting all other village regulations, comply with the following:
   (A)   The minimum number of plumbing fixtures shall be provided and
maintained as required by code.
   (B)   The establishment will comply with all building, property maintenance,
and fire codes.
(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)
§ 10-13-11 OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Prices for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception
area in a location available to all prospective customers on a placard of at
least eight inches by ten inches.
   (B)   All employees, including massage therapists, shall wear nontransparent
outer garments.
   (C)   The sexual or genital areas of patrons must be covered with
nontransparent towels, cloths, or undergarments when in the presence of an
employee or massage therapist.
   (D)   No massage therapist, employee, or licensee shall perform, offer, or
agree to perform any act, which shall require the touching of a patron's sexual
or genital area.
   (E)   Any reception or waiting area shall be open to the public and visible
from outside of the immediate entrance of establishment, e.g., storefront
windows and any entrance door shall be transparent and unobstructed. Any
exterior windows or doors with a view to the waiting area or reception area
must be free of any posting or material that would obstruct the view of the
waiting area or reception area from the outside of the establishment. No
massage establishment shall be equipped with tinted or one-way glass in any
room or office. No doors to corridors or individual massage rooms shall be
equipped with a lock or shall be obstructed.
   (F)   No massage establishment granted a license under the provisions of
this article shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed,
published or distributed any advertisement, picture, or statement which is
known or through the exercise of reasonable care should be known to be false,
deceptive or misleading in order to induce any person to purchase or utilize
any professional massage services.
   (G)   No massage establishment granted a license under the provisions of
this article shall depict, place, publish, distribute, or cause to be depicted,
placed, published, or distributed any advertising matter that suggests to
prospective patrons that any services are available other than those services
permitted by this article, or which would suggest that employees or massage
therapists are dressed in any manner other than that permitted by this article.
   (H)   No advertising will suggest or describe the physical characteristics
of employees or massage therapists.
   (I)   No person shall be denied a massage or access to the massage
establishment because of gender.
   (J)   No massage establishment or employee of any massage establishment may
display or offer to others any novelties, instruments, devices, or
paraphernalia that are designed primarily for use in connection with specified
sexual activities or that give the appearance of or simulate any of the
specified anatomical areas.
   (K)   An owner or manager of the massage establishment must be present
during all operating hours.
(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)
§ 10-13-12 PERSONS UNDER AGE 18 PROHIBITED ON PREMISES.
   It shall be unlawful to permit any person under the age of 18 years to be
offered or receive a massage at any massage business establishment unless
accompanied by, or with written consent of, a parent or legal guardian.
(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)
§ 10-13-13 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep, or cause to be sold,
given, dispensed, provided or kept, any alcoholic beverage on any premises used
in any way for or by a massage business, patron or massage therapist.
(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)
§ 10-13-14 HOURS.
   No portion of any business premises used in any way for or by a massage
business shall be kept open for any purpose between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m.
(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)
§ 10-13-15 EMPLOYMENT OF MASSAGE THERAPIST.
   No person shall employ, as a massage therapist, any person unless the
employee has obtained and has in effect a state license issued by the Illinois
Department of Professional Regulation pursuant to the Illinois Massage
Licensing Act (225 ILCS 57/1 et seq.), as it may be amended from time to time,
or a reciprocal license as defined by 225 ILCS 57/1 et seq.
(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)
§ 10-13-16 INSPECTIONS REQUIRED.
   Upon issuance of a massage establishment business license, in addition to
the inspection requirements of this article, the licensee shall provide any
representative of the village with reasonable opportunity to inspect the
premises for which the license is issued and to interview the licensee's agents
and employees for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this
article and other applicable ordinances and state and federal laws are being
complied with. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to allow any
representative of the village access to the premises of the massage
establishment or to hinder such access in any manner.
(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)
§ 10-13-17 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, in a massage establishment, to
place his or her hand or hands upon, to touch with any part of his or her body,
to fondle in any manner, or to massage, a sexual or genital area of any other
person.
   (B)    It shall be unlawful for any person, in a massage establishment, to
expose his or her sexual or genital area to any other person. It shall also be
unlawful for any person, in a massage establishment, to expose the sexual or
genital area of any other person.
   (C)    It shall be unlawful for any person, while in the presence of any
other person in a massage establishment, to fail to conceal with a fully opaque
covering, the sexual or genital area of his or her body.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to perform, offer or agree to
perform any act which shall require the touching of a patron's sexual or
genital area or any unlawful act, as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-14, 11-14.1, 11-
14.3, and 11-14.4, which are incorporated as now or hereafter amended.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or managing a
massage establishment, to
cause, allow or permit in or about such massage establishment, any agent,
employee or any other person under his or her control or supervision to perform
such acts prohibited in divisions (A), (B), (C), or (D) above.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this article to administer
or permit massage within the village, except within the establishment licensed
to carry on such business under this article or as outcall massage service.
   (G) It shall be unlawful for any massage service to be carried on within any
cubicle, room, booth or any area within a massage establishment, which is
fitted with a door capable of being locked. Toilets and cubicles used solely
for the application of liquid and vapor baths shall be clearly marked as to
purposes on the exterior door or curtain of the cubicle, room or booth. Nothing
contained in this article shall be construed to eliminate any other regulation
concerning the maintenance of premises, or to preclude authorized inspection of
any premises, whenever such inspection is deemed appropriate by the Carol
Stream Police Department.
(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)
§ 10-13-18 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE; EXEMPTIONS.
   The massage establishment license shall not be required for hospitals,
nursing homes, sanatoriums, or any facility at which a healthcare worker duly
licensed by the State of Illinois provides, on an ongoing basis, professional
health services to individuals, including, but not limited to, the offices of
an occupational therapist licensed under the Illinois Occupational Therapy
Practice Act (225 ILCS 75/1 et seq.); a physical therapist licensed under the
Medical Practice Act (225 ILCS 60/1 et seq.); a chiropractor licensed under the
Medical Practice Act (225 ILCS 60/1 et seq.); and a naprapath listed under the
Illinois Naprapathic Practice Act (225 ILCS 63/1 et seq.).
(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)
§ 10-13-19 SALE OR TRANSFER OR CHANGE OF LOCATION.
   No license issued under the provisions of this article is transferable. Upon
sale, transfer or relocation of a massage establishment, the license shall be
null and void and a new license required. Upon the death or legal incapacity of
the licensee or any co-licensee of the massage establishment, any heir or
beneficiary of a deceased licensee, or any legal guardian of an heir or
beneficiary of a deceased licensee, or any legal guardian of any legally
incapacitated licensee, may continue the business of the massage establishment
for a reasonable period of time not to exceed 60 days to allow for an orderly
transition and application for a new license.
(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)
§ 10-13-20 NAME AND PLACE OF BUSINESS.
   No person granted a license pursuant to this article, shall operate the
massage establishment under a name not specified in the license, nor shall the
person conduct business under any designation or location not specified in the
license, except that the location for outcall massage service need not be
specified on the license.
(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)
§ 10-13-21 JOINT AND SEVERAL LIABILITY.
   Any act or failure to act of an employee, a person performing massage at or
on behalf of a massage establishment, or an agent of the licensee with respect
to the licensed business shall be deemed to be the act of the licensee. The
licensee and individual committing a violation are jointly and severally liable
for any fines or penalties assessed pursuant to this article.
(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)
§ 10-13-22 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   It is determined and declared by the corporate authorities to be a public
nuisance and a menace to the health, safety and welfare for any person, firm
association or corporation to establish, operate, or maintain a massage
establishment, whether open to the public generally or operated as a private or
semi-private club, within the village where any massage therapist, employee or
patron touches, rubs, strokes, kneads, massages, fondles, or manipulates the
genital area of any other person or exposes his or her sexual or genital area
to any other person for the purpose of sexual arousal and/or sexual
gratification. Touching of the genital area by a licensed physician,
chiropractor, osteopath, or nurse for the purpose of medical examination or
treatment shall not constitute a public nuisance hereunder.
(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)
§ 10-13-23 DUTY TO REPORT.
   All employees, managers and agents of a massage establishment are mandated
reporters and shall immediately report to the Carol Stream Police Department
within one business day any sexual misconduct that is observed or any
allegations of sexual misconduct that are reported.
(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)
§ 10-13-24 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be punished by a
fine as determined by §
15-4-5 (Index of Minimum Fines). Penalties for ordinance violations may also be
determined by administrative adjudication. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each time on each day during or on which violation occurs or is
permitted to occur.
(Ord. 2018-05-19, passed 5-7-2018)
ARTICLE 14: VIDEO GAMING
Section
   
10-14-1   Definitions
   
10-14-2   Licenses required
   
10-14-3   Authority of the Liquor Commissioner
   
10-14-4   Terminal operators licensing
   
10-14-5   Video gaming locations - license
   
10-14-6   Licensing procedures
   
10-14-7   Denials of applications for licensure
   
10-14-8   Inspection
   
10-14-9   Continuing duty to report violations
   
10-14-10   Duties of licensed video terminal operators
   
10-14-11   Duties of licensed video gaming locations
   
10-14-12   Minimum standards for use agreements
   
10-14-13   Multiple types of licenses prohibited
   
10-14-14   Display of terminal licenses
   
10-14-15   Disciplinary actions against licensees
   
10-14-16   State - local relations
   
10-14-17   Privilege granted by license; transferability
   
10-14-18   Licenses subject to amendments
   
10-14-19   Applicability of Illinois Gambling Act
   
10-14-20   Judicial review
§ 10-14-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the
following meaning:
   APPLICANT. A person applying for any license under this chapter.
   APPLICATION. All material submitted, including the instructions,
definitions, forms and other documents issued by the village, comprising the
video gaming license application submitted to the village.
   CLASS V LIQUOR LICENSE. A liquor license authorization granted by the
village to holders of a Class A, Class B, Class F, Class I or Class N liquor
license permitting the licensee to operate video gaming terminals in the
village.
   CLASS VC LIQUOR LICENSE. A liquor license authorization granted by the
village permitting the licensee to sell beer and wine and to operate video
gaming terminals in a video gaming café within the village.
   CODE. The Village Code of Ordinances of the Village of Carol Stream,
Illinois.
   CONTROL. The possession, direct or indirect, of power to direct or cause the
direction of the management and policies of an applicant or licensee through
the ownership of voting securities, by contract or otherwise.
   DISTRIBUTOR. An individual, partnership, corporation, or limited liability
company licensed under the Video Gaming Act to buy, sell, lease, or distribute
video gaming terminals or major components or parts of video gaming terminals
to or from terminal operators.
   GAME. A gambling activity that is played for money, property or anything of
value, including, without limitation, those played with cards, chips, tokens,
vouchers, dice, implements, or electronic, electrical or mechanical devices or
machines.
   GAMING. The dealing, operating, carrying on, conducting, maintaining or
exposing for play of any game.
   GAMING OPERATION. The conducting of gaming or the providing or servicing of
gaming equipment.
   ILLINOIS GAMING BOARD. The board created by the Illinois legislature to
regulate video gaming by the State of Illinois.
   LICENSED TECHNICIAN. An individual who is licensed under the Video Gaming
Act to repair, service, and maintain video gaming terminals.
   LICENSED TERMINAL HANDLER. A person, including, but not limited to, an
employee or independent contractor working for a manufacturer, distributor,
supplier, technician, or terminal operator, who is licensed under the Video
Gaming Act to possess or control a video gaming terminal or to have access to
the inner workings of a video gaming terminal. A licensed terminal handler does
not include an individual, partnership, corporation, or limited liability
company defined as a manufacturer, distributor, supplier, technician or
terminal operator under Section 5 of the Video Gaming Act.
   LICENSED VIDEO GAMING LOCATION. A licensed establishment, as defined in
Section 5 of the Video Gaming Act, that holds a valid Class V or Class VC
liquor license permitting the licensee to operate and maintain up to six video
gaming terminals at the establishment.
   LICENSEE. The person, firm or entity to whom an authorization is granted by
the village permitting it to engage in the defined activities of video gaming.
   LIQUOR COMMISSIONER. The Liquor Commissioner of the village.
   LIQUOR LICENSE. A license issued by the Liquor Commissioner authorizing the
holder to sell and offer for sale at retail alcoholic liquor for use or
consumption.
   MANUFACTURER. An individual, partnership, corporation, or limited liability
company that is licensed under the video gaming act and that manufactures or
assembles video gaming terminals.
   OWNERSHIP INTEREST. Includes, but is not limited to, direct, indirect,
beneficial or attributed interest, or holder of stock options, convertible
debt, warrants or stock appreciation rights, or holder of any beneficial
ownership or leasehold interest.
   PERSON. Both individuals and business entities.
   STATE. The State of Illinois.
   STATE LICENSE. Authorization granted by the Illinois Gaming Board permitting
a licensee to engage in the defined activities of video gaming.
   SUPPLIER. An individual, partnership, corporation, or limited liability
company that is licensed under the Video Gaming Act to supply major components
or parts of video gaming terminals to licensed terminal operators.
   TERMINAL OPERATOR. An individual, partnership, corporation, or limited
liability company that is licensed under the Video Gaming Act that owns,
services, and maintains video gaming terminals for placement in licensed video
gaming locations in the village.
   USE AGREEMENT. A contractual agreement between a licensed terminal operator
and a licensed video gaming location establishing terms and conditions for
placement and operation of video gaming terminals by the licensed terminal
operator within the premises of the licensed video gaming location.
   VIDEO GAMING ACT. The Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.
   VIDEO GAMING EQUIPMENT. Video gaming terminals, associated video gaming
equipment and major components or parts.
   VIDEO GAMING OPERATION. As the context requires, means the conducting of
video gaming and all related activities.
   VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL. Any electronic video game machine that, upon
insertion of cash, is available to play or simulate the play of a video game,
including, but not limited to, video poker, line up, and blackjack, as
authorized by the Illinois Gaming Board utilizing a video display and
microprocessors in which the player may receive free games or credits that can
be redeemed for cash. The term does not include a machine that directly
dispenses coins, cash, or tokens or is for amusement purposes only.
   VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL LICENSE. Authorization granted by the village
permitting a licensed terminal operator to operate a video gaming terminal in
the village.
(Ord. 2020-09-29, passed 9-21-2020; Ord. 2022-02-09, passed 2-7-2022)
§ 10-14-2 LICENSES REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall operate or maintain any video gaming terminal or allow
video gaming in any premises in the village unless that person holds a valid
state location license issued under the Video Gaming Act and a valid village
Class V or Class VC liquor license and has entered into a written use agreement
with a terminal operator for placement of the terminals. A copy of the use
agreement shall be on file in the licensed video gaming location in the village
and available for inspection by the Liquor Commissioner or his or her
designees.
   (B)   No person shall own, maintain, or place a video gaming terminal in the
village unless he or she has a valid terminal operator's state license issued
under the Video Gaming Act and a valid village video gaming terminal operators
license for each video gaming terminal placed and maintained in the village. A
terminal operator may only place video gaming terminals in the village for use
in licensed video gaming locations.
   (C)   It is unlawful to operate a video gaming terminal in the village
without a valid video gaming sticker affixed thereon.
(Ord. 2020-09-29, passed 9-21-2020; Ord. 2022-02-09, passed 2-7-2022)
§ 10-14-3 AUTHORITY OF THE LIQUOR COMMISSIONER.
   The Liquor Commissioner shall have jurisdiction, subject to the jurisdiction
of the Illinois Gaming Board, over and shall supervise all video gaming
operations in the village governed by the Video Gaming Act, the regulations
promulgated pursuant to the Video Gaming Act and the Village Code. The Liquor
Commissioner shall have all powers necessary and proper to fully and
effectively execute the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited
to, the following:
   (A)   To investigate applicants and determine the eligibility of applicants
for video gaming licenses.
   (B)   To have jurisdiction and supervision, subject to the jurisdiction and
supervision of the Illinois Gaming Board, over all video gaming operations in
the village and all persons in establishments where video gaming operations are
conducted.
   (C)   To adopt rules for the purpose of administering the provisions of this
chapter and to prescribe rules, regulations, and conditions under which all
video gaming in the village shall be conducted. Such rules and regulations are
to provide for the prevention of practices detrimental to the public interest
and for the best interests of video gaming, including rules and regulations
regarding: 1) the inspection of such establishments and the review of any
permits or licenses necessary to operate an establishment under any laws or
regulations applicable to establishments and 2) to impose penalties for
violations of this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-09-29, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 10-14-4 TERMINAL OPERATORS LICENSING.
   The rules contained in this section and the divisions thereunder shall
govern qualifications for terminal operators’ licenses issued by the village
pursuant to this article.
   (A)   Issuance of license.
      (1)   The burden is upon each applicant to demonstrate his or her
suitability for licensure. Each video gaming terminal operator owning,
maintaining, or placing a video gaming terminal in a licensed video gaming
location located in the village shall obtain a video gaming terminal license
from the Liquor Commissioner for each video gaming terminal in a licensed video
gaming location located in the village
      (2)   Each person seeking and possessing a license as a video gaming
terminal operator shall submit to a background investigation conducted by the
Illinois Gaming Board with the assistance of the state police or other law
enforcement. The background investigation shall include each beneficiary of a
trust, each partner of a partnership, and each director and officer and all
stockholders of 5% or more in a parent or subsidiary corporation of a video
gaming operator or a licensed video gaming location.
   (B)   Qualifications for licensure.
      (1)   Applicant qualifications for terminal operators license. The Liquor
Commissioner may not grant any video gaming license until the Liquor
Commissioner is satisfied that the applicant is:
         (a)   A person of good character, honesty and integrity;
         (b)   A person whose background, including criminal record, reputation
and associations, is not injurious to the public health, safety, morals, good
order and general welfare of the people of the state or the village;
         (c)   A person whose background, including criminal record, reputation
and associations, does not discredit or tend to discredit the Illinois Gaming
Industry, the state or the village;
         (d)   A person whose background, including criminal record,
reputation, habits, social or business associations does not adversely affect
public confidence and trust in gaming or pose a threat to the public interests
of the state, the village or to the security and integrity of video gaming;
         (e)   A person who does not create or enhance the dangers of
unsuitable, unfair or illegal practices, methods and activities in the conduct
of video gaming;
         (f)   A person who does not present questionable business practices
and financial arrangements incidental to the conduct of video gaming activities
or otherwise;
         (g)   A person who, either individually or through employees,
demonstrates business ability and experience to establish, operate and maintain
a business for the type of license for which application is made;
         (h)   A person who does not associate with, either socially or in
business affairs, or employ persons of notorious or unsavory reputation or who
have extensive police records, or who have failed to cooperate with any
officially constituted investigatory or administrative body;
         (i)   A person who has not had a gaming license revoked in any other
jurisdiction;
         (j)   A person who has met the qualifications required in the Video
Gaming Act or the regulations promulgated under the Video Gaming Act or this
article.
      (2)   No person may be licensed as a video gaming terminal operator if
that person has been found unqualified for licensing by the Illinois Gaming
Board.
      (3)   The Liquor Commissioner shall not grant a license to a person who
has facilitated, enabled or participated in the use of coin operated devices
for gambling purposes. For the purposes of this division, "facilitated,
enabled, or participated in the use of coin operated amusement devices for
gambling purposes" means that the person has been convicted of any violation of
Chapter 28 of the Illinois Criminal Code, 720 ILCS 5/28-1 et seq. If there is
pending legal action against a person for any such violation, then the Liquor
Commissioner shall delay the licensure of that person until the legal action is
resolved.
   (C)   Testing requirements for video terminals. Every video gaming terminal
offered in the village for play shall first be tested and approved pursuant to
the rules of the Illinois Gaming Board, and each video gaming terminal offered
in the village for play shall conform to an approved model. Every video gaming
terminal offered in the village for play must meet minimum standards set by an
independent outside testing laboratory approved by the Illinois Gaming Board.
(Ord. 2020-09-29, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 10-14-5 VIDEO GAMING LOCATIONS – LICENSE.
   In addition to the requirements set forth in Chapter 11, Article 2 of this
Code, the rules contained in this section shall apply to the issuance of a
Class V or Class VC liquor license for the operation of video gaming.
   (A)   License required.
      (1)   Each owner or operator of any establishment in the village where a
video gaming terminal is maintained or placed shall obtain a Class V or Class
VC liquor license from the Liquor Commissioner.
      (2)   The burden is upon each applicant to demonstrate his or her
suitability for licensure.
      (3)   Each person seeking a Class V or Class VC liquor license shall
submit to a background investigation as required by Chapter 11 of this Code.
   (B)   Qualifications for licensure.
      (1)   Applicant qualifications Class V or Class VC liquor license. The
Liquor Commissioner may not grant any Class V or Class VC liquor license until
the Liquor Commissioner is satisfied that the applicant is:
         (a)   A person of good character, honesty and integrity;
         (b)   A person whose background, including criminal record, reputation
and associations, is not injurious to the public health, safety, morals, good
order and general welfare of the people of the state or the village;
         (c)   A person whose background, including criminal record, reputation
and associations, does not discredit or tend to discredit the Illinois Gaming
Industry, the state or the village;
         (d)   A person whose background, including criminal record,
reputation, habits, social or business associations does not adversely affect
public confidence and trust in gaming or pose a threat to the public interests
of the state, the village or to the security and integrity of video gaming;
         (e)   A person who does not create or enhance the dangers of
unsuitable, unfair or illegal practices, methods and activities in the conduct
of video gaming;
         (f)   A person who does not present questionable business practices
and financial arrangements incidental to the conduct of video gaming activities
or otherwise;
         (g)   A person who, either individually or through employees,
demonstrates business ability and experience to establish, operate and maintain
a business for the type of license for which application is made;
         (h)   A person who does not associate with, either socially or in
business affairs, or employ persons of notorious or unsavory reputation or who
have extensive police records, or who have failed to cooperate with any
officially constituted investigatory or administrative body;
         (i)   A person who has not had a gaming license revoked in any other
jurisdiction;
         (j)   A person who has met the qualifications required in the Video
Gaming Act or the regulations promulgated under the Video Gaming Act; and
         (k)   A person who is not ineligible from holding a Class V or Class
VC liquor license as set forth in Chapter 11, Article 2 of this Code.
      (2)   No person may be licensed as a video gaming terminal operator if
that person has been found unqualified for licensing by the Illinois Gaming
Board.
      (3)   The Liquor Commissioner shall not grant a license to a person who
has facilitated, enabled or participated in the use of coin operated devices
for gambling purposes. For the purposes of this division, "facilitated,
enabled, or participated in the use of coin operated amusement devices for
gambling purposes" means that the person has been convicted of any violation of
Chapter 28 of the Illinois Criminal Code, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-
1 et seq. If there is pending legal action against a person for any such
violation, then the Liquor Commissioner shall delay the licensure of that
person until the legal action is resolved.
(Ord. 2020-09-29, passed 9-21-2020; Ord. 2022-02-09, passed 2-7-2022)
§ 10-14-6 LICENSING PROCEDURES.
   The rules contained in this section and the subsections thereunder shall
govern procedures for applying for, renewing and maintaining all types of video
gaming licenses issued by the village pursuant to this chapter.
   (A)   Application forms.
      (1)   Applications for licensure or renewal shall be submitted on
applications and forms provided by the village.
      (2)   Additional materials. An applicant or its affiliate may be required
to submit forms or materials in addition to an application as required by
division (A)(1) of this section.
   (B)   Application procedures.
      (1)   Any misrepresentation or omission made with respect to an
application may be grounds for denial of the application.
      (2)   An application shall be deemed filed when the completed application
form, including all required documents and materials, and the application fee
have been submitted.
   (C)   Submission of application. All applications shall be submitted to the
Liquor Commissioner at the village's offices.
   (D)   License fees. All applicants for terminal operator licenses issued by
the Liquor Commissioner shall pay a license fee per terminal in the amount of
$500 (one half of the $1,000 terminal establishment license fee amount per
terminal). All applicants for a Class V or Class VC liquor license shall pay
the license fee as set forth in § 11-2-7.
   (E)   Consideration of applications. Only complete applications will be
considered for licensure. Applications are complete when the applicant has
submitted:
      (1)   All information required by this chapter;
      (2)   All information required or requested by the village; and
      (3)   Payment of the license fee.
   (F)   Withdrawal of applications.
      (1)   An application for licensure under this article may be withdrawn at
any time.
      (2)   If an application for licensure is withdrawn, the applicant may not
reapply for a license within one year from the date withdrawal is granted,
without leave of the Liquor Commissioner.
   (G)   Issuance of license.
      (1)   The Liquor Commissioner may only issue a license after the Illinois
Gaming Board background investigation is complete, the Illinois Gaming Board
determines the applicant is suitable for licensure, and the applicant has filed
a completed application and paid the required license fee.
      (2)   If an applicant is denied a license, the applicant may not reapply
for a license within one year from the date on which the final order of denial
was made.
   (H)   Renewal of license.
      (1)   All licenses issued by the village under this article shall expire
on April 30 and are renewable annually unless sooner canceled or terminated. No
license issued under this article is transferable or assignable.
      (2)   The Liquor Commissioner may only renew a license upon receipt of a
copy of the current state video gaming license, the applicable renewal fee and
any renewal forms provided by the Liquor Commissioner.
      (3)   The Liquor Commissioner may only renew a license if the licensee
continues to meet all qualifications for licensure set forth in the Video
Gaming Act, the regulations promulgated pursuant to the Video Gaming Act and
this chapter.
   (I)   Renewal fees and dates. A licensee shall pay license fees annually,
before May 1 of each year, as applicable.
(Ord. 2020-09-29, passed 9-21-2020; Ord. 2022-02-09, passed 2-7-2022)
§ 10-14-7 DENIALS OF APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSURE.
   (A)   If the Liquor Commissioner finds that an applicant is not suitable for
licensure, the Liquor Commissioner shall issue the applicant a notice of
denial.
   (B)   The Liquor Commissioner shall serve notice on the applicant by
personal service or U.S. certified mail and U.S. mail to the last known address
of the applicant. Service shall be deemed to be complete four days after
mailing.
   (C)   Should an applicant wish to contest the action the Liquor Commissioner
has taken regarding his or her application, the applicant must submit a request
for hearing to the Liquor Commissioner. A request for hearing must be made
within ten days after receipt of notice of denial from the Liquor Commissioner.
A request shall be deemed filed on the date on which it is postmarked. If a
request for hearing is not filed within ten days after the receipt of notice
from the Liquor Commissioner, then the notice of denial becomes the final order
of the Liquor Commissioner denying the applicant's license application.
   (D)   All requests for hearing shall be in writing and shall include an
original and one copy. The request shall contain the following:
      (1)   The name, current address and current telephone number of the
applicant;
      (2)   Detailed reasons why and the facts upon which the applicant will
rely to show that the applicant is suitable for licensure, including specific
responses to any facts enumerated in the Illinois Gaming Board's notice of
denial;
      (3)   The signature of the applicant.
      (4)   A verification of the request for hearing in the following form:
The undersigned certifies that the statements set forth in this request are
true and correct, except as to matters therein stated to be on information and
belief and as to such matters the undersigned certifies as aforesaid that he/
she verily believes the same to be true.
      (5)   The request must be notarized.
   (E)   Hearing.
      (1)   The burden of proof is at all times on the applicant. The applicant
shall have the affirmative responsibility of establishing by clear and
convincing evidence that the applicant is suitable for licensing.
      (2)   All testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation.
      (3)   All testimony and oral proceedings shall be recorded
stenographically or by such other means as to adequately ensure the
preservation of such testimony or oral proceedings and shall be transcribed on
request of any party. The stenographer or such other means as to adequately
ensure the preservation of such testimony or oral proceedings shall be arranged
by the village. The cost of the stenographer or such other means as to
adequately ensure the preservation of such testimony or oral proceedings shall
be paid by the applicant. The transcript shall be paid for by the requesting
party.
      (4)   The Liquor Control Commissioner shall, within five business days
after such hearing, render a written order including written findings of fact
and conclusions of law on which the Liquor Commissioner's decision is based.
      (5)   Copies of the Liquor Commissioner's final order shall be served on
the applicant by personal delivery, certified mail or overnight express mail to
applicant's last known address.
      (6)   The Liquor Commissioner's final order shall become effective upon
personal delivery to the applicant or upon posting by certified or overnight
express mail to applicant's last known address.
   (F)   Sanctions and penalties.
      (1)   The Liquor Commissioner may impose sanctions and penalties if the
Liquor Commissioner finds that a party has acted in bad faith, for the purpose
of delay, or has otherwise abused the hearing process. Sanctions and penalties
include, but are not limited to, default judgment or directed finding on one or
more issues.
      (2)   If an applicant fails to testify on his or her own behalf with
respect to any question propounded to him or her, the Liquor Commissioner may
infer that such testimony or answer would have been adverse to the petitioner's
case.
      (3)   Failure of an applicant to appear at a hearing or scheduled
proceeding shall constitute an admission of all matters and facts contained in
the notice of denial. In such cases the Liquor Commissioner may take action
based upon that admission or upon any other evidence, including affidavits,
without any further notice to the applicant.
(Ord. 2020-09-29, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 10-14-8 INSPECTION.
   The Liquor Commissioner and the village's officers, employees and agents
shall have unrestricted access to enter the premises of any licensee or
applicant where evidence of compliance or noncompliance with the provisions of
the Video Gaming Act, the regulations promulgated under the Video Gaming Act or
this chapter may be found.
(Ord. 2020-09-29, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 10-14-9 CONTINUING DUTY TO REPORT VIOLATIONS.
   Licensees and applicants for licensure under this chapter must promptly
report all of the following to the Liquor Commissioner or his or her designee:
   (A)   A violation of the Video Gaming Act, the regulations promulgated under
the Video Gaming Act, this chapter or any illegal conduct including, but not
limited to, the possession, maintenance, facilitation or use of any illegal
gaming device;
   (B)   Any fact, event, occurrence, matter or action that may affect the
conduct of video gaming or the business and financial arrangements incidental
to the conduct of video gaming, or the ability to conduct the activities for
which the licensee is licensed;
   (C)   Each arrest, summons, citation or charge for any criminal offense or
violation, excluding minor traffic violations; and
   (D)   Any adverse action taken or nonrenewal relative to a liquor license.
(Ord. 2020-09-29, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 10-14-10 DUTIES OF LICENSED VIDEO TERMINAL OPERATORS.
   In addition to all other duties and obligations required by the Video Gaming
Act, the regulations promulgated under the Video Gaming Act and this article,
each licensed terminal operator has an ongoing duty to comply with the
following:
   (A)   Assume the primary responsibility for the operation and maintenance of
video gaming terminals and for payment of tax remittance to the State of
Illinois as required by the Video Gaming Act and the payment of the fees
imposed by this chapter on licensed terminal operators;
   (B)   Maintain and provide, either directly or through a licensed
manufacturer, distributor, supplier or technician, an inventory of associated
video gaming equipment to ensure the timely repair and continued, approved
operation and play of the video gaming terminals it operates;
   (C)   Ensure the timely repair and continued, approved operation and play of
the video gaming terminals it operates;
   (D)   Assume responsibility for the payment of valid receipt tickets issued
by video gaming terminals it operates;
   (E)   Maintain at all times an approved method of payout for valid receipt
tickets and pay all valid receipt tickets;
   (F)   Assume responsibility for the video gaming terminal and associated
video gaming equipment malfunctions, including any claim for the payment of
credits arising from malfunctions;
   (G)   Promptly notify the Illinois Gaming Board of electronic or mechanical
malfunctions or problems experienced in a video gaming terminal that affect the
integrity of video gaming terminal play;
   (H)   Extend no form of deferred payment for video gaming terminal play in
which an individual receives something of value now and agrees to repay the
lender in the future for the purpose of wagering at a video gaming terminal;
   (I)   Maintain a separate bank account for each licensed video gaming
location for deposit of aggregate revenues generated from the play of video
gaming terminals and allow for electronic fund transfers for tax payments;
   (J)   Enter into a written use agreement with each licensed video gaming
location where video gaming terminals will be located, which agreement complies
with the Video Gaming Act, the regulations promulgated under the Video Gaming
Act and this chapter;
   (K)   Obtain and install, at no cost to the state or the village and as
required by the Illinois Gaming Board, all hardware, software and related
accessories necessary to connect video gaming terminals to a central
communications system;
   (L)   Offer or provide nothing of value to any licensed video gaming
location or any agent or representative of any licensed video gaming location
as an incentive or inducement to locate, keep or maintain video gaming
terminals at the licensed video gaming location;
   (M)   Not own, manage or control a licensed video gaming location;
   (N)   Conduct advertising and promotional activities in accordance with the
Video Gaming Act, the regulations promulgated under the Video Gaming Act and
this chapter and in a manner that does not reflect adversely on or that would
discredit or tend to discredit the Illinois gaming industry, the state or the
village;
   (O)   Respond to service calls within a reasonable time from the time of
notification by the video gaming location;
   (P)   Immediately remove all video gaming terminals from the restricted area
of play:
      (1)   Upon order of the Illinois Gaming Board, the village, an agent of
the Illinois Gaming Board or an agent of the village, or
      (2)   That have been out of service or otherwise inoperable for more than
72 hours;
   (Q)   Provide the Illinois Gaming Board with a current list of video gaming
terminals acquired for use in the village;
   (R)   Not install, remove or relocate any video gaming terminal in the
village without notification and approval of the Liquor Commissioner or his or
her designee;
   (S)   Maintain a video gaming terminal access log for each video gaming
terminal, which must be kept inside the video gaming terminal at all times,
documenting all access to the video gaming terminal. The log format shall
provide for the time and date of access, the persons who had access, the
license number when applicable and the nature of the service or repair made
during the access; and
   (T)   Service, maintain or repair video gaming terminals at licensed video
gaming locations only by licensed technicians or licensed terminal handlers.
(Ord. 2020-09-29, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 10-14-11 DUTIES OF LICENSED VIDEO GAMING LOCATIONS.
   In addition to all other duties and obligations required by the Video Gaming
Act, the regulations promulgated under the Video Gaming Act, the provisions of
this article and of
Chapter 11, Article 2 of the Village Code, each licensed video gaming location
has an ongoing duty to comply with the following:
   (A)   Provide secure premises for the placement, operation and play of video
gaming terminals;
   (B)   Permit no one to tamper with or interfere with the approved operation
of any video gaming terminal;
   (C)   Ensure that all connections with the central communications system and
associated video gaming equipment are at all times maintained and prevent any
person from tampering or interfering with the approved, continuing operation of
the central communications system;
   (D)   Accept nothing of value from any video terminal operator or any agent
or representative of any video terminal operator as an incentive or inducement
to locate, keep or maintain video gaming terminals at the licensed video gaming
location;
   (E)   Conduct advertising and promotional activities in accordance with the
Video Gaming Act, the regulations promulgated under the Video Gaming Act and
this chapter and in a manner that does not reflect adversely on or that would
discredit or tend to discredit the Illinois gaming industry, the state or the
village;
   (F)   Immediately remove all video gaming terminals from the restricted area
of play:
      (1)   Upon order of the Illinois Gaming Board, the village, an agent of
the Illinois Gaming Board or an agent of the village, or
      (2)   That have been out of service or otherwise inoperable for more than
72 hours;
   (G)   Enter into a written use agreement with a licensed video terminal
operator for the placement of any video gaming terminals, which agreement shall
comply with the Video Gaming Act, the regulations promulgated under the Video
Gaming Act and this article;
   (H)   Ensure that video gaming terminals are placed and remain in a
designated, approved location;
   (I)   Prevent access to or play of video gaming terminals by persons who are
under the age of 21 years or who are visibly intoxicated;
   (J)   Commit no violations of the laws of this state or the ordinances of
the village concerning the sale, dispensing or consumption on premises of
alcoholic beverages that result in suspension or revocation of any liquor
license held by or associated with a licensed video gaming location;
   (K)   Maintain at all times an approved method of payout for valid receipt
tickets and pay all valid receipt tickets;
   (L)   Extend no form of deferred payment for video gaming terminal play in
which an individual receives something of value now and agrees to repay the
lender in the future for the purpose of wagering at a video gaming terminal;
   (M)   Promptly report all malfunctions of video gaming terminals and all out
of service terminals to the video terminal operator and promptly notify the
Illinois Gaming Board of a terminal operator's failure to provide service and
repair of video gaming terminals and associated equipment within 24 hours after
notice to the terminal operator;
   (N)   Install, post and display signs as required by the Illinois Gaming
Board;
   (O)   Promptly notify the Illinois Gaming Board and the Liquor Commissioner
of any unauthorized or illegal video gaming terminals or any video gaming
device that is in violation of Section 35 of the Video Gaming Act;
   (P)   Exercise control over the licensed video gaming location;
   (Q)   Promptly notify the Illinois Gaming Board and the Liquor Commissioner
of any action taken on or related to any state liquor license held;
   (R)   Allow maintenance and/or service of video gaming terminals and
associated video gaming equipment only by licensed technicians and licensed
terminal handlers possessing valid identification issued by the Illinois Gaming
Board; and
   (S)   Redeem for cash a ticket dispensed by a video gaming terminal within
its redemption period.
(Ord. 2020-09-29, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 10-14-12 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR USE AGREEMENTS.
   In addition to the requirements set forth in the Video Gaming Act, the
regulations promulgated under the Video Gaming Act and this article, a use
agreement must satisfy the following:
   (A)   Only be between a licensed terminal operator and a licensed video
gaming location;
   (B)   Contain an affirmative statement that no inducement was offered or
accepted regarding the placement or operation of video gaming terminals in a
licensed video gaming location;
   (C)   Contain an indemnity and hold harmless provision on behalf of the
state, the Illinois Gaming Board, the village and their officers, employees and
agents relative to any cause of action arising from a use agreement;
   (D)   Prohibit any assignment other than from a licensed terminal operator
to another licensed terminal operator; and
   (E)   Contain a provision that releases the video gaming location from any
continuing contractual obligation to the terminal operator in the event that
the terminal operator has its license revoked or surrenders its license.
(Ord. 2020-09-29, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 10-14-13 MULTIPLE TYPES OF LICENSES PROHIBITED.
   A video gaming terminal operator may not be licensed by the state or the
village as a video gaming terminal manufacturer or distributor or own, manage,
or control a licensed video gaming location, and shall be licensed only to
contract with licensed distributors and licensed video gaming locations. An
owner or manager of a licensed video gaming location may not be licensed by the
state or the village as a video gaming terminal manufacturer, distributor, or
operator, and shall only contract with a licensed operator to place and service
this equipment.
(Ord. 2020-09-29, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 10-14-14 DISPLAY OF TERMINAL LICENSES.
   (A)   Each video gaming terminal shall be licensed by the Illinois Gaming
Board and by the village before placement or operation on the premises of a
licensed video gaming location in the village.
   (B)   Any terminal operator that possesses any video gaming terminal shall
have a registration tag issued by the Illinois Gaming Board and a video gaming
sticker issued by the village securely affixed on each such video gaming
terminal.
   (C)   Any video gaming terminal without a current registration tag and video
gaming sticker shall be subject to seizure. Any agent of the village may demand
and gain access to any property relating to a licensed video gaming location or
any location where video gaming terminals are stored, sold, distributed, or
transported, and seize any video gaming terminal which does not bear a current
registration tag, video gaming sticker or is operating in a manner that
violates any provision of the Video Gaming Act or this article. Such video
gaming terminals so seized shall be subject to confiscation and forfeiture. In
the event the village seizes video gaming terminals in accordance with this
section, the village shall notify the terminal operator of such seizure and of
the terminal operator's right to a hearing. The terminal operator shall have
the burden at hearing of establishing that the video game terminal displayed a
valid registration tag and video gaming sticker and was operating in full
compliance with the Video Gaming Act and this article.
   (D)   No video gaming terminal licensed under this chapter may be played
except during the legal hours of operation allowed for the consumption of
alcoholic beverages at the licensed video gaming location. A licensed video
gaming location that violates this division is subject to termination of its
license by the Liquor Commissioner.
(Ord. 2020-09-29, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 10-14-15 DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS AGAINST LICENSEES.
   The rules contained in this section shall govern all disciplinary actions
against licensees including, but not limited to, suspension and revocation of a
terminal operators license or a Class V liquor license.
   (A)   Grounds for disciplinary actions.
      (1)   Holders of any license issued under this chapter shall be subject
to imposition of fines, suspension, revocation or restriction of license, or
other disciplinary action for any act or failure to act by themselves or by
their agents or employees that violates any provision of this chapter, is
injurious to the public health, safety, morals, good order and general welfare
of the people of the state or the village, or that would discredit or tend to
discredit the Illinois video gaming industry, the state or the village. Without
limiting the provisions of this division (A)(1), the following acts or
omissions may be grounds for discipline:
         (a)   Failing to comply with or make provision for compliance with the
Video Gaming Act, the regulations promulgated under the Video Gaming Act and
this chapter, any federal, state or local law or regulation, or a control
system or protocol mandated by the Illinois Gaming Board or the village;
         (b)   Failing to comply with any order or ruling of the Illinois
Gaming Board or its agents pertaining to the regulation of video gaming in the
state;
         (c)   Failing to comply with any order or ruling of the Liquor
Commissioner or the village's officers, employees or agents pertaining to the
regulation of video gaming in the village;
         (d)   Receiving goods or services from a licensee or other person in
violation of the Video Gaming Act's or this chapter's licensing requirements,
or in violation of any restriction, condition or prohibition of a license;
         (e)   Being suspended or ruled ineligible or having a license revoked
or suspended by the Illinois Gaming Board, the village or in any state or
gaming or video gaming jurisdiction;
         (f)   Employing, associating with, or participating in any enterprise
or business with a documented or identifiable organized crime group or
recognized organized crime figure;
         (g)   Employing, associating with, or participating in any enterprise
or business with persons of notorious or unsavory reputation or who have
extensive police records, or who have failed to cooperate with any officially
constituted investigatory or administrative body;
         (h)   Failing to establish and maintain standards and procedures
designed to prevent ineligible or unsuitable persons from being employed by the
licensee, including any person known to have been found guilty of cheating or
using any improper device in connection with any game or gaming device
regulated under the Video Gaming Act or under the law of any gaming
jurisdiction;
         (i)   Misrepresenting any information to the Illinois Gaming Board,
the Liquor Commissioner or the village;
         (j)   Intentionally making, causing to be made, or aiding, assisting,
or procuring another to make any false statement in any report, disclosure,
application, permit, form, or any other document, including improperly
notarized documents, required by the Video Gaming Act, the regulations
promulgated under the Video Gaming Act or this chapter;
         (k)   Submitting tardy, inaccurate, or incomplete material or
information to the Liquor Commissioner;
         (l)   Obstructing or impeding the lawful activities of the Illinois
Gaming Board or its agents, the Liquor Commissioner or the village's officers,
employees or agents;
         (m)   Willfully or repeatedly failing to pay amounts due or to be
remitted to the state or the village;
         (n)   Failing to timely pay amounts due or to be remitted to the state
or the village;
         (o)   Failing to timely pay a fine imposed by the Illinois Gaming
Board or the village;
         (p)   Failing to respond in a timely manner to communications from the
Illinois Gaming Board or the village;
         (q)   Being unavailable to the Illinois Gaming Board, the village or
their representatives or agents;
         (r)   Aiding and abetting a violation by an Illinois Gaming Board
member, village official or employee, or other government official, of a
requirement established by statute, resolution, ordinance, personnel code or
code of conduct;
         (s)   Violation of the Video Gaming Act, the regulations promulgated
under the Video Gaming Act or this chapter;
         (t)   Facilitating, enabling or participating in the use of coin
operated amusement devices for gambling purposes on or after December 16, 2009;
         (u)   Engaging in, or facilitating, any unfair methods of competition
or unfair or deceptive acts or practices, including, but not limited to, the
use or employment of any deception, fraud, false pretense, false promise or
misrepresentation, or the concealment, suppression or omission of any material
fact in the conduct of any video gaming operation;
         (v)   Failing to maintain minimum qualifications for licensure; and
         (w)   Any cause that, if known by the Liquor Commissioner, would have
disqualified the applicant from receiving a license.
      (3)   A person who has had his or her license revoked by the Liquor
Commissioner may not reapply for a license.
   (B)   Notice of proposed disciplinary action against licensees.
      (1)   When notified of facts sufficient to support disciplinary action
against a licensee, the Liquor Commissioner shall immediately notify the
licensee of the proposed disciplinary action. The notice shall advise the
licensee of the following:
         (a)   A statement of the facts supporting the proposed disciplinary
action;
         (b)   A description of the rule or statutory section the licensee has
violated;
         (c)   A statement or description of the matters asserted and the
consequences of the failure to respond; and
         (d)   The name and mailing address of the village.
      (2)   The Liquor Commissioner shall serve the notice of proposed
disciplinary action on the licensee by personal service or U.S. certified mail
or U.S. regular mail to the last known address of the licensee. Service is
complete four days after mailing.
   (C)   Hearings in disciplinary actions.
      (1)   Should a licensee wish to contest the proposed disciplinary action,
the licensee must submit a response to the notice of proposed disciplinary
action described in division (B) of this section to the Liquor Commissioner.
      (2)   All responses shall be in writing and shall include an original and
one copy. The response shall contain the following:
         (a)   The name, current address and current telephone number of the
licensee.
         (b)   A clear and concise statement admitting or denying each of the
factual allegations set forth in the notice of proposed disciplinary action,
with each admission or denial being shown in separately numbered paragraphs
corresponding to the separately numbered paragraphs in the notice of proposed
disciplinary action.
         (c)   For all factual allegations that the licensee denies, a clear
and concise statement of facts upon which the licensee relies or will rely on
at a hearing.
         (d)   A signature of the licensee.
         (e)   A verification of the licensee in the following form: The
undersigned certifies that the statements set forth in this request are true
and correct, except as to matters therein stated to be on information and
belief and as to such matters the undersigned certifies as aforesaid that he or
she verily believes the same to be true.
         (f)   The response must be notarized.
         (g)   The response must be filed within ten days after receipt of the
notice of proposed disciplinary action. A response shall be deemed filed on the
date on which it is postmarked.
      (4)   If a response is not filed within ten days after receipt of the
notice of proposed disciplinary action then the proposed disciplinary action
becomes effective and final immediately.
      (5)   No response shall be deemed filed if it fails to comply with any of
the requirements of this section.
      (6)   The licensee may submit a response by:
         (a)   Personal delivery;
         (b)   Certified mail, postage prepaid; or
         (c)   Overnight express mail, postage prepaid.
      (7)   All responses must be submitted to the Liquor Commissioner at the
village's offices.
      (8)   If a response is properly filed, the Liquor Commissioner will
conduct a hearing.
   (D)   Appearances.
      (1)   All licensees may be represented by an attorney who is licensed to
practice in Illinois. All attorneys who appear in a representative capacity on
behalf of a licensee must file a written appearance setting forth:
         (a)   The name, address and telephone number of the attorney;
         (b)   The name and address of the licensee the attorney represents;
and
         (c)   An affirmative statement that the attorney is licensed to
practice in Illinois.
      (2)   Only individual attorneys may file appearances. Any licensee's
attorney who has not filed an appearance may not address the Liquor
Commissioner or sign pleadings.
      (3)   An attorney may only withdraw his or her appearance upon written
notice to the Liquor Commissioner.
      (4)   An individual may appear on his or her own behalf.
      (5)   A partner may appear on behalf of a partnership.
      (6)   A corporation and a limited liability company must be represented
by an attorney.
      (7)   The village will be represented by its corporation counsel.
   (E)   Proceedings. The village shall establish the charges contained in the
notice of proposed disciplinary action by a preponderance of the evidence.
   (F)   Evidence.
      (1)   The hearing need not be conducted according to the technical rules
of evidence. Any relevant evidence may be admitted and shall be sufficient in
itself to support a finding if it is the sort of evidence on which responsible
persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of
the existence of any common law or statute that might make improper the
admission of evidence over objection in a civil action. Hearsay may support a
finding of the Liquor Commissioner if it is the best evidence available, has
sufficient indicia of trustworthiness and reliability and is of the type
reasonably and customarily relied on in the gaming industry.
         (a)   If relevant, and not precluded from the hearing by section 6(d)
of the Illinois Gambling Act, 230 ILCS 10/6(d), relating to all licensed
applicants, the official Illinois Gaming Board records or certified copies of
the records shall be admissible into evidence if the records tend to prove or
disprove an allegation contained in the complaint.
         (b)   Official Illinois Gaming Board records are documents either
prepared by or provided to the Illinois Gaming Board for the purpose of
conducting its regular business.
         (c)   If relevant and not precluded from the hearing by a statute,
regulation or ordinance, official village records or certified copies of the
records shall be admissible into evidence.
         (d)   Official village records are documents either prepared by or
provided to the village for the purpose of conducting its regular business.
      (2)   The parties should, to the fullest extent possible, stipulate to
all matters that are not or fairly should not be in dispute.
      (3)   The parties may make objections to evidentiary offers. When an
objection is made, the Liquor Commissioner may receive the disputed evidence
subject to a ruling at a later time.
      (4)   The Liquor Commissioner may take official notice of any generally
accepted information or technical or scientific matter within the field of
video gaming, and any other fact that may be judicially noticed by courts of
this state. The parties shall be informed of any information, matter or facts
so noticed, including any village staff memoranda or data, and shall be given
reasonable opportunity to refute that information.
   (G)   Prohibition on ex parte communication. No licensee or its
representative shall communicate directly or indirectly with the Liquor
Commissioner regarding any pending disciplinary matter, except upon notice to
and opportunity for all parties to participate.
   (H)   Hearing.
      (1)   Upon conclusion of the hearing the Liquor Commissioner shall render
a written order including written findings of fact and conclusions of law on
which the Liquor Commissioner's decision is based. The findings of fact shall
be based exclusively on the evidence and on matters officially noticed.
      (2)   Copies of the Liquor Commissioner's final order shall be served on
the licensee by personal delivery, certified mail or overnight express mail to
licensee's last known address.
      (3)   The Liquor Commissioner's final order shall become effective upon
personal delivery to the licensee or upon posting by certified or overnight
express mail to applicant's last known address.
   (I)   Sanctions and penalties.
      (1)   The Liquor Commissioner may impose sanctions and penalties if the
Liquor Commissioner finds that a party has acted in bad faith, for the purpose
of delay, or has otherwise abused the hearing process. Such sanctions and
penalties include, but are not limited to, default judgment or directed finding
on one or more issues.
      (2)   If a licensee fails to testify on his or her own behalf with
respect to any question propounded to him or her, the Liquor Commissioner may
infer that such testimony or answer would have been adverse to the licensee's
case.
      (3)   Failure of a licensee to appear at a hearing or scheduled
proceeding shall constitute an admission of all matters and facts contained in
the complaint. In such cases the Liquor Commissioner may take action based upon
that admission or upon any other evidence, including affidavits, without any
further notice to the licensee.
   (J)   Penalties.
      (1)   The Liquor Commissioner may impose fines, suspend, revoke or
restrict any license issued under this chapter or impose other disciplinary
action for any act or failure to act by the licensee or by the licensee's
agents or employees that violates any provision of the Video Gaming Act or the
regulations promulgated under the Video Gaming Act or this chapter.
      (2)   Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, limited liability
company, or other entity recognized in law who violates any provision of this
chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall be subject
to a fine of not less than $150 nor more than $1,500. Each and every day that a
violation occurs or exists shall constitute a separate and distinct offense for
which a fine may be imposed. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the
village shall have available to it all remedies in law or in equity or as may
be otherwise provided for by the ordinances of the village.
      (3)   Every gambling device found in a licensed video gaming location in
the village operating gambling games in violation of this chapter shall be
subject to seizure and confiscation, and shall be turned over to the Illinois
Gaming Board as provided in Section 1800.1110 of the Illinois Administrative
Code.
      (4)   Any village liquor license issued by the Liquor Commissioner under
the provisions of
Chapter 11 of this Code to any operator of a licensed video gaming location
that operates or permits the operation of a video gaming terminal within its
establishment in violation of this chapter may be immediately revoked.
(Ord. 2020-09-29, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 10-14-16 STATE - LOCAL RELATIONS.
   (A)   Whenever the village takes any action authorizing or prohibiting the
licensing operation, or use of video gaming terminals in the village it shall
notify the Illinois Gaming Board of such action.
   (B)   Whenever the village or the Liquor Commissioner takes action relating
to the operation or use of a video gaming terminal in the village, whether
licensed or unlicensed, the Illinois Gaming Board shall be notified and the
notice shall specify the extent of the action taken and the reasons for the
action. The village and the Liquor Commissioner shall thereupon take whatever
action is necessary under the Act. If the village confiscated video gaming
terminals or terminal income, the village shall, as soon as practicable under
the circumstances, turn over the video gaming terminals and terminal income to
the Illinois Gaming Board unless otherwise ordered by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2020-09-29, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 10-14-17 PRIVILEGE GRANTED BY LICENSE; TRANSFERABILITY.
   A license granted under this article shall be purely a personal privilege,
good for not to exceed one year after issuance, unless sooner revoked as
provided in this chapter, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be
subject to attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or
transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated. Such license shall not descend by the laws of testate or
intestate devolution, but it shall cease upon the cessation of business or
death of the licensee.
(Ord. 2020-09-29, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 10-14-18 LICENSES SUBJECT TO AMENDMENTS.
   All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to any and all
changes or amendments that may be hereafter made to the provisions of this
chapter or to any rules or changes in rules adopted by the Liquor Commissioner.
No licensee shall have any vested right to the continuation of any provision of
this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-09-29, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 10-14-19 APPLICABILITY OF ILLINOIS GAMBLING ACT.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the Illinois Gambling Act
and all rules promulgated thereunder, and to the Video Gaming Act and all rules
promulgated thereunder, except that in the event of a conflict between the two
Acts, the provisions of the Video Gaming Act shall apply, and in the event of a
conflict between the rules promulgated under the two Acts, the rules
promulgated under the Video Gaming Act shall apply.
(Ord. 2020-09-29, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 10-14-20 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   Judicial review of final determinations of the Liquor Commissioner issued
after hearings regarding licensure or discipline made under this chapter shall
be subject to judicial review, by writ of certiorari.
(Ord. 2020-09-29, passed 9-21-2020)
CHAPTER 11: INTOXICATING LIQUOR
      Article
         
1.   LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER
         
2.   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR DEALERS
         
3.   SOCIAL HOSTING
ARTICLE 1: LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER
Section
   
11-1-1   Commissioner
   
11-1-2   Compensation
   
11-1-3   Powers, duties and functions
   
11-1-4   Suspension and revocation of liquor licenses
   
11-1-5   Complaint of violation
   
11-1-6   Notice, hearing and order
Cross-reference:
   Liquor dealers, see
Ch. 11, Art. 2
§ 11-1-1 COMMISSIONER.
   The Village President shall, in accordance with state law, serve as the
Liquor Control Commissioner of the village and shall be charged with the
administration of the provisions of the Liquor Control Act, 235 ILCS 5/4-1 et
seq., and of such ordinances and resolutions relating to alcoholic liquor as
may be enacted. The Village President may appoint a person or persons to assist
him or her in the exercise of the powers and the performance of the duties
provided for such Liquor Control Commissioner.
§ 11-1-2 COMPENSATION.
   The corporate authorities may establish a salary for the Liquor Control
Commissioner prior to the term of a new Village President. The corporate
authorities may, from time to time, fix and pay compensation to the deputies,
assistants or employees of the Liquor Control Commissioner as may be deemed
necessary for the proper performance of the duties vested in them.
§ 11-1-3 POWERS, DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS.
   The Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the following powers, duties and
functions with respect to local liquor licenses:
   (A)   To grant or suspend for not more than 30 days or revoke for cause all
local licenses issued to persons or entities for premises within his or her
jurisdiction;
   (B)   To adopt rules and regulations for the conduct and operation of a
licensee’s business which are not inconsistent with state law or municipal
ordinances;
   (C)   To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter, at any
time, upon the premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the
provisions of the state law or municipal ordinances or any rules or regulations
adopted by him, her or by the State Liquor Control Commission have been or are
being violated, and at such time to examine the premises of the licensee in
connection therewith;
   (D)   To receive complaints from any citizen within his or her jurisdiction
that any of the provisions of the state law or of this code have been or are
being violated and to act upon such complaint in the manner provided by law;
   (E)   To order local license fees paid to the Village Treasurer;
   (F)   To examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant for a
local license or for a renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom notice of
revocation or suspension has been served, or any licensee against whom a
citation proceeding has been instituted by the State Liquor Control Commission;
to examine, or cause to be examined, the books and records of any such
applicant or licensee or respondent; and to hear testimony and take proof for
his or her information in the performance of his or her duties; and for such
purposes to issue subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of the state.
For the purpose of obtaining any of the information desired by the Liquor
Control Commissioner under this section, he or she may authorize his or her
agent to act on his or her behalf; and
   (G)   To order, upon the issuance of a written order, the licensed premises
closed for not more than seven days, giving the licensee an opportunity to be
heard during that period, if the Liquor Control Commissioner has reason to
believe that any continued operation of a particular licensed premises will
immediately threaten the welfare of the community; except that, if such
licensee shall also be engaged in the conduct of another business or businesses
on the licensed premises, such order shall not be applicable to such other
business or businesses.
§ 11-1-4 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LIQUOR LICENSES.
   The Liquor Control Commissioner may, in accordance with law, revoke or
suspend any license issued by him or her if he or she determines that the
licensee has violated any state law, any municipal ordinance, or any applicable
rule or regulation established by the Liquor Control Commissioner which is not
inconsistent with law.
§ 11-1-5 COMPLAINT OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   Any five residents of the village shall have the right to file a
complaint with the Liquor Control Commissioner stating that any retailer
licensed within the village has been or is violating the provisions of the
State Liquor Control Commission. Such complaint shall be in writing and shall
be signed and sworn to by the parties complaining. The complaint shall state
the particular provision, rule or regulation believed to have been violated and
the facts in detail upon which belief is based.
   (B)   If the Liquor Control Commissioner is satisfied that the complaint
substantially charges a violation and that from the facts alleged there is
reasonable cause for such belief, he or she shall set the matter for hearing
and shall serve notice upon the licensee of the complaint.
§ 11-1-6 NOTICE, HEARING AND ORDER.
   (A)   No such liquor license shall be revoked or suspended, except after a
public hearing before the Liquor Control Commissioner. The Liquor Control
Commissioner shall give written notice to the licensee, not less than three
days prior to the hearing, affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and
defend or otherwise answer.
   (B)   The Liquor Control Commissioner shall, within five days after such
hearing, if he or she determines that the license should be revoked or
suspended, state the reason or reasons for such determination in a written
order of revocation or suspension and shall serve a copy of such order upon the
licensee within five days. The corporate authorities prescribe that an appeal
from a decision of the Local Liquor Commissioner of the village shall be
limited to review of the official record of the proceedings of such Local
Liquor Control Commissioner.
   (C)   In the event that a hearing takes place and an appeal from that
hearing is filed, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall require that a
certified official copy of the proceedings, taken and prepared by a certified
court reporter or a certified shorthand reporter, shall be filed within five
days after notice of the filing of such appeal. The review by the State Liquor
Control Commission shall be limited to and based upon the transcript so filed.
No new or additional evidence shall be admitted or considered.
   (D)   In the event the appeal is from an order of the Liquor Control
Commissioner denying a renewal application, the licensee shall have on deposit
with the village an amount sufficient to cover the license fee for the renewal
period and the certificate of dram shop insurance as required by this code.
ARTICLE 2: ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR DEALERS
Section
   
11-2-1   Definitions
   
11-2-2   License required
   
11-2-3   Term of license
   
11-2-4   Applications
   
11-2-5   Persons ineligible to license
   
11-2-6   Violation of Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act
   
11-2-7   Classification of licenses; number issued; fees
   
11-2-8   Record of licenses
   
11-2-9   Disposition of fees
   
11-2-10   Dram shop insurance
   
11-2-11   License renewal
   
11-2-12   Displaying license
   
11-2-13   Duplicate license
   
11-2-14   Transfer of license
   
11-2-15   Change in personnel
   
11-2-16   Change of premises name
   
11-2-17   Change of location
   
11-2-18   Recovery of fees
   
11-2-19   Use of premises after revocation
   
11-2-20   Retail sales restrictions
   
11-2-21   Election days
   
11-2-22   Restrictions concerning minors
   
11-2-23   Parental responsibility
   
11-2-24   Hours, days of sale regulated
   
11-2-25   Books and records available on request
   
11-2-26   Sales to minors, habitual drunkards, spendthrifts and mental
incompetents
   
11-2-27   Gambling
   
11-2-28   Refilling original packages
   
11-2-29   Civil rights in licensed premises
   
11-2-30   Sales on credit
   
11-2-31   Sanitary conditions
   
11-2-32   Health requirements; employees and others
   
11-2-33   Peddling
   
11-2-34   Possession of alcoholic liquor in motor vehicles
   
11-2-35   Compliance with state statutes
   
11-2-36   BASSET training required
   
11-2-37   Video gaming by persons under 21 years of age prohibited
   
11-2-38   Conduct prohibited in licensed premises
   11-2-39   Shipping and delivery of alcoholic liquor
Cross-reference:
   Liquor Control Commission, see
Ch. 11, Art. 1
§ 11-2-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid containing
more than 0.5% of alcohol by volume, which is fit for beverage purposes.
   CLUB. A corporation organized under the laws of this state, not for
pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the
sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used and maintained by its
members through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring or leasing a
building or space in a building of such extent and character as may be suitable
and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its
members and their guests, and provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and
dining room space and equipment, and maintaining a sufficient number of
servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for
its members and their guests; and, provided further that, its affairs and
management are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee or
similar body chosen by the members at their annual meeting and that no member
or any other officer, agent, or employee of the club is paid, or directly or
indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits
from the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to the club or  the members
of the club or its guests introduced by members, beyond the amount of such
salary as may be fixed and voted at any annual meeting by the members or by its
board of directors or other governing body out of the general revenue of the
club.
   INTENTIONAL CONDUCT. Conduct engaged in by a person with the conscious
objective to accomplish that result or engage in that conduct.
   KNOWING CONDUCT. Conduct engaged in by a person when he or she is
consciously aware of the nature or attendant circumstances of his or her
conduct which constitutes an offense under this section.
   LEGAL GUARDIAN. Any foster parent, person appointed guardian or given
custody of a minor by a circuit court of this state, or person appointed
guardian or given custody of a minor under the State Juvenile Court Act, being
705 ILCS 405/1-1 et seq., not including any person appointed guardian only to
the estate of a minor.
   MINOR. Any person over seven years of age, but not yet 21 years of age.
   NEGLIGENCE. Conduct engaged in by a person where such person fails to be
aware of a substantial and unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or that
a result will follow which constitutes an offense under this section and where
such failure constitutes a substantial deviation from the standard of care
which a reasonable person would exercise in the situation.
   PARENTS. The father and mother of a minor child, whether by birth or
adoption, or the parent having legal custody of the minor in the event the
parents are divorced or separated. The term PARENT, as used in this section,
shall also be deemed to mean LEGAL GUARDIAN.
   RECKLESS CONDUCT. Conduct engaged in by a person in conscious disregard of a
substantial and unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or that a result
will follow which constitutes an offense under this section and where such
disregard constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care which a
reasonable person would exercise in the situation.
   RETAIL SALE. The sale for use or consumption and not for resale. The retail
sale of alcoholic liquor shall include providing alcoholic liquor in
conjunction with the sale of a service or product.
(Ord. 2025-10-42, passed 10-6-2025)
§ 11-2-2 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale in the
village any alcoholic liquor without having a village liquor license, or to
sell or offer for sale any alcoholic liquor in violation of the terms of a
village liquor license.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any business or not-for-profit corporation to
allow the consumption of alcoholic liquor on the premises without a valid
village liquor license issued pursuant to the provisions of the village code.
(Ord. 2011-12-47, passed 12-19-2011; Ord. 2025-10-42, passed 10-6-2025)
§ 11-2-3 TERM OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Each license shall terminate on April 30 next following its issuance.
A full yearly fee shall be paid for each license issued between the period of
May 1 through October 31. In the event that a new license is sought between the
period of November 1 through April 30, the fee for such new license shall be
50% of the yearly license fee.
   (B)   In the event that an application for the renewal of an existing
license is not filed by the second Wednesday in April, or in the event that
payment submitted with the application renewed is returned to the village
because of insufficient funds or other reason, the amount of the applicable fee
shall be increased by 20%.
(Ord. 90-03-25, passed 3-27-1990)
§ 11-2-4 APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Applications for such licenses shall be made to the Liquor Control
Commissioner, in writing, signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by a
duly authorized agent thereof if a club or corporation, verified by oath or
affidavit, and shall contain information required by application forms approved
by the Liquor Control Commissioner and provided by the Village Clerk.
   (B)   All such applications shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee in
the amount of $500 to cover application handling and the costs to conduct a
background investigation of the individual or the duly authorized agent. An
additional fee of $150 shall be paid for each additional individual or
authorized agent for which an investigation must be conducted. Application fees
are in addition to the yearly license fee.
   (C)   Any change in the individual or the duly authorized agent made during
the term of the license which requires an investigation shall be accompanied by
a non-refundable fee in the amount of $375 for each such change made during the
year.
   (D)   Such applications shall contain the following information and
statements:
      (1)   The name, age and address of all applicants, whether individuals,
partners, or limited partners; in the case of corporations or clubs, the date
of incorporation or organization, corporate or organizational purpose, and
names and addresses of all officers and directors. In addition, corporate
applicants whose stock is not regulated by a state or federal securities
commission shall identify all stockholders, including trust beneficiaries,
pledges, contract purchasers, optionees on holders of a right of first refusal
to purchase, or persons otherwise having a similar interest in any of its
stock, by name, address and number of shares;
      (2)   The citizenship of the applicant; his or her place of birth and, if
a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his or her naturalization;
      (3)   The character of business of the applicant; and, in the case of a
corporation, the objects for which it was formed;
      (4)   The location and description of the premises or place of business
which is to be operated under such license;
      (5)   A statement as to whether applicant has made similar application
for a similar license on premises other than described in this application, and
the disposition of such application;
      (6)   A statement that the applicant has never been convicted of a felony
and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
contained in this article, laws of the state or ordinances of the village;
      (7)   The name and address of the landlord, if the premises are leased;
      (8)   The address of the applicant’s ware-house if he or she warehouses
liquor;
      (9)   Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof, or
by the federal government has been revoked, and the reasons therefor; and
      (10)   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of
the state or the United States in the conduct of his or her place of business.
(Ord. 92-06-76, passed 6-23-1992)
§ 11-2-5 PERSONS INELIGIBLE TO LICENSE.
   No such retail liquor dealer’s license shall be issued to the following:
   (A)   A person who is not a resident of the village; (See division (J) below
for corporations.)
   (B)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which he or she resides;
   (C)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States;
   (D)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state
law if the Liquor Control Commissioner determines, after investigation, that
such person has not been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public
trust;
   (E)   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper, or is keeping a
house of ill fame;
   (F)   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality;
   (G)   A person whose license issued under this article has been revoked for
cause;
   (H)   A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application;
   (I)   A co-partnership, unless all the members of such co-partnership shall
be qualified to obtain a license;
   (J)   Corporations:
      (1)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stock-holders owning in the aggregate more than 5% of the stock
of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for
any reason other than citizenship and residence within the village; and
      (2)   A corporation, unless it is incorporated in this state, or unless
it is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the State Business
Corporation Act, being 805 ILCS 5/1.05 et seq., to transact business in the
state.
   (K)   Any person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent,
unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required by the
licensee;
   (L)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor, or who
shall have forfeited his or her bond to appear in court to answer charges for
any such violation;
   (M)   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a
license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for
which the license is to be issued;
   (N)   Any law enforcing public official, including members of the Liquor
Control Commission, the Village President and any member of the corporate
authorities within their own community; and no such official whose residence is
within the village shall be interested in any way, either directly or
indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor;
   (O)   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated
by the licensee;
   (P)   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as prescribed by
state law;
   (Q)   A person to whom a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering
stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period;
   (R)   A co-partnership to which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period, or if any of the partners have been issued a federal gaming device
stamp or federal wagering stamp by the federal government for the current tax
period;
   (S)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 20% of the stock of such
corporation has been issued a federal gaming device stamp or wagering stamp for
the current tax period; and
   (T)   Any premises for which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period.
§ 11-2-6 VIOLATION OF RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX ACT.
   In addition to other grounds specified in this article, the Liquor Control
Commissioner may refuse the issuance or renewal of a retail license, or suspend
or revoke such license, for any of the following violations of the state law:
   (A)   Failure to make a tax return;
   (B)   The filing of a fraudulent return;
   (C)   Failure to pay all or part of any tax or penalty finally determined to
be due;
   (D)   Failure to keep books and records;
   (E)   Failure to secure and display a certificate or subcertificates of
registration; and/or
   (F)   Willful violation of any rule or regulation of the state relating to
the administration and enforcement of tax liability.
Cross-reference:
   Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act, see
Ch. 5, Art. 1
§ 11-2-7 CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES; NUMBER ISSUED; FEES.
   Licenses issued under this article shall be divided into various classes,
and shall be limited in number and shall provide for fees as follows.
   (A)   Class A licenses.
      (1)   Class A licenses shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic
beverages in hotels, restaurants and bowling alleys for consumption on the
premises. The issuance of a Class A license in a restaurant and the retention
of that license in a restaurant shall only take place where more than 50% of
the gross retail sales in such restaurant shall be derived from the sale of
food and non-alcoholic beverages. Not more than 17 Class A licenses shall be
issued. The fee for such license shall be $3,725 for each year the license is
issued in the name of such licensee.
      (2)   The holder of a Class A license may also apply for a special
license which shall permit the retail sale of alcoholic liquors through the
entire license year for consumption in a structure located within the village
where the holder of the Class A license has entered into an agreement with the
owner or tenant to provide food and liquor catering services for a business or
social event. The arrangement between the holder of the Class A license and the
person or entity for whom the catering services are to be performed must be a
bona fide contract and such operation may not be a permanent extension or a
satellite operation of the Class A licensee. A Class A special license shall
also authorize the retail sale of wine, but not for consumption on the premises
where sold, when such sale is made in conjunction with the sale of a carry-out
food order at the restaurant for which the license holder possesses a Class A
license. No such special license shall be issued. The fee for such special
license shall be $300 for each year the license is issued in the name of the
licensee.
   (B)   Class B licenses. Class B licenses shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquors in hotels and restaurants located in the same building or
complex as a hotel, or in meeting rooms, banquet facilities and conference
areas located in the same hotel. Banquet facilities, meeting rooms and
conference areas are locations which are not open to the general public, but
are rented to persons or groups for meals, parties, weddings, conferences and
other similar functions. The issuance of a Class B license in a restaurant
shall only take place where more than 50% of the gross retail sales in such
restaurant are derived from the sale of food and non-alcoholic beverages. When,
within a single hotel, the retail sale of alcoholic liquors in a restaurant is
provided by a different person, partnership, co-partnership or corporation from
that entity which provides service within meeting rooms, banquet facilities and
conference areas, a separate license shall be required for each entity. Not
more than one license shall be issued. The fee for such license shall be $3,850
for each year the license is issued in the name of the licensee.
   (C)   Class C licenses. Class C licenses shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor, but not for consumption on the premises where sold. No more
than 18 such licenses shall be issued. The fee for such license shall be $3,400
for each year that the license is issued in the name of such licensee.
   (D)   Class E licenses.
      (1)   Class E licenses shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor on the premises during a 24-hour period if such sales are limited to
occasions when groups are assembled on the premises solely for the promotion of
some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic liquor.
Issuance of such 24-hour licenses shall be limited to schools, churches,
hospitals, homes for the aged or indigent persons, or for veterans, their
spouses or children, or any military or naval station, governmental group or
fraternal organization incorporated under a general not-for-profit corporation
act.
      (2)   No more than seven such Class E licenses shall be issued to any
group mentioned herein, or to any person representing any group mentioned
herein in any one year. The fee for such 24-hour license shall be $25, unless
waived by the Liquor Control Commissioner.
   (E)   Class F licenses. Class F licenses shall authorize the retail sale of
beer and wine only, for consumption on the premises. The retention of such
Class F license shall only take place where more than 75% of the gross retail
sales on such premises shall be derived from the sale of food and non-alcoholic
beverages. No more than ten Class F licenses shall be issued. The fee for such
license shall be $2,175 for each year that the license is issued in the name of
such licensee.
   (F)   Class G licenses. Class G licenses shall authorize the retail sale of
beer and wine only, but not for consumption on the premises where sold. No more
than one such license shall be issued. The fee for such license shall be $1,700
for each year that the license is issued in the name of such licensee.
   (G)   Class I licenses. Class I licenses shall authorize the retail sale of
draft beer only, for consumption on the premises where sold. The retention of
such Class I license shall only take place where more than 75% of the gross
retail sales on such premises shall be derived from the sale of food and non-
alcoholic beverages. The draft beer may only be furnished in regular glasses or
in disposable glasses furnished without tops. The sale of such draft beer shall
be made at a separate station or location from the place where food or non-
alcoholic beverages are sold. The holder of such a license shall post signs in
prominent places within the establishment stating that "BEER MAY NOT BE REMOVED
FROM THE PREMISES". Zero Class I licenses are authorized for issuance. The fee
for such license shall be $925 for each year that the license is issued in the
name of such licensee.
   (H)   Class J licenses. Class J licenses shall authorize the retail sale of
wine, in its original package, not for consumption on the premises, by a
restaurant holding a Class A license, under the following conditions: The
retail sale must only be to members of a wine club operated by the restaurant
or the retail sale must be made to a dining patron of the restaurant in
conjunction with a meal that has been served to the dining patron. Tasting or
sampling of wine on the premises shall be allowed only if conducted as part of
a promotion or sales device for the purpose of the retail sale of wine through
wine club membership. Zero Class J licenses are authorized for issuance. The
fee for such license shall be $1,100 for each year that the license is issued
in the name of such licensee.
   (I)   Class K licenses. Class K licenses shall authorize the retail sale of
beer and wine by means of mail order, telephone order, or internet transmitted
order for delivery to be made directly to the purchaser.
      (1)   A Class K license shall only be issued to a bona fide mail order,
telephone order, or internet business for retail distribution of beer and/or
wine with no direct sales of beer and wine at the facility.
      (2)   Beer and wine shall be sold and delivered in sealed packages only,
and shall not be for gift or consumption on the premises of the licensee. Sales
shall only be by mail order, telephone order or by internet for delivery to
various locations or destinations away from the premises of the licensee.
      (3)   It is a condition of the Class K license that, beer and wine be
sold only through mail order, telephone or internet order and such beer and
wine be delivered by the licensee or an agent of the licensee, or by common
carrier to locations and destinations away from the premises of licensee, in
accordance with the provisions of § 11-2-39 of this Code.
      (4)   Zero Class K licenses is authorized for issuance. The fee for such
license shall be $1,700 for each year that the license is issued in the name of
such licensee.
      (5)   The provisions of §§ 11-2-22 and 11-2-26, concerning sale or
delivery to underage persons, shall apply to any delivery made by a Class K
license holder whether such delivery is made by the licensee an agent of the
licensee, or common carrier. Evidence of any delivery made or shipped by a
licensee in violation of §§ 11-2-22, 11-2-26 or 11-2-39 shall be grounds for
suspension or revocation of the Class K license.
   (J)   Class L licenses. Class L licenses shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquors by means of mail order, telephonic order or internet
transmitted order for delivery to be made directly to the purchaser.
      (1)   A Class L license shall only to a bona fide mail order, telephone
order or internet business for retail distribution of alcoholic liquor with no
direct sales of alcoholic liquor at the facility.
      (2)   Alcoholic liquor shall be sold and delivered in sealed packages
only, and shall not be for gift or consumption upon the premises of the
licensee. Sales shall only be by mail order, telephone order or by internet for
delivery to various locations away from the premises of the licensee.
      (3)   It is a condition of the Class L license that alcoholic liquor be
sold only through mail order, telephone order or internet order and such
alcoholic liquor be delivered by the licensee or an agent of the licensee, or
by common carriers to locations and destinations away from the premises of
licensee, in accordance with the provisions of § 11-2-39.
      (4)   One Class L license is authorized for issuance. The fee for such
license shall be $3,400 for each year the license is issued in the name of such
licensee.
   (K)   Class N license. A Class N license shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquors for the consumption on the premises, but only when those
premises are a fixed location owned by a veterans' group or fraternal
organization incorporation under a general Not-for-Profit Corporation Act to
which only its members and members' guests shall be served the alcoholic
liquor. Zero licenses are authorized for issuance. The fee for such license
shall be $1,625 for each year the license is issued in the name of the
licensee.
   (L)   Class O license.
      (1)   A Class O license shall authorize the consumption of beer and wine
which has been brought onto the premises by a patron or patrons over the age of
21 for on-site consumption where the premises is that of a restaurant as
defined herein. The following provisions shall apply.
         (a)   Service of alcohol shall be permitted in conjunction with the
purchase and consumption of a meal prepared on the premises while seated at a
table and served by wait staff.
         (b)   No more than one 750 ml bottle of wine per patron or no more
than 36 ounces of beer per patron (unopened) shall be permitted to be brought
into the premises.
         (c)   Service of alcohol shall be allowed only during the restaurant
hours of operation and only along with and during the regular food service and
shall not exceed the hours of service of alcohol found in §
11-2-24.
         (d)   Service of alcohol shall be limited to indoor seating only.
Under no circumstances shall the service of alcohol be permitted outside unless
otherwise permitted by the Carol Stream Code of Ordinances.
         (e)   Licensees may only provide glassware and ice to patrons, may
uncork, pour and control its consumption and may charge a corkage fee. The
amount of any corkage fee shall be prominently displayed on the establishment's
menu.
         (f)   The licensee shall not permit any customer to leave the licensed
premises with any open beer or wine container. Partially consumed wine, which
has been securely sealed by the licensee, placed into a transparent, one-time
use, tamper-proof bag may be removed from the licensed premises. A licensee
shall not charge for this service.
         (g)   Only employees who have successfully completed a certified
training program may perform corkage/serving duties. Such employees must be at
least 19 years of age and shall serve in accordance with all state and local
laws.
         (h)   Licensees are prohibited from storing liquor on the licensed
premises, unless otherwise provided by a separate license classification
validly held by the licensee.
         (i)   Package and on-site sales of liquor is prohibited, unless
otherwise provided by a separate license classification validly held by the
licensee.
         (j)   No licensee shall be permitted to charge a cover charge.
         (k)   A Class O license may be issued to a restaurant in valid
possession of another license classification.
         (l)   Licensees shall provide a certificate of insurance reflecting
coverage for dram shop or equivalent liability for service of alcohol.
         (m)   Licensees shall be liable for violations of this article in the
same manner as the holder of any other classification of liquor license,
including, but not limited to, violations for service to minors and over-
serving of patrons.
      (2)   The number of Class O licenses authorized for issuance shall be set
at zero, effective 5-6-2013.
      (3)   The fee for a Class O license shall be $650 annually.
   (M)   Class P and PL licenses.
      (1)   A Class P license shall authorize the retail sale of beer and wine
in its original package, not for consumption on the premises where sold, in a
premises whose primary purpose is the sale of gasoline. The area devoted to the
sale of beer and wine shall comprise no more than 20% of the premises retail
square footage. For purposes of determining the allowable beer and wine sales
area, the licensee shall submit a floor plan of the retail sales area at the
time of application for the license. Areas to which access by customers is
prohibited shall not be counted in the floor area calculation. The issuance of
a Class P license and the retention of that license shall only take place where
no more than 20% of the gross retail sales are derived from the sale of beer
and wine. All extra beer and wine stock shall be kept in a storage room with
access only to the employees. Subject to the provisions of §
11-2-24, the sale of beer and wine shall be limited to only those hours
gasoline is sold. The number of Class P licenses authorized for issuance shall
be two. The fee for a Class P license shall be $1,700 annually.
      (2)   Class PL license. A Class PL license shall authorize the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor in its original package, not for consumption on the
premises where sold, in a premises whose primary purpose is the sale of
gasoline. The area devoted to the sale of alcoholic liquor shall comprise no
more than 20% of the premises retail square footage. For purposes of
determining the allowable alcoholic liquor sales area, the licensee shall
submit a floor plan of the retail sales area at the time of application for the
license. Areas to which access by customers is prohibited shall not be counted
in the floor area calculation. The issuance of a Class PL license and the
retention of that license shall only take place where no more than 20% of the
gross retail sales are derived from the sale of alcoholic liquor. All extra
alcoholic liquor stock shall be kept in a storage room with access only to the
employees. Subject to the provisions of §
11-2-24, the sale of alcoholic liquor shall be limited to only those hours
gasoline is sold. The number of Class PL licenses authorized for issuance shall
be seven. The fee for a Class PL license shall be $3,400 annually.
   (N)   Class R-1 and R-2 licenses.
      (1)   Class R-1 (Park District Recreation Center Caterer's License)
license, which shall authorize the retail sale or the service of alcoholic
liquor by the holder of a Class A or B license for consumption on the premises
of the Carol Stream Park District Recreation Center in conjunction with the
sale of food on the date of a catered event as specified herein. A Class R
license shall only allow service of alcoholic liquor on the date of catered
Park District special events or private special events approved by the Park
District where full multiple course meals or buffet style meals are served for
consumption at tables, and at which alcoholic liquor may be served or sold with
and incidental to the service of food by the licensee. Any private special
event must be approved by the Park District, be prearranged under the
sponsorship of a particular person or organization, including but not limited
to weddings, graduation parties and similar affairs and cannot be open to
members of the general public. Alcoholic liquor shall be consumed only within
the room used for the event and no alcoholic liquor shall be served to members
of the general public or consumed in areas of the Recreation Center open to the
general public or outside the Recreation Center building. No bar area devoted
primarily to the service and consumption of alcoholic liquor shall be allowed.
The sale and consumption of alcohol shall not be related to any commercial
purpose or in connection with the sale of non-alcoholic products or to promote
the sale of non-alcoholic products. A Class R licensee shall comply with all
other requirements of this Article 2. The fee for such license shall be $50 per
day for an event the license is issued in the name of the licensee.
      (2)   Class R-2 (McCaslin Park) license which shall authorize the retail
sale of alcoholic liquor only by the Carol Stream Park District for consumption
on the premises of McCaslin Park, 27W650 North Avenue, Carol Stream, IL 60188
in accordance with the following conditions:
         (a)   The sale and consumption of alcoholic liquor shall be permitted
only at approved concession stand locations during sporting or athletic events
and at an approved concession stand location for the Coyote Crossing mini-golf
course.
         (b)   The licensee shall, at the time of and with the application or
renewal of the liquor license, provide in writing the dates of the sport
tournaments or special athletic events where the consumption of alcoholic
liquor is proposed to occur, and the liquor commissioner shall have the right
to restrict, deny or condition the sale of alcoholic liquor at such specific
events.
         (c)   Sales of alcoholic liquor during sporting or athletic events
shall be limited to the time that the athletic or sporting event is taking
place.
         (d)   Sales of alcoholic liquor from the Coyote Crossing mini-golf
concessions shall be limited to the operating hours of the mini-golf course.
         (e)   The Park District shall place signs at the locations of
alcoholic liquor sales indicating that all alcoholic liquor must be consumed
only on the premises of McCaslin Park.
         (f)   Video gaming as defined under the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230
ILCS 40/1 et seq., shall not be allowed upon a class PD licensed premises.
         (g)   The Park District shall comply with all other requirements of
the Village Liquor Code with respect to the sale of alcoholic liquor.
         (h)   The annual fee for such license shall be $1,250.00.
         (i)   Not more than one Class R-2 license shall be issued.
   (O)   Limitation on sales of alcoholic liquor. Where this section, as a
condition of issuance of the license, provides for a limitation on the sales of
alcoholic liquor by percentage of gross retail sales, the license holder shall,
upon the request of the Liquor Commissioner, provide evidence in a form
satisfactory to the Liquor Commissioner that such percentage limitation on
sales has not been exceeded.
   (P)   Class V license.
      (1)   A Class V license shall authorize holders of a Class A, Class B,
Class F, Class I or Class N license to the operate video gaming devices upon
the licensed premises upon receipt of a video gaming license issued by the
Illinois Gaming Board in accordance with the provisions of the Video Gaming
Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.
      (2)   Not more than 19 Class V licenses shall be issued. The annual fee
for such license shall be $1,000 for each terminal located upon the licensed
premises, $500 of which shall be paid by the terminal operator as provided in §
10-14-6 of the Village Code of Ordinances. No more than six video gaming
terminals shall be located on any premises issued a Class V license.
      (3)   No licensee shall permit any video gaming terminal to be located
upon its premises unless a valid video terminal operators license has been
issued for that terminal and the terminal displays a valid state terminal
registration tag and a village video gaming sticker, both of which shall be
displayed in a conspicuous place, readily identifiable upon public inspection.
      (4)   Any denial or revocation of a video gaming license application by
the Illinois Gaming Board shall constitute a revocation of a Class V license.
      (5)   Every establishment issued a Class V license to operate video
gaming shall comply with the provisions of the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230
ILCS 40/1 et seq., and all rules, regulations and restrictions imposed by the
Illinois Gaming Board and the provisions of Chapter 10, Article 14 of the Carol
Stream Code of ordinances.
      (6)   The operation of video gaming terminals shall not be permitted
during the hours alcoholic liquor sales are prohibited as provided in § 11-2-24
of the Carol Stream Code of Ordinances.
      (7)   Video gaming shall be located in an area that is restricted to
persons over 21 years of age. No licensee shall permit any person under the age
of 21 years to use or play any video gaming terminal.
      (8)   A Class V licensee shall notify the Illinois Gaming Board and the
village of any proposed change in ownership or any transaction that requires
approval of qualifications in accordance with the Video Gaming Act, the
regulations promulgated under the Video Gaming Act or this chapter on forms
supplied or approved by the Illinois Gaming Board and the village and
containing such information and documents as specified, and at such time as
required, by the Illinois Gaming Board or the Liquor Commissioner.
   (Q)   Class VC License.
      (1)   A Class VC License shall authorize the retail sale of beer and wine
only in a video gaming café for consumption on the premises, and authorize the
operation of video gaming devices upon the licensed premises, subject to the
following:
         (a)   A class VC licensed premises must be at least 1,200 square feet
in size.
         (b)   A class VC licensed premises must provide a minimum table
seating capacity in the dining area of 20 persons and food and beverages must
be served to the customer's table by wait staff or servers.
         (c)   The primary business of the establishment shall be video gaming.
         (d)   Establishment shall provide a full service food menu which shall
include a variety of non-alcoholic beverages and a minimum of 20 food items,
hot and cold, which shall be prepared in a kitchen or food preparation area and
served during all hours of operation. A menu of all food offerings must be
submitted as part of the license application and will be subject to approval by
the Liquor Commissioner. The approved menu shall be conspicuously placed in the
establishment.
         (e)   No class VC licensed establishment shall be located within 1,500
feet, as measured from entrance to entrance, from any other VC licensed
establishment authorized by the village to operate video gaming devices.
         (f)   No video gaming terminal shall be located upon a VC licensed
premises unless a valid video terminal operator's license has been issued for
each terminal and each terminal displays a valid state terminal registration
tag and a village video gaming sticker, both of which shall be displayed in a
conspicuous place, readily identifiable upon public inspection.
         (g)   A class VC licensed establishment must have a video gaming
license issued by the Illinois Gaming Board in accordance with the provisions
of the Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.); shall comply with all
provisions of the Illinois Video Gaming Act, all rules, regulations and
restrictions imposed by the Illinois Gaming Board, and the provisions of
Chapter 10, Article 14 of the Carol Stream Code of ordinances. Any denial or
revocation of a video gaming license application by the Illinois Gaming Board
shall constitute a revocation of a Class V license.
         (h)   The operation of video gaming terminals shall not be permitted
during the hours alcoholic liquor sales are prohibited as provided in §
11-2-24 of the Carol Stream Code of Ordinances.
         (i)   No licensee shall permit any person under the age of 21 years to
use or play any video gaming terminal.
         (j)   The fee for a class VC liquor license shall be $3,725 plus
$1,000 per each video gaming terminal, $500 of which shall be paid by the
terminal operator as provided in §
10-14-6 of the Village Code of Ordinances.
         (k)   The village shall issue no more than seven class VC licenses.
   (R)   A Class T license shall authorize the retail sales of alcoholic
beverages by means of bar service only for the consumption on a premises that
is annexed into the corporate limits of the village pursuant to the terms of an
annexation agreement which authorizes such license. Under no circumstances
shall the service of alcohol be permitted outside unless otherwise permitted by
the Carol Stream Code of Ordinances. Unless otherwise authorized, the holder of
such a license shall post signs in prominent places within the establishment
stating that "ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES MAY NOT BE REMOVED FROM THE PREMISES". No
more than one Class T license may be issued. The fee for such license shall be
$3,850.
   (S)   A Class MB (Microbrewery License) shall authorize the manufacture of
up to 10,000 gallons of beer on the premises per year, the retail sale of beer
manufactured on the premises for consumption on the premises and the retail
sale of beer manufactured on the premises for consumption not on the premises.
Approved containers for the sale of beer manufactured on the premises for
consumption not on the premises shall include bottles, cans, growlers and kegs
properly sealed for transportation in accordance with state law. A Class MB
license shall also authorize the retail sale of beer, wine and other alcoholic
liquor which are not manufactured on the premises, for consumption on the
premises, provided that a minimum of 1,600 gallons of beer is manufactured on
the premises per year. No more than zero Class MB licenses may be issued. The
initial annual fee for such license shall be $1,500 and $2,500 for each year
thereafter.
(Ord. 90-05-45, passed 5-8-1996; Ord. 92-04-35, passed 4-14-1992; Ord. 93-05-
47, passed 5-25-1993; Ord. 96-07-45, passed 7-1-1996; Ord. 96-07-46, passed 7-
1-1996; Ord. 96-08-60, passed 8-19-1996; Ord. 96-10-70, passed 10-7-1996; Ord.
97-04-26, passed 4-21-1997; Ord. 97-04-27, passed 4-21-1997; Ord. 97-09-59,
passed 9-2-1997; Ord. 97-11-81A, passed 11-17-1997; Ord. 98-06-40, passed 6-1-
1998; Ord. 98-06-41, passed 6-1-1998; Ord. 98-10-72, passed 10-22-1998; Ord.
98-11-76, passed 11-2-1998; Ord. 99-05-33, passed 5-17-1999; Ord. 99-12-65,
passed 12-6-1999; Ord. 99-12-66, passed 12-6-1999; Ord. 99-12-67, passed 12-6-
1999; Ord. 2000-02-09, passed 2-7-2000; Ord. 2001-04-20, passed 4-16-2000; Ord.
2000-04-30, passed 4-17-2000; Ord. 2000-05-35, passed 5-1-2000; Ord. 2000-05-
39, passed 5-15-2000; Ord. 2000-06-55, passed 6-5-2000; Ord. 2000-06-56, passed
6-5-2000; Ord. 2000-07-60, passed 7-17-2000; Ord. 2000-11-96, passed 11-6-2000;
Ord. 2001-04-21, passed 4-16-2001; Ord. 2001-05-22, passed 5-7-2001; Ord. 2001-
05-23, passed 5-7-2001; Ord. 2001-05-25, passed 5-7-2001; Ord. 2001-05-26,
passed 5-21-2001; Ord. 2001-10-52, passed 10-1-2001; Ord. 2002-05-19, passed 5-
6-2002; Ord. 2002-06-36, passed 6-17-2002; Ord. 2002-06-37, passed 6-17-2002;
Ord. 2002-06-38, passed 6-17-2002; Ord. 2002-06-39, passed 6-17-2002; Ord.
2002-06-40, passed 6-17-2002; Ord. 2003-02-05, passed 2-3-2003; Ord. 2003-03-
09, passed 3-3-2003; Ord. 2003-11-74, passed 11-17-2003; Ord. 2004-01-01,
passed 1-19-2004; Ord. 2004-01-02, passed 1-19-2004; Ord. 2004-05-27, passed 5-
3-2004; Ord. 2004-05-28, passed 5-3-2004; Ord. 2004-06-35, passed 6-21-2004;
Ord. 2004-11-61, passed 11-1-2004; Ord. 2004-12-67, passed 12-6-2004; Ord.
2005-02-11, passed 2-22-2005; Ord. 2005-04-18, passed 4-18-2005; Ord. 2005-04-
19, passed 4-18-2005; Ord. 2005-06-28, passed 6-6-2005; Ord. 2005-06-29, passed
6-6-2005; Ord. 2005-06-30, passed 6-6-2005; Ord. 2005-05-31, passed 6-6-2005;
Ord. 2005-05-32, passed 6-6-2005; Ord. 2005-08-42, passed 8-1-2005; Ord. 2006-
04-17, passed 4-17-2006; Ord. 2006-05-21, passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 2006-05-22,
passed 5-15-2006; Ord. 2006-06-26, passed 6-19-2006; Ord. 2006-06-27, passed 6-
19-2006; Ord. 2006-11-61, passed 11-20-2006; Ord. 2006-11-62, passed 11-20-
2006; Ord. 2006-11-63, passed 11-20-2006; Ord. 2006-11-64, passed 11-20-2006;
Ord. 2006-11-65, passed 11-20-2006; Ord. 2006-12-72, passed 12-4-2006; Ord.
2006-12-73, passed 12-4-2006; Ord. 2007-04-17, passed 4-16-2007; Ord. 2007-05-
19, passed 5-7-2007; Ord. 2007-05-21, passed 5-7-2007; Ord. 2007-10-40, passed
10-15-2007; Ord. 2007-10-41, passed 10-15-2007; Ord. 2007-10-42, passed 10-15-
2007; Ord. 2007-11-44, passed 11-5-2007; Ord. 2007-11-45, passed 11-5-2007;
Ord. 2008-04-13, passed 4-21-2008; Ord. 2008-04-14, passed 4-21-2008; Ord.
2008-05-21, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. 2008-05-22, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. 2008-05-
23, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. 2008-05-24, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. 2008-08-36,
passed 8-4-2008; Ord. 2009-07-36, passed 7-20-2009; Ord. 2009-11-63, passed 11-
16-2009; Ord. 2009-11-65, passed 11-16-2009; Ord. 2009-12-68, passed 12-21-
2009; Ord. 2009-12-69, passed 12-21-2009; Ord. 2010-01-04, passed 1-19-2010;
Ord. 2010-03-08, passed 3-15-2010; Ord. 2010-05-25, passed 5-3-2010; Ord. 2010-
08-43, passed 8-2-2010; Ord. 2010-10-47, passed 10-4-2010; Ord. 2011-01-01,
passed 1-18-2011; Ord. 2011-09-30, passed 9-6-2011; Ord. 2011-09-31, passed 9-
6-2011; Ord. 2011-09-33, passed 9-19-2011; Ord. 2011-12-47, passed 12-19-2011;
Ord. 2012-02-04, passed 2-6-2012; Ord. 2012-02-05, passed 2-6-2012; Ord. 2012-
03-09, passed 3-19-2012; Ord. 2012-04-11, passed 4-2-2012;Ord. 2012-04-14,
passed 4-16-2012; Ord. 2012-05-18, passed 5-7-2012; Ord. 2012-05-19, passed 5-
7-2012; Ord. 2013-01-01, passed 1-7-2013; Ord. 2013-02-04, passed 2-4-2013;
Ord. 2013-03-06, passed 3-4-2013; Ord. 2013-04-08, passed 4-1-2013; 2013-05-13,
passed 5-6-2013; 2013-05-14, passed 5-6-2013; Ord. 2013-05-15, passed 5-6-2013;
Ord. 2013-05-16, passed 5-6-2013; Ord. 2013-05-18, passed 5-6-2013; Ord. 2013-
05-22, passed 5-20-2013; Ord. 2013-05-23, passed 5-20-2013; Ord. 2013-06-24,
passed 6-3-2013; Ord. 2013-06-25, passed 6-3-2013; Ord. 2013-06-26, passed 6-3-
2013; Ord. 2013-06-28, passed 6-17-2013; Ord. 2013-06-29, passed 6-17-2013;
Ord. 2013-08-36, passed 8-5-2013; Ord. 2013-08-37, passed 8-19-2013; Ord. 2013-
11-46, passed 11-4-2013; Ord. 2013-12-51, passed 12- 16-2013; Ord. 2013-12-52,
passed 12-16-2013; Ord. 2013-12-53, passed 12-16-2013; Ord. 2013-12-54, passed
12-16-2013; Ord. 2013-12-55, passed 12-16-2013; Ord. 2014-01-02, passed 1-6-
2014; Ord. 2014-01-03, passed 1-6-2014; Ord. 2014-02-09, passed 2-18-2014; Ord.
2014-03-10, passed 3-3-2014; Ord. 2014-04-16, passed 4-21-2014; Ord. 2014-04-
17, passed 4-21-2014; Ord. 2014-06-27, passed 6-16-2014; Ord. 2014-07-29,
passed 7-7-2014; Ord. 2014-08-34, passed 8-4-2014; Ord. 2014-08-36, passed 8-
18-2014; Ord. 2014-08-37, passed 8-18-2014; Ord. 2014-08-38, passed 8-18-2014;
Ord. 2014-08-39, passed 8- 18-2014; Ord. 2014-10-50, passed 10-20-2014; Ord.
2014-10-51, passed 10-20-2014; Ord. 2015-01-01, passed 1-5-2015; Ord. 2015-05-
08, passed 5-4-15; Ord. 2015-05-09, passed 5-4-2015; Ord. 2015-10-20, passed
10-5-2015; Ord. 2015-11-25, passed 11-2-2015; Ord. 2015-11-27, passed 11-16-
2015; Ord. 2015-11-28, passed 11-16-2015; Ord. 2016-02-07, passed 2-16-2016;
Ord. 2016-02-08, passed 2-16-2016; Ord. 2016-03-12, passed 3-7-2016; Ord. 2016-
03-13, passed 3-7-2016; Ord. 2016-03-14, passed 3-21-2016; Ord. 2016-03-16,
passed 3-21-2016; Ord. 2016-03-17, passed 3-21-2016; Ord. 2016-03-18, passed 3-
21-2016; Ord. 2016-04-24, passed 4-18-2016; Ord. 2016-05-26, passed 5-2-2016;
Ord. 2016-12-48, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 2017-01-01, passed 1-17-2017; Ord.
2017-01-02, passed 1-17-2017; Ord. 2017-06-24, passed 6-5-2017; Ord. 2017-06-
25, passed 6-5-2017; Ord. 2017-06-26, passed 6-5-2017; Ord. 2017-07-31, passed
7-17-2017; Ord. 2017-07-35, passed 7-17-2017; Ord. 2017-08-47, passed 7-17-
2017; Ord. 2017-08-48, passed 8-7-2017; Ord. 2017-08-49, passed 8-7-2017; Ord.
2017-08-50, passed 8-21-2017; Ord. 2017-08-51, passed 8-21-2017; Ord. 2017-08-
52, passed 8-21-2017; Ord. 2017-09-53, passed 9-5-2017; Ord. 2017-10-57, passed
10-2-2017; Ord. 2017-10-59, passed 10-2-2017; Ord. 2017-10-60, passed 10-2-
2017; Ord. 2017-11-67, passed 11-20-2017; Ord. 2017-11-68, passed 11-20-2017;
Ord. 2017-12-71, passed 12-4-2017; Ord. 2017-12-72, passed 12-4-2017; Ord.
2018-01-02, passed 1-16-2018; Ord. 2018-02-03, passed 2-5-2018; Ord. 2018-02-
06, passed 2-20-2018; Ord. 2018-05-18, passed 5-7-2018; Ord. 2018-05-20, passed
5-21-2018; Ord. 2018-06-21, passed 6-18-2018; Ord. 2018-07-24, passed 7-2-2018;
Ord. 2018-10-39, passed 10-15-2018; Ord. 2018-10-40, passed 10-15-2018; Ord.
2018-12-45, passed 12-3-2018; Ord. 2019-02-01, passed 2-4-2019; Ord. 2019-03-
08, passed 3-4-2019; Ord. 2019-06-18, passed 6-3-2019; Ord. 2019-09-35, passed
9-30-2019; Ord. 2019-11-36, passed 11-4-2019; Ord. 2019-12-51, passed 12-16-
2019; Ord. 2020- 08-27, passed 8-17-2020; Ord. 2020-09-29, passed 9-21-2020;
Ord. 2020-10-34, passed 10- 19-2020; Ord. 2020-11-37, passed 11-2-2020; Ord.
2020-11-38, passed 11-2-2020; Ord. 2020-11-39, passed 11-2-2020; Ord. 2020-11-
40, passed 11-2-2020; Ord. 2021-03-03, passed 3-1-2021; Ord. 2021-03-06, passed
3-1-2021; Ord. 2021-03-07, passed 3-1-2021; Ord. 2021-03-09, passed 3-15-2021;
Ord. 2021-04-10, passed 4-5-2021; Ord. 2021-04-13, passed 4-19-2021; Ord. 2021-
04-14, passed 4-19-2021; Ord. 2021-05-16, passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 2021-06-21,
passed 6-7-2021; Ord. 2021-06-22, passed 6-7-2021; Ord. 2021-07-29, passed 7-
19-2021; Ord. 2021-09-46, passed 9-20-2021; Ord. 2021-09-47, passed 9-20-2021;
Ord. 2021-09-48, passed 9-20-2021; Ord. 2021-10-49, passed 10-4-2021; Ord.
2021- 12-57, passed 12-6-2021; Ord. 2022-01-01, passed 1-3-2022; Ord. 2022-01-
02, passed 1-3- 2022; Ord. 2022-01-03, passed 1-3-2022; Ord. 2022-01-05, passed
1-17-2022; Ord. 2022-02-07, passed 2-7-2022; Ord. 2022-02-08, passed 2-7-2022;
Ord. 2022-02-09, passed 2-7-2022; Ord. 2022-03-14, passed 3-7-2022; Ord. 2022-
04-20, passed 4-18-2022; Ord. 2022-05-22, passed 5-2-2022; Ord. 2022-05-23,
passed 5-2-2022 ; Ord. 2022-06-29, passed 6-6-2022; Ord. 2022-06-30, passed 6-
6-2022; Ord. 2022-06-31, passed 6-6-2022; Ord. 2022-06-32, passed 6-20-2022;
Ord. 2022-06-33, passed 6-20-2022 ; Ord. 2022-07-35, passed 7-18-2022; Ord.
2022-10-46, passed 10-3-2022; Ord. 2022-12-54, passed 12-5-2022; Ord. 2022-12-
55, passed 12-5-2022; Ord. 2022-12-56, passed 12-5-2022; Ord. 2023-01-02,
passed 1-16-2023; Ord. 2023-02-03, passed 2-6-2023; Ord. 2023-02-04, passed 2-
6-2023; Ord. 2023-04-20, passed 4-17-2023; Ord. 2023-05-25, passed 5-15-2023;
Ord. 2023-05-26, passed 5-15-2023; Ord. 2023-06-29, passed 6-19-2023; Ord.
2023-07-30, passed 7-17-2023; Ord. 2023-07-31, passed 7-17-2023; Ord. 2023-08-
36, passed 8-7-2023; Ord. 2023-08-37, passed 8-7-2023; Ord. 2023-08-38, passed
8-7-2023; Ord. 2023-09-41, passed 9-18-2023; Ord. 2023-10-48, passed 10-16-23;
Ord. 2023-11-52, passed 11-6-2023; Ord. 2023-12-60, passed 12-18-2023; Ord.
2024-01-01, passed 1-15-2024; Ord. 2024-01-02, passed 1-15-2024; Ord. 2024-01-
03, passed 1-15-2024; Ord. 2024-01-02, passed 1-15-2024; Ord. 2024-01-03,
passed 1-15-2024; Ord. 2024-04-14, passed 4-1-2024; Ord. 2024-05-21, passed 5-
6-2024; Ord. 2024-05-22, passed 5-6-2024; Ord. 2024-05-23, passed 5-6-2024;
Ord. 2024-05-24, passed 5-6-2024; Ord. 2024-05-25, passed 5-6-2024; Ord. 2024-
07-31, passed 7-1-2024; Ord. 2024-10-41, passed 10-7-2024; Ord. 2024-11-47,
passed 11-4-2024; Ord. 2024-11-48, passed 11-4-2024; Ord. 2025-02-04, passed 2-
3-2025; Ord. 2025-03-05, passed 3-3- 2025; Ord. 2025-03-06, passed 3-3-2025;
Ord. 2025-05-20, passed 5-5-2025; Ord. 2025-05-21, passed 5-19-2025; Ord. 2025-
05-22, passed 5-19-2025; Ord. 2025-08-33, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 11-2-8 RECORD OF LICENSES.
   The Liquor Control Commissioner shall keep, or cause to be kept, a complete
record of all such licenses issued, and shall furnish the Treasurer, Chief of
Police and Village Clerk each with a copy thereof. Upon the issuance of a new
license, or the revocation of any old license, the Liquor Control Commissioner
shall give written notice of such action to each of these officers within 48
hours of such action.
§ 11-2-9 DISPOSITION OF FEES.
   (A)   All such license fees shall be paid to the Liquor Control Commissioner
at the time application for license is made, and shall be forthwith turned over
to the Village Treasurer for deposit in the general village accounts. In the
event the application is denied, the fee shall be returned to the applicant.
   (B)   If the license is granted, the fee shall be deposited as set forth
above, and no portion thereof shall be refunded.
§ 11-2-10 DRAM SHOP INSURANCE.
   No license shall be granted to any applicant until such applicant shall
furnish evidence satisfactory to the Liquor Control Commissioner that such
applicant is covered by a policy of dram shop insurance issued by a responsible
insurance company authorized and licensed to do business in the state insuring
such applicant and the owner of the premises against liability in the minimum
amount of $100,000 each for liability, one person, means of support and
property damage, which such applicant may incur under the provisions of state
law.
§ 11-2-11 LICENSE RENEWAL.
   (A)   Each licensee shall make application for renewal of his or her license
to the Liquor Control Commissioner not less than one month prior to the end of
the licensing period. The annual fee for the license must accompany this
renewal application. If the Liquor Control Commissioner determines that the
renewal application contains information that is in any way changed from the
original application for license, in which case a new investigation of the
license is necessary, a fee of $375 shall be charged to the licensee to cover
the costs of such investigation, in addition to the yearly license fee.
   (B)   If, after investigation, it is determined that the applicant is not
entitled to a renewal license, the yearly license fee shall be returned. The
charge for the investigation is non-refundable.
   (C)   A renewal license shall be issued provided the licensee is entitled to
receive a license and provided that the premises for which renewal license is
sought are suitable for such purposes; pro-vided further that the renewal
privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested right which
shall in any case prevent the corporate authorities from decreasing the number
of licenses to be issued within the village.
   (D)   In the event that the village shall reduce the number of licenses
below that number issued in the prior year and the number of applicants do not
decrease such as to be equal to or less than the number of available licenses,
the Liquor Control Commissioner may issue the available licenses on the basis
of date of application, years holding prior licenses, adequate service to areas
in village, record of violation or any other reasonable basis.
§ 11-2-12 DISPLAYING LICENSE.
   Every licensee shall cause his or her license to be framed and hung in plain
view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises.
§ 11-2-13 DUPLICATE LICENSE.
   In the event of the loss or destruction of a license issued pursuant to this
article, upon written application to the Liquor Control Commissioner, and
payment of a fee of $5, a duplicate license will be issued.
§ 11-2-14 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   A license shall be a purely personal privilege, good for not to exceed one
year after issuance unless sooner revoked or suspended as provided in this
article, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to
attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or
transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily or subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated. Such license shall cease upon the death of the licensee, and
shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, provided that
executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee, and the
trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in
part of alcoholic liquor under the order of the appropriate court, and may
exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after
the death of such decedent, or such insolvency or bankruptcy, until the
expiration of such license, but not longer than six months after the death,
bankruptcy or insolvency of such license.
§ 11-2-15 CHANGE IN PERSONNEL.
   (A)   Any changes in partnerships, officers, directors, persons holding
directly or beneficially more than 5% of the stock or ownership interest, or
managers of establishments licensed under this article, shall be reported in
writing to the Liquor Control Commissioner within ten days of the change. All
new personnel shall meet all the standards of this article and must otherwise
qualify to hold a liquor license. All such changes in personnel shall be
subject to review by the Liquor Control Commissioner. In each case, a new
investigation shall be completed, with the licensee paying an investigation
charge of $375. Such investigation charge is non-refundable.
   (B)   When a license has been issued to a partnership and a change of
ownership occurs resulting in a partnership interest by one who is not eligible
to hold a liquor license, such license shall terminate.
   (C)   When a license has been issued to a corporation and a change takes
place in officers, directors, managers or shareholders of more than 5% of the
stock, resulting in the holding of office or such shares of stock by one who is
not eligible for a license, such license shall terminate.
   (D)   When a license has been issued to an individual who is no longer
eligible for a license, such license shall terminate.
§ 11-2-16 CHANGE OF PREMISES NAME.
   Written application to the Liquor Control Commissioner must be made before
the name of the premises holding the liquor license can be changed. If the
Liquor Control Commissioner determines that there is no other change to the
original application, except for the name of the premises, the license issued
in the former name shall become null and void and a license shall be issued in
the new name at no charge to the licensee.
§ 11-2-17 CHANGE OF LOCATION.
   A retail liquor dealer’s license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor
only in the premises described in the application and license. Such location
may be changed only upon the written permission to make such change issued by
the Liquor Control Commissioner. No change of location shall be permitted
unless the proposed new location is a proper one for the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor under the laws of this state and the ordinances of the
village. Such relocation may only be permitted if ownership of the premises
remains the same. When a change of location is desired by the licensee, an
investigation of the new premises shall be completed by the village, with the
licensee paying an investigation charge of $375. Such investigation charge is
non-refundable.
§ 11-2-18 RECOVERY OF FEES.
   Whenever any license hereunder has been revoked or suspended as provided for
in this code, the licensee shall not recover any of the moneys that have been
paid for such license.
§ 11-2-19 USE OF PREMISES AFTER REVOCATION.
   When any license shall have been revoked for any cause, no license shall be
granted to any person for the period of one year thereafter for the conduct of
the business of manufacturing, distributing or selling alcoholic liquor in the
premises described in such revoked license.
§ 11-2-20 RETAIL SALES RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic
liquor within 100 feet of any church, school, other than an institution of
higher learning, hospital, home for aged or indigent persons or for veterans,
their spouses or children, or any military or naval station; provided that,
this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant service,
regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops or other places where
sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business carried on, if such
place of business so exempted shall have been established for such purposes
prior to the taking effect of this ordinance; nor to the renewal of a license
for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on premises within 100 feet of any
church or school where such church or school has been established within such
100 feet since the issuance of the original license. In the case of a church,
the distance of 100 feet shall be measured to the nearest part of any building
used for worship services or educational programs and not to property
boundaries.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the issuance of a license to a
church or private school to sell at retail alcoholic liquor if any such sales
are limited to periods when groups are assembled on the premises solely for the
promotion of some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic
liquors.
   (C)   No license shall be issued to any person for the sale of any alcoholic
liquor at any store or other place of business where the majority of customers
are minors of school age or where the principal business transacted consists of
school books, school supplies, food, lunches or drinks for such minors.
§ 11-2-21 ELECTION DAYS.
   Licensees may sell at retail any alcoholic liquor on the day of any
national, state, county or municipal election, including primary elections,
during the hours the polls are open, within the village.
§ 11-2-22 RESTRICTIONS CONCERNING MINORS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to
purchase or obtain any alcoholic liquor any place in the village where
alcoholic liquor is sold.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to
misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining
alcoholic liquor any place in the village where alcoholic liquor is sold.
   (C)   In every place in the village where alcoholic liquor is sold, there
shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place, a printed card which
shall be supplied by the Village Clerk and which shall read substantially as
follows:
 
   “WARNING TO MINORS
 
You are subject to a fine up to $750 under the provisions of the Village Code
if you purchase alcoholic liquor or misrepresent your age for the purpose of
purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor.”
 
   (D)   No person under the age of 21 years may draw, pour, mix or tend bar as
an employee of any retail licensee.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to
dispense, sell or deliver any alcoholic liquor in the original bottle or case
for consumption off the premises of any liquor licensee.
   (F)   Except for the prohibitions provided herein, it shall be lawful for
any person 18 years of age or over to work in a licensed premise and to serve
alcoholic liquor.
   (G)   The Liquor Control Commissioner may revoke or suspend the retail
dealer’s license for any violation of this section.
   (H)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to have
in his or her possession any alcoholic liquor on any street, highway, public
place open to the public, or in any other place. This prohibition does not
apply to possession by a person under the age of 21 years making a delivery of
an alcoholic liquor in pursuance of the order of his or her parent or in
pursuance of his or her employment as long as such employment is not prohibited
under the provisions of this article.
   (I)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to
consume any alcoholic liquor on any street, highway, public place, in any place
open to the public or in any other place. This prohibition does not apply to
consumption by a person under the age of 21 years where such consumption is in
the performance of a religious service or ceremony or such consumption takes
place under the direct supervision and approval of the parent or a person
standing in loco parentis of the person under the age of 21 years.
   (J)   Any person under the age of 21 years convicted of any violation of the
provisions of this section shall be fined not less than $50, nor more than
$750, for each offense.
§ 11-2-23 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   No parent shall give or deliver alcoholic liquor to his or her minor
child for the minor’s consumption unless the consumption of alcoholic liquor by
such minor is in the performance of a religious service or ceremony, or such
consumption takes place under the direct supervision and approval of the parent
of the minor or such person standing in loco parentis to the minor in the
privacy of a home.
   (B)   No parent shall intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or negligently
give or deliver alcoholic liquor to, or permit possession of alcoholic liquor
by, his or her minor child, or any other person under the age of 21, unless
such minor or person under the age of 21 is making a delivery of such alcoholic
liquor pursuant to order of his or her parent, in pursuance of his or her
employment, as long as such employment is not prohibited under the provisions
of this article, or as otherwise allowed by division (A) of this section.
   (C)   No parent shall intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or negligently
give, deliver, invite or permit the consumption of alcoholic liquor by any
minors on or about any premises owned, leased or controlled by such parent,
except as otherwise allowed by division (A) of this section.
   (D)   Parents shall restrain or prevent their minor children from consuming
alcoholic liquor where the parent knows, or in the exercise of ordinary care
should know, of a substantial probability that his or her minor child is or
will consume alcoholic liquor under circumstances which would violate the
provisions of this section, the State Liquor Control Act, being 235 ILCS 5/1-
1 et seq., or any other ordinances, statutes or amendments thereto.
   (E)   Parents who know, or in the exercise of ordinary care should know, of
a substantial probability that their minor child has consumed or will consume
alcoholic liquor, whether in violation of this section, the State Liquor
Control Act, or any other ordinances, statutes or amendments thereto, or as
allowed under division (A) of this section, shall restrain or prevent their
minor child from operating or driving a motor vehicle on the public streets and
ways of the village in violation of any ordinances, law or statutes.
   (F)   Parents who know, or in the exercise of ordinary care should know, of
a substantial probability that their minor child has consumed or will consume
alcoholic liquor, whether in violation of this section, the State Liquor
Control Act, or any other ordinance, statutes or amendments thereto, or as
allowed under division (A) of this section, shall restrain or prevent their
minor child from committing acts which constitute vandalism, theft, disorderly
conduct, or the unjustifiable use of force in violation of any ordinance, law
or statute.
   (G)   Any person who fails to perform the acts required of him under this
act shall be guilty of a violation of law, and upon conviction of any violation
of the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than $50 nor more
than $750 for each offense.
§ 11-2-24 HOURS, DAYS OF SALE REGULATED.
   (A)   Except as provided herein, no person licensed under this article shall
sell, permit to be sold or give away any alcoholic liquor between the following
hours:
      (1)   2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Saturdays and Sundays;
      (2)   3:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on New Year's Day; and
      (3)   1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on all other days.
   (B)   In any premises for which a license to sell alcoholic liquors is held,
all alcoholic liquor shall be removed from the tables of patrons, or other
places at which patrons are seated, within 30 minutes after the applicable
closing times set forth above. In addition, no alcoholic liquor shall be
consumed on any such premises 30 minutes after the applicable closing time for
such premises set forth above.
   (C)   With respect to K and L licenses only, mail, telephonically or
electronically transmitted orders for sales of alcoholic liquor may be received
at any time, but the delivery of alcoholic liquor to the customer shall not
occur during the hours set forth in division (A) of this section.
   (D)   With respect to Class R licenses, no person licensed under §
11-2-7 (O) shall sell, permit to be sold or give away any alcoholic liquor
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. each day of the week.
(Ord. 2000-04-30, passed 4-17-2000; Ord. 2014-02-09, passed 2-18-2014; Ord.
2014-04-17, passed 4-21-2014; Ord. 2014-10-51, passed 10-20-2014)
§ 11-2-25 BOOKS AND RECORDS AVAILABLE ON REQUEST.
   It shall be the duty of every retail licensee to make books and records
available upon request at all times for the purpose of investigation and
control by the State Liquor Control Commission and the Liquor Control
Commissioner.
§ 11-2-26 SALES TO MINORS, HABITUAL DRUNKARDS, SPENDTHRIFTS AND MENTAL
INCOMPETENTS.
   (A)   No licensee nor any officer, associate, member, representative, agent
or employee of such licensee shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to
any person under the age of 21 years, or to any intoxicated person, or to any
person known by him or her to be an habitual drunkard, spendthrift, insane,
mentally ill, mentally deficient or in need of mental treatment. No person,
after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, shall sell, give or
deliver such alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of 21 years, except
in the performance of a religious ceremony or service.
   (B)   Each employee of a Class A, B, C, F, G, I, N or P license, who will be
engaged in selling, mixing, preparing, serving or delivering alcoholic
beverages to customers, guests or patrons, for consumption on or off of the
premises, shall successfully complete a Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers
Education and Training program conducted by an agency licensed by the Illinois
Liquor Control Commission. Such training shall be completed not more than 60
days after the employee begins employment with the licensee. A copy of the
employee's certificate of completion of training shall be filed with the Liquor
Commissioner.
   (C)   No express company, common carrier or contract carrier that carries or
transports alcoholic liquor for delivery within the village shall knowingly
give or knowingly deliver to a residential address any shipping container
clearly labeled as containing alcoholic liquor and labeled as requiring
signature of an adult of at least 21 years of age to any person in the village
under the age of 21 years. An express company, common carrier or contract
carrier that carries or transports such alcoholic liquor for delivery within
the village shall obtain a signature acknowledging receipt of the alcoholic
liquor by an adult who is at least 21 years of age. Any person who violates the
provisions of this division (C) shall be subject to a fine of not less than
$500, in addition to any other penalty provided by this code.
(Ord. 2000-11-96, passed 11-6-2000; Ord. 2013-02-04, passed 2-4-2013)
§ 11-2-27 GAMBLING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to permit any gambling on any premises licensed
to sell alcoholic liquor, except as otherwise provided herein.
   (B)   Video gaming shall be permitted only in establishments that have a
Class V liquor license issued in accordance with the provisions of this code.
   (C)   Only establishments issued a Class V liquor license are authorized to
operate video gaming terminals within the village when licensed by the Illinois
Gaming Board pursuant to the provisions of the Illinois Gaming Act, 230 ILCS
40/1 et seq.
(Ord. 2012-08-28, passed 8-6-2012; 2013-05-13, passed 5-6-2013)
§ 11-2-28 REFILLING ORIGINAL PACKAGES.
   No person licensed under this article shall fill or refill, in whole or in
part, any original package of alcoholic liquor with the same or any other kind
or quality of alcoholic liquor or any other potable liquid; and it shall be
unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession for sale at retail any
bottles, casks, or other containers containing alcoholic liquor, except in
original packages.
§ 11-2-29 CIVIL RIGHTS IN LICENSED PREMISES.
   No licensee licensed under the provisions of this article shall deny or
permit his or her agents and employees to deny any person the full and equal
enjoyment of the accommodations, advantages, facilities and privileges of any
premises in which alcoholic liquors are authorized to be sold subject only to
the conditions and limitations established by law and applicable alike to all
citizens.
§ 11-2-30 SALES ON CREDIT.
   No person shall sell or furnish alcoholic liquor at retail to any person on
credit or on a pass book, or order on a store, or in exchange for any goods,
wares or merchandise, or in payment for any services rendered; and if any
person shall extend credit for such purpose the debt thereby attempted to be
created shall not be recoverable at law; provided that nothing herein contained
shall be construed to prevent any club from permitting checks or statements for
alcoholic liquor to be signed by members or bona fide guests of members and
charged to the account of such members or guests in accordance with the by-laws
of such club; and, provided further that, nothing herein contained shall be
construed to prevent any hotel from permitting checks or statements for liquor
to be signed by regular guests residing at such hotel and charged to the
accounts of such guests; and provided further that nothing herein shall be
construed to prevent payment by credit card or other credit device.
§ 11-2-31 SANITARY CONDITIONS.
   All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, or for the
storage of such liquor for such sale, shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition, and shall be governed by the ordinances of the village regulating
the condition of premises used for the storage or sale of food for human
consumption.
§ 11-2-32 HEALTH REQUIREMENTS; EMPLOYEES AND OTHERS.
   It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises open to the public or engaged
in the transportation, processing, preparation or packaging of food or
beverages any person who the employer knows or should know, based upon
reasonable observation, is afflicted with, or who is a carrier of, any
contagious or infectious disease; and it shall be unlawful for any person who
knows or should know that he or she is afflicted with or a carrier of any such
disease, to work in or about any such premises.
§ 11-2-33 PEDDLING.
   It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the village.
§ 11-2-34 POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR IN MOTOR VEHICLES.
   No person shall transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor
within the passenger area of any motor vehicle, except in the original package
with the seal unbroken.
§ 11-2-35 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE STATUTES.
   All licenses issued under this article shall be subject to all of the
provisions of the State Dram Shop Act, to all applicable state statutes,
village ordinances and rules of the State Liquor Commission.
§ 11-2-36 BASSET TRAINING REQUIRED.
   (A)   Each applicant for a liquor license shall successfully complete a
Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers Training (BASSET) program conducted by an
agency licensed by the Illinois Liquor Commission prior to issuance of a liquor
license. Applications submitted by corporations shall require all managers and
subsequent managers to successfully complete BASSET training prior to issuance
of a liquor license. Proof of successful completion of BASSET training shall be
required prior to issuance of the liquor license.
   (B)   Each employee of a Class A, B, C, F, G, I, N or P license, who will be
engaged in selling, mixing, preparing, serving or delivering alcoholic
beverages to customers, guests or patrons, for consumption on or off of the
premises, shall successfully complete a Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers
Education and Training program conducted by an agency licensed by the Illinois
Liquor Control Commission. Such training shall be completed not more than 60
days after the employee begins employment with the licensee. A copy of the
employee’s certificate of completion of training shall be filed with the Liquor
Commissioner.
   (C)   A BASSET certificate shall be considered valid for a period of 36
months after successful completion of the program. Thereafter, employees will
be required to attend a state-certified and Police Department-approved BASSET
program. A person with a BASSET certificate that does not have an expiration
date shall file a new certificate before 4-30-2012.
(Ord. 2002-03-07, passed 3-4-2002; Ord. 2004-06-38, passed 6-21-2004; Ord.
2011-02-02, passed 2-7-2011; Ord. 2013-02-04, passed 2-4-2013)
§ 11-2-37 VIDEO GAMING BY PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to play or
operate a video gaming terminal.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any licensee, its employees or agents, to allow any
person under the age of 21 years to play or operate a video gaming terminal.
(Ord. 2012-08-28, passed 8-6-2012)
§ 11-2-38 CONDUCT PROHIBITED IN LICENSED PREMISES.
   The following conduct is prohibited in any premises licensed under the
provisions of this chapter:
   (A)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic area,
perineum, anus, anal cleft or cleavage, pubic hair, buttocks or female breasts;
   (B)   The manipulation of the human body of another, including massage, by
the use of any portion of manipulator's body, whether covered or uncovered, or
by any device, if the person performing the manipulation or the person
receiving the manipulation is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity;
   (C)   The performance of any sexual acts, heterosexual, homosexual or
bisexual, including without limitation intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus,
analingus, masturbation, bestiality, sodomy, bondage and discipline, sadism and
masochism, and sex acts between animals;
   (D)   The actual or simulated display of the female breast below the areola,
the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, or vulva;
   (E)   The permitting by a licensee of any person who exposes to public view
any portion of his or her genitals or anus, to remain in or upon the licensed
premises;
   (F)   The displaying of any films, videos or pictures depicting any act, the
live performance of which is prohibited by this section.
(Ord. 2016-07-31, passed 7-18-2016)
§ 11-2-39 SHIPPING AND DELIVERY OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.
   (A)   Shipping. All holders of a Class A, B, C, L, N, or T license shall be
permitted to ship alcoholic liquor, all holders of a Class F, G, K, or P
license shall be permitted to ship beer and wine and all holders of a Class I
license shall be permitted to ship beer from the licensed premises, in
accordance with the following requirements:
      (1)   For the purposes of this division, "shipping" or to "ship" means
the movement of alcoholic liquor from a licensed retailer to a consumer via a
common carrier. Common carrier shall mean a business that transports goods or
services and offers its services to the general public under license or
authority provided by a regulatory body.
      (2)   The shipping container of any alcoholic liquor shipped under this
section shall be clearly labeled with the following words: "CONTAINS ALCOHOL.
SIGNATURE OF A PERSON 21 YEARS OF AGE OR OLDER REQUIRED FOR DELIVERY. PROOF OF
AGE AND IDENTITY MUST BE SHOWN BEFORE DELIVERY." This warning must be
prominently displayed on the packaging.
      (3)   The licensee shall be responsible for ensuring a full age
verification process is conducted by every common carrier which shall include
the following requirements: (i) that the purchaser provide his or her name and
birth date and certify that he or she is at least 21 years of age prior to the
placement of any order; (ii) that delivery of the alcoholic liquor may only be
made to an adult who is at least 21 years of age who must provide a valid and
legal form of identification verifying that he/she is at least 21 years of age
and must sign a receipt for delivery of the alcoholic liquor; (iii) the
deliverer must verify that the identification is that of an adult at least 21
years of age; and (iv) the licensee shall receive a delivery confirmation from
the common carrier indicating the location of the delivery, time of delivery,
and the name and signature of the adult 21 years of age or older who accepts
receipt of the alcoholic liquor, the driver's license number or state
identification number used for purpose of verifying the age of the person to
whom the alcoholic liquor is delivered. The licensee shall be required to
retain the signed receipt for a period of at least 12 months after the
delivery.   
      (4)   Each person delivering alcoholic liquor under the provisions of
this section shall, upon delivery of the alcoholic liquor, require the
purchaser to provide his or her birth date and a valid and legal form of
identification verifying that the purchaser is at least 21 years of age and the
deliverer must verify that the identification is that of the purchaser and that
the purchaser is at least 21 years of age. The person that delivers the
alcoholic liquor shall obtain the signature of a person 21 years of age or
older at the delivery address at the time of delivery. The person delivering
the alcoholic liquor shall provide the licensee with a delivery confirmation
indicating the location of the delivery, time of delivery, and the name and
signature of the individual 21 years of age or older who accepts receipt of the
alcoholic liquor, and the driver's license number or state identification
number used for purpose of verifying the age of the purchaser.
      (5)   No person under the age of 21 shall deliver alcoholic liquor. No
licensee or common carrier shall allow a person under the age of 21 to deliver
alcoholic liquor.
   (B)   Delivery. All holders of a Class A, B, C, L, N, or T license shall be
permitted to deliver alcoholic liquor, all holders of a Class F, G, K, or P
license shall be permitted to deliver beer and wine and all holders of a Class
I license and shall be permitted to deliver beer from the licensed premises, in
accordance with the following requirements:
      (1)   For the purposes of this division, "delivery" or to "deliver" means
the movement of alcoholic liquor purchased from a licensed retailer to a
consumer through the following methods:
         (a)   Delivery within the licensed retailer's parking lot, including
curbside, for pickup by the consumer;
         (b)   Delivery by an owner, officer, director, shareholder, or
employee of the licensed retailer; or
         (c)   Delivery by a third-party contractor, independent contractor, or
agent with whom the licensed retailer has contracted to make deliveries of
alcoholic liquors.
      (2)   Under this section, delivery shall not include the use of common
carriers.
      (3)   Delivery shall be made only within 12 hours from the time the
alcoholic liquor leaves the licensed premises of the retailer for delivery.
      (4)   Any alcoholic liquor to be delivered shall be in its original
sealed and unopened container.
      (5)   The licensee shall be responsible for establishing and having a
full age verification process conducted which shall include the following
requirements: (i) that the purchaser provide his or her birth date and certify
that he or she is at least 21 years of age prior to the placement of any order;
(ii) that upon delivery of the alcoholic liquor authorized to be delivered by
the licensee, the purchaser must provide a valid and legal form of
identification verifying that the purchaser is at least 21 years of age and
must sign a receipt for delivery of the alcoholic liquor; (iii) the deliverer
must verify that the identification is that of the purchaser and that the
purchaser is at least 21 years of age; and (iv) a record shall be kept on
behalf of for the liquor license holder who delivers alcoholic liquor into or
within the village indicating the purchaser's name, address, and driver's
license/state identification number; signed receipt, the time, date and place
of delivery; and the individual deliverer's identity. The licensee must
maintain a copy of the signature and a receipt for alcoholic liquor delivery
for a minimum period of one year from the date of sale.   
      (6)   Each licensee who delivers alcoholic liquor shall provide training
to all employees or agents delivering alcoholic liquor to customers, which
training shall include verification techniques for identification and age.    
      (7)   Each person delivering alcoholic liquor under the provisions of
this section shall, upon delivery of the alcoholic liquor, require the
purchaser to provide his or her birth date and a valid and legal form of
identification verifying that the purchaser is at least 21 years of age and the
deliverer must verify that the identification is that of the purchaser and that
the purchaser is at least 21 years of age. The person that delivers the
alcoholic liquor shall obtain the signature of a person 21 years of age or
older at the delivery address at the time of delivery. The person delivering
the alcoholic liquor shall provide the licensee with a delivery confirmation
indicating the location of the delivery, time of delivery, and the name and
signature of the individual 21 years of age or older who accepts receipt of the
alcoholic liquor, and the driver's license number or state identification
number used for purpose of verifying the age of the purchaser.
      (8)   No person under the age of 21 shall deliver alcoholic liquor. No
licensee or person contracting with a licensee to deliver alcoholic liquor
shall allow a person under the age of 21 to deliver alcoholic liquor.
   (C)   The shipping and delivery of alcoholic liquor by village liquor
license holders are limited to the shipping and delivery authorized in this
section, except as otherwise authorized by Illinois State law.
(Ord. 2022-02-08, passed 2-7-2022)
ARTICLE 3: SOCIAL HOSTING
Section
   
11-3-1   Definitions
   
11-3-2   Duty of host
   
11-3-3   Prohibited acts
   
11-3-4   Prima facie evidence—presumption
   
11-3-5   Exceptions
   
11-3-6   Unlawful assembly by underaged persons
   
11-3-7   Penalties
§ 11-3-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine,
whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits including dilutions
and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid
or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, beer, and which contains .5% or
more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone
or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances.
   CONTROL. To have legal authority over a premise by ownership, lease,
license, or permission or, where no legal authority exists, to exert authority
over a premise.
   CONVEYANCE. Any vehicle, trailer, watercraft or container operated for the
transportation of persons or property.
   GATHERING OR EVENT. Any group of two or more persons who have assembled or
gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.
   HOST. To aid, conduct, allow, entertain, organize, supervise, control, or
permit.
   ILLICIT DRUGS. Any drug, substance or compound prohibited by law, including
drugs prescribed by a physician, which are in the possession of or used by
someone other than the person to whom the drug was prescribed.
   PARENT. Any person having legal custody of a juvenile:
      (1)   As a natural, adoptive parent, or stepparent;
      (2)   As a legal guardian; or
      (3)   As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the
court.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, corporation, or any
association of one or more individuals.
   POSSESSION. Actual possession or constructive possession based on facts,
which permit the inference of intent to possess or control.
   PREMISES. Any home, yard, farm, field, land, apartment, condominium, hotel
or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting room, park, or any
other place of conducive of assembly, public or private, whether occupied on a
temporary or  permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or specifically
for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or
used with or without permission or compensation.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
governmental buildings, transport facilities, parks, businesses or parking
lots.
   RELIGIOUS CEREMONY. The possession, consumption and dispensation of alcohol
or an alcoholic beverage for conducting any bona fide rite or religious
ceremony.
   UNDERAGE PERSON. Any individual under 21 years of age.
(Ord. 2019-04-13, passed 4-1-2019)
§ 11-3-2 DUTY OF HOST.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of each person who controls a premise to take
reasonable steps to ensure that underage persons do not possess or consume
alcoholic beverages or illicit drugs on such premises.
   (B)   Reasonable steps shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Controlling underaged persons access to alcoholic beverages or
illicit drugs,
      (2)   Supervising underaged persons activities at any gathering on such
premises,
      (3)   Controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages,
      (4)   Verifying the age of persons being served, in possession of or
consuming alcoholic beverages at any gathering,
      (5)   Notifying law enforcement of underage possession or consumption of
alcoholic beverages or illicit drugs and allowing the law enforcement officers
to enter the premises for stopping the possession or consumption of alcoholic
beverages or illicit drugs by underage persons.
      (6)   Notifying law enforcement in advance of departing the premises that
the owner, lessee, tenant, or person in control of a premise will be away and
no underage person is authorized to be present and consume or be in possession
of any alcoholic beverage or illicit drugs on the premises.
(Ord. 2019-04-13, passed 4-1-2019)
§ 11-3-3 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to host a gathering of underaged persons
on any premises, whether public or private, or in any conveyance, over which
that person has control or a reasonable opportunity to control, when that
person knows or reasonably should have known that an underage person is in
possession of or has possessed or consumed an alcoholic beverage or an illicit
drug at such gathering.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to fail to take reasonable steps to
prevent the possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages or illicit drugs
by any underage person at a gathering on a premise, whether public or private,
or in a conveyance, over which that person has control or a reasonable
opportunity to control.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to intentionally aids, advises, hires,
counsels, conspires with, or solicits another person to commit a violation of
this article.
   (D)   A person who hosts a gathering does not have to be present at the
gathering to be responsible and in violation of the provisions of this article.
(Ord. 2019-04-13, passed 4-1-2019)
§ 11-3-4 PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE—PRESUMPTION.
   It shall be prima facie evidence that a person who hosts a gathering of
underaged persons had knowledge or should have had knowledge that an underage
person possessed or consumed an alcoholic beverage or illicit drug, if the
person who hosts the gathering is present at the premises at the time the
underaged person possessed or consumed any alcoholic beverage or illicit drug.
(Ord. 2019-04-13, passed 4-1-2019)
§ 11-3-5 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   A person who hosts a gathering of underaged persons shall not be in
violation of this article if he or she:
      (1)   Terminates the gathering because the person has been unable to
prevent an underage person from consuming or possessing alcoholic beverages or
illicit drugs, as long as the termination occurs prior to law enforcement
intervention or any other person making a complaint to a law enforcement agency
about the gathering.
      (2)   Seeks assistance from law enforcement to remove any person who
refuses to abide by the host's performance of his or her duties under this
article.
   (B)   This article shall not apply to conduct involving the use of alcoholic
beverages that occurs at a religious ceremony or exclusively between an
underaged person and his or her parent, as permitted by state law.
(Ord. 2019-04-13, passed 4-1-2019)
§ 11-3-6 UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY BY UNDERAGED PERSONS.
   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to remain in any
premises or conveyance, when such person knows, or reasonably should have known
that one or more other persons under the age of 21 years located upon such
premises or conveyance is/are in possession of or have consumed any alcoholic
beverage or illicit drug.
(Ord. 2019-04-13, passed 4-1-2019)
§ 11-3-7 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be fined
not more than $1,000 for each such violation. Each day on which, or during
which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   The first violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine of
not less than $500 plus applicable court costs.
   (C)   A second violation of this article by the same person within a 12-
month period shall be punishable by a fine of no less than $750 plus applicable
court costs.
   (D)   A third or subsequent violation of this article by the same person
within a 12-month period shall be punishable by a fine of no less than $1,000
plus applicable court costs.
   (E)   The court may, in its discretion, order the person to perform
community service of an equivalent value to the fine imposed under this section
(Ord. 2019-04-13, passed 4-1-2019)
CHAPTER 12: PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTIES
      Article
         
1.   (RESERVED)
         
2.   BUILDING NUMBERING SYSTEM
         
3.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND DRIVEWAYS
         
4.   DITCHES, DRAINS AND DRAINAGE STRUCTURES
         
5.   CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY
         
6.   MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY
         
7.   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
ARTICLE 1: (RESERVED)
 
ARTICLE 2: BUILDING NUMBERING SYSTEM
Section
   
12-2-1   Building numbering system established
   
12-2-2   Base lines
   
12-2-3   Numbers per mile
   
12-2-4   Street numbers to be displayed; size; location
   
12-2-5   Even, odd numbers
   
12-2-6   Numbering on adjacent, abutting streets
   
12-2-7   Numbering to be continuous; changes in directions
§ 12-2-1 BUILDING NUMBERING SYSTEM ESTABLISHED.
   In order to maintain uniformity and continuity in the number of postal
addresses in the village, and to show the location of addresses to Fire and
Police Departments and other agencies requiring ready knowledge of building
locations, the system of grid building numbering set forth hereinafter is
hereby established.
§ 12-2-2 BASE LINES.
   The 100 north, 100 south base line of the numbering system of the village is
a line running east and west parallel to section lines, and such base line
shall run through the center of the intersection of Gary Avenue and North
Avenue, and the 100 east, 100 west base line is a line running north and south
down the centerline of the public right-of-way of Gary Avenue.
§ 12-2-3 NUMBERS PER MILE.
   There shall be an assumed 500 building numbers per mile. Building numbers
shall be assigned on the basis of number of feet of street frontage, in
increments of 21 feet per odd or even number. Only one number will be assigned
per occupiable building or dwelling unit and this number shall be the number
given by the addition of the last increment of 21 feet. Thus, if a building has
a street frontage of 60 feet and is the first building on the even side of the
street, it will be assigned the number “106”.
§ 12-2-4 STREET NUMBERS TO BE DISPLAYED; SIZE; LOCATION.
   (A)   All buildings in the village must display street numbers of the
building address. Buildings under construction shall display building numbers
prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit.
   (B)   The street numbers must be displayed in a prominent place on the main
building, contrasting from the background and clearly visible from the traveled
portion of the street on which the building is located, and must be at least
six inches high.
   (C)   The street numbers shall be in Arabic numerals and placed to the left,
right or above the main entrance doorway. If this location is not visible from
the street, the numerals may be located near the garage doorway or any other
portion of the building which is clearly visible from the roadway.
§ 12-2-5 EVEN, ODD NUMBERS.
   All even numbers in the numbering system of the village shall fall on the
south and west sides of the streets, and all odd numbers shall fall on the
north and east sides of the streets.
§ 12-2-6 NUMBERING ON ADJACENT, ABUTTING STREETS.
   On streets that abut but do not cross, buildings on the corner thus formed
shall be determined to face the street where the bulk of the building lies on
the side of a line which is the bisector of such street angle intersection.
§ 12-2-7 NUMBERING TO BE CONTINUOUS; CHANGES IN DIRECTIONS.
   Building numbering shall be continuous down each individual street,
regardless of the change in general direction of the street. Such directions
shall be based on the basic or established direction of such street. Where it
becomes apparent that the general direction of any street has made a long
continuous change, the change of number shall be made at a street crossing
only.
ARTICLE 3: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND DRIVEWAYS
Section
   
12-3-1   Street names
   
12-3-2   Scaffolds, tools over public places
   
12-3-3   Articles on windows
   
12-3-4   Obstructions generally
   
12-3-5   Obstructions to drains
   
12-3-6   Supervision and control
   
12-3-7   Permit required
   
12-3-8   Permit fees
   
12-3-9   Location, line and grade of sidewalks and drive approaches
   
12-3-10   Driveway approach construction
   
12-3-11   Construction of drive approach crossing sidewalk
   
12-3-12   Entrance culverts
   
12-3-13   Maintenance of unpaved drive approach
   
12-3-14   Maintenance of drive
   
12-3-15   Abandoning drive approach
   
12-3-16   Tree preservation
   
12-3-17   Public improvement preservation bond
§ 12-3-1 STREET NAMES.
   Street names within the planning jurisdiction of the village shall be chosen
so that they are of a simple phonetic spelling and so that no conflict will be
created with the names of existing village streets. For streets within planned
unit developments or property developed by the same developer, the street names
shall be chosen to carry out a single theme of the development in which the
particular street is located. The developer, in coordination with the
administrative staff of the village, will propose area themes and street names
which will be reviewed by the Plan Commission as part of its review of the
final development plan or plat of subdivision.
§ 12-3-2 SCAFFOLDS, TOOLS OVER PUBLIC PLACES.
   Any scaffold or ladder placed in such a position that it overhangs or can
fall onto any public street, alley or other public place in the village shall
be firmly and properly constructed and safeguarded. It shall be unlawful to
place or leave any tool or article on any such place in such a manner that the
same can fall into any such street, sidewalk, alley or other public way from a
greater height than four feet.
§ 12-3-3 ARTICLES ON WINDOWS.
   It shall be unlawful to place any movable article on any window ledge, or
other place abutting on a public street, alley or other place at a height above
four feet from the ground, in such a manner that the same can be or is in
danger of falling onto such sidewalk, street, alley or other public place.
§ 12-3-4 OBSTRUCTIONS GENERALLY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create or maintain any
obstruction upon any street, alley, sidewalk or anywhere within a public right-
of-way, except as may be specifically authorized in this code. For the purpose
of this section, an OBSTRUCTION may be any person or natural or artificial
object or grade of land. Without limiting the powers of the corporate
authorities to develop regulations pursuant to this section, the following
objects shall be specifically declared to be unlawful obstructions:
      (1)   Objects which are so placed as to interfere with the snowplowing
operations of the village;
      (2)   Objects which are so placed as to likely result in damage to any
village maintenance or other equipment;
      (3)   Objects which tend to impede the flow of traffic or interfere in a
dangerous manner with the visibility of pedestrians, bicyclists or the drivers
of motor vehicles;
      (4)   Objects which have been placed at a location in violation of other
ordinances of the village;
      (5)   Objects which, by their nature or placement, would be likely to
cause injuries to persons or property; and/or
      (6)   Objects which will impede or interfere with the efficient operation
of village or other governments to utilize the public right-of-way or
facilities placed therein.
   (B)   Any object which constitutes an unlawful obstruction may be removed
without regard to the length of time during which it has remained upon the
public right-of-way without village permission.
   (C)   No person may be required to remove an unlawful obstruction prior to
having received a written notice, by certified or registered mail, that the
obstruction is unlawful and having been given a period of not less than ten
days to remove the obstruction; provided, however, that, if the obstruction
constitutes an immediate danger to public health and safety, it may be removed
without the notification having been given. Even under an emergency
circumstance, if sufficient time exists to grant a notice to the owner to
remove the obstruction, the officials of the village will attempt to give such
a notice so long as the identity of the owner is known. After the notice
required under this section has been given, and the obstruction has not been
removed, the village officials may remove the obstruction using reasonable
care.
   (D)   Any obstruction which is brought about as a result of a recreational
activity in any street, alley, sidewalk, parkway, or anywhere within a public
right-of-way shall be governed by the provisions of §
14-4-5 of this code.
(Ord. 95-08-44, passed 8-21-95)
§ 12-3-5 OBSTRUCTIONS TO DRAINS.
   It shall be unlawful to obstruct any drain in any public street or alley.
§ 12-3-6 SUPERVISION AND CONTROL.
   The maintenance, repair, new construction, curb cut excavation and pavement
cut or street openings of streets, sidewalks, alleys, curbs and other public
ways shall be supervised, controlled and under the direction of the Director of
Public Works and/or Village Engineer, and he or she is hereby authorized and
directed to enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 12-3-7 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct,
reconstruct, alter, repair, make curb cuts or lay any pavement or surfacing
material of any nature whatsoever on any public street, sidewalk, alley, curb
or any other public way in the village, nor shall they make any tunnel, opening
or excavation of any kind in or under the surface of any public street,
sidewalk, alley, curb or other public way in the village without first having
obtained a permit therefor.
§ 12-3-8 PERMIT FEES.
   Permit and inspection fees for excavations or street cuts, sidewalk
construction, drive approaches, including curb cuts and street opening
deposits, shall be as are required in the permit fee schedule of the Building
Code, located at
Ch. 6, Art. 13, of this code.
§ 12-3-9 LOCATION, LINE AND GRADE OF SIDEWALKS AND DRIVE APPROACHES.
   All sidewalks and drive approaches shall be laid and constructed at the
locations and to the lines and grades designated or approved by the Director of
Public Works and/or the Village Engineer.
§ 12-3-10 DRIVEWAY APPROACH CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   No industrial or commercial driveway approach shall be constructed
with a greater pavement width than 30 feet measured at the property line, or 50
feet measured at the edge of street pavement. No residential driveway approach
shall be constructed with a greater width than 20 feet measured at the property
line, and 30 feet measured at the edge of street pavement. No driveway approach
shall extend past the face of the curb or edge of the street onto the pavement
so as to change the street grade at the gutter line.
   (B)   On a corner lot, no driveway approach shall be located closer than ten
feet to the right-of-way corner.
§ 12-3-11 CONSTRUCTION OF DRIVE APPROACH CROSSING SIDEWALK.
   Whenever a drive approach crosses a sidewalk, it shall be constructed of
portland cement concrete.
§ 12-3-12 ENTRANCE CULVERTS.
   Material used for entrance culverts shall be of corrugated metal pipe or
reinforced concrete sewer pipe and all material must meet current State Highway
Department specifications.
§ 12-3-13 MAINTENANCE OF UNPAVED DRIVE APPROACH.
   It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain an unpaved drive approach
where such approach abuts a paved street.
§ 12-3-14 MAINTENANCE OF DRIVE.
   Every portion of a driveway area on public property shall be maintained in
good repair by the owner of the property being served, and shall be kept clean
and free of snow and ice.
§ 12-3-15 ABANDONING DRIVE APPROACH.
   If, at any time, a drive approach is abandoned, the curb and gutter at the
edge of the street and sidewalk shall be replaced in accordance with current
village specifications by, and at the expense of, the owner abandoning this
curb cut.
§ 12-3-16 TREE PRESERVATION.
   (A)   Purpose. Tree preservation is a valued purpose. To enhance the quality
of life and the present and future health, safety, and welfare of all
residents, to enhance property values, to ensure proper planting and care of
trees on public property, and in recognition that well-managed public trees are
a part of our public infrastructure that provide collective benefits for the
public, local wildlife, and environment beyond property boundaries, the Village
Board herein establishes practices governing the planting and care of trees on
public property, and makes provision for the proper tree care, preservation,
and removal, of trees on public property and, under certain conditions, private
property. In support of this purpose, the village may share educational
outreach on the value of trees as part of our community.
   (B)   Definitions. As used in this article, the following words and phrases
shall have the meanings indicated:
      ANSI. The American National Standards Institute.
      BMPs. Best management practices published by the International Society of
Arboriculture.
      DAMAGE. Any injury to or destruction of a tree, including but not limited
to: uprooting; severance of all or part of the root system or main trunk;
storage of material on or compaction of surrounding soil; a substantial change
in the natural grade above a root system or around a trunk; surrounding the
tree with impervious paving materials; or any trauma caused by accident or
collision.
      DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH). The diameter of the tree at four and
one-half feet above the ground.
      NUISANCE. Any tree, or limb thereof, that has an infectious disease or
insect; is dead or dying; obstructs the view of traffic signs or the free
passage of pedestrians or vehicles; or threatens public health, safety and
welfare.
      PARKWAY. The area along a public street between the curb and the
sidewalk; or if there is no curb or sidewalk, the unpaved portion of the area
between the street right-of-way (ROW) line and the paved portion of the street
or alley.
      PUBLIC PROPERTY. All grounds and ROWs owned or maintained by the village.
      PUBLIC TREE. Any tree or woody vegetation on village-owned or village-
maintained property or ROW.
      ROW. Right-of-way.
      TOP OR TOPPING. The non-standard practice of cutting back of limbs to
stubs within a tree's crown to such a degree as to remove the normal canopy and
disfigure the tree.
      URBAN FOREST MANAGEMENT PLAN. An action plan which provides the village
detailed information, recommendations, and resources to effectively and
proactively manage public trees.
   (C)   Authority and power.
      (1)   Delegation of authority and responsibility. The Director of the
Public Works Department, and/or his or her designee/s, hereinafter referred to
as the "Director", shall have full authority and responsibility to plant,
prune, maintain and remove trees and woody plants growing in or upon all
municipal streets, ROWs, and other public property. This shall include the
removal of trees that may threaten electrical, telephone, gas, or any municipal
water or sewer line, or any tree that is dead or dying or is affected by
terminal fungus, insect, or other pest disease.
      (2)   Coordination among village departments. All village departments
will coordinate, as necessary, with the Director and will provide services as
required to ensure compliance with this section as it relates to streets,
alleys, ROW, drainage, easements and other public properties not under direct
jurisdiction of the Director.
      (3)   Interference. No person shall hinder, prevent, delay, or interfere
with the Director while engaged in carrying out the execution or enforcement of
this section.
      (4)   Skills required. The Village of Carol Stream shall have on staff at
least one certified arborist. Any urban forestry work completed by a contractor
within the Village of Carol Stream shall be under the direction of a certified
arborist and the contractor shall also have a certified arborist on staff.
These individuals, under the direction of the Director, are responsible for
enforcement and compliance of the Urban Forest Management Plan.
         (a)   The village requires that staff and contractors working on
behalf of the village follow safety practices as detailed in ANSI Z133.1 and
the Urban Forest Management Plan.
         (b)   Contractors working on behalf of the village must maintain and
hold the village harmless as detailed in the village loss control manual.
   (D)   Tree planting and care standards.
      (1)   Requirements of franchise utility companies. The maintenance of
public trees for utility clearance shall conform to all applicable utility
industry standards.
      (2)   Tree species list. The Director shall develop and maintain, in
consultation with appropriate resources, an official list of desirable tree
species for planting on public property. Any variation from this list requires
written approval from the Director. The preferred species list is provided in
the Urban Forest Management Plan as is the restricted species list which
includes references to invasive and undesirable trees.
      (3)   Planting distances. The Director shall develop and maintain an
official set of spacing requirements for the planting of trees on public
property. When planting trees, they shall be installed at no closer of a rate
than one tree per 30 linear feet, or at a rate that matches the existing tree
spacing pattern on adjacent parkways, as approved by the Director of Public
Works. Spacing may be adjusted to ensure adequate room for streetlights and
utilities, as defined by "planting standards" listed below.
      (4)   Planting trees under electric utility lines. Planting trees under
or within 15 lateral feet of any overhead utility wire is prohibited, unless
approved by the Director. If approved, only a tree which conforms to ComEd and
the Arbor Day Foundation's "The Right Tree in the Right Place" guidebook may be
planted.
      (5)   Protection of public trees during construction. Tree protection is
required, with the details at the discretion of the Director of Public Works or
Director of Engineering Services, when any person, firm, corporation, or
village department performs construction involving soil excavation and/or the
movement of heavy equipment within the drip line of any public tree to prevent
injury to the trunk, crown, and unnecessary injury to the root system of the
tree.
      (6)   Purchase of trees by village. The village shall, on an annual
basis, as funds permit and as space is available, procure trees to be placed in
the parkway portion of ROWs under the jurisdiction of the village. The village
shall determine the location and placement of the trees, using ANSI Z60.1 for
guidance.
      (7)   Planting standards. All planting and maintenance of public trees
shall conform to the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A-300
"Standards for Tree Care Operations" and should follow tree care Best
Management Practices (BMPs) published by the International Society of
Arboriculture.
         (a)   Trees when planted shall have no less than a minimum diameter of
two inches at a distance of six inches above the ground and shall have a
continuous single trunk. All trees shall be free from deformity and indication
of undesirable growth characteristics.
         (b)   Trees when planted shall be free of infectious disease or insect
infestation.
         (c)   Trees shall be planted on the centerline of the parkways or in
line with the existing row of trees, when possible. Planting of trees in
situations which meet requirements of this chapter will be prohibited if such
planting will interfere with existing utilities.
         (d)   No tree shall be placed so as to cause a traffic hazard or
within the clear visibility triangle of a street intersection.
         (e)   Spacing of newly planted trees will be as follows, unless
otherwise approved by the Public Works Director, or his/her designee. Street
trees will be planted:
            1.   A minimum distance of ten feet from driveway aprons.
            2.   A minimum distance of five feet from water/sewer service lines
and system structures.
            3.   A minimum distance of 15 feet from crosswalks.
            4.   A minimum distance of 15 feet from street light and utility
poles.
            5.   A minimum distance of ten feet from fire hydrants.
            6.   A minimum distance of 15 feet from any traffic control device,
not including signs.
         (f)   No tree shall be planted where the soil is too poor to ensure
the growth of such tree.
         (g)   Trees required for new developments shall be planted at the
owner's expense, in accordance with the regulations in §
16-5-6 Landscape. The owner will be responsible to plant any required trees in
a State of Illinois, DuPage County, or village ROW.
         (h)   No tree may be planted in a parkway less than ten feet in width,
unless otherwise approved by the Director of Public Works.
      (8)   Tree planting in ROW. Tree planting in ROWs under the jurisdiction
of the village shall take place in accordance with the following terms and
conditions:
         (a)   Tree replacements based upon village removal.
            1.   If a tree within the ROWs under the jurisdiction of the
village is removed by the village, the village may plant one or more trees,
subject to sufficient space therefor.
            2.   The adjacent property owner may be afforded the opportunity to
provide input on the species of tree to be planted, in accordance with the tree
species list; however, the village shall make the final determination of the
species, based on the tree species available to the village and in accordance
with species diversity goals in the Urban Forest Management Plan.
         (b)   Trees requested by the adjacent property owner.
            1.   If an adjacent property owner requests that the village plant
a tree within the ROWs under the jurisdiction of the village, and no tree was
previously removed by the village from the location in question, subject to
sufficient space therefor, the village may, subject to the availability of a
tree and whether parkway trees were not required in the area at the time of
development, plant a tree at the location in question; provided the adjacent
property owner pays the full planting fee per tree to the village, prior to the
planting of the tree.
            2.   The adjacent property owner may be afforded the opportunity to
provide input on the species of tree to be planted, in accordance with the tree
species list; however, the village shall make the final determination of the
species, based on the trees available to the village and in accordance with
species diversity goals.
            3.   Trees planted at the request of the adjacent property owner,
within the ROWs under the jurisdiction of the village, shall remain the
property of the village.
         (c)   If trees are planted by the village within the ROWs under the
jurisdiction of the village, as part of an approved development of the existing
adjacent property, which requires the planting of parkway trees by the
developer of said adjacent property, the adjacent property owner and/or
developer of the approved development shall be charged the cost of the tree and
its planting costs for each tree planted by the village.
      (9)   Tree pruning. Properly pruned trees establish faster, grow quicker,
and live longer lives than trees which are not pruned, or improperly pruned.
         (a)   The village maintains a six-year pruning cycle, supplemented by
intermediate pruning on an as-needed basis to remove sight obstructions and
hazards to pedestrians, bicyclists and vehicles using industry best practices
as detailed in ANSI A300 and the Urban Forest Management Plan.
         (b)   No property owner or property tenant may perform any tree
pruning or other maintenance on any tree planted in the public ROW or any
village-owned property.
   (E)   Tree removal standards.
      (1)   Prohibition against harming public trees. It shall be unlawful for
any person, firm, or corporation to damage, remove, or cause the damage or
removal of a tree on public property without written permission from the
Director.
         (a)   If a public tree is removed without authorization, or is
unlawfully damaged by any person, firm, or corporation to the point that the
tree may need to be removed and/or replaced, at the discretion of the Director
or designee, the offending entity may be charged the tree removal fee of $50
for removals of up to ten inches DBH and another $100 for each additional ten
inches DBH of the tree with a maximum fee of $500 per tree. This fee may be
waived with approval from the Director.
            1.   Said fee is in addition to the direct costs associated with
the restoration of the area including the potential replacement of the tree.
            2.   The village acknowledges that larger trees provide greater
benefits and that when replaced with smaller trees the benefits and services
are reduced.
         (b)   Tree removal applications must be submitted to the Public Works
Director at least 30 days prior to the intended removal date. Common cases
where tree removal would be considered include:
            1.   Removal of a nuisance tree which is dead or declining and has
the potential to damage other trees, people, or structures.
            2.   Removal of undesirable or invasive species as identified in
the Urban Forest Management Plan.
         (c)   It may be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
attach any cable, wire, signs, or any other object to any village-owned and
maintained public tree, without prior approval from the Public Works Director
or his/her designee.
         (d)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
"top" any public tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, where
best pruning practices are impractical, may be temporarily exempted from this
provision at the determination of the Director.
         (e)   In the event of any site improvement which may impact public
property trees, a tree preservation plan is required, must be approved, and
implemented prior to the start of any work or delivery of any materials to the
building activity area. Details on tree preservation standards are included in
the Urban Forest Management Plan.
      (2)   Village tree removal. Trees located within the ROWs under the
jurisdiction of the village shall be removed by the village or a village
designee when removal is considered necessary by the village's Public Works
Department for reasons of tree health and/or public safety.
         (a)   Prior to such removal, the village will attempt to give notice
to the resident of the abutting property, stating the reason for the removal.
village staff has the authority to remove any tree located in the ROWs under
the jurisdiction of the village without providing the aforementioned notice,
when removal is considered necessary for public safety. In regard to any such
tree removal:
            1.   All stump removals shall require underground utility locations
prior to action. All stumps will be ground to a depth of at least 12 inches
below existing grade. Stump grindings will be removed, replaced with topsoil
and restored with grass seed.
            2.   Any tree located in the ROWs under the jurisdiction of the
village, that is removed, will be replaced during the next available planting
season, provided there is sufficient funding and spacing, for the planting of a
tree, and sufficient funding for planting a replacement tree. If the adjacent
resident does not desire a new tree be planted such request must be submitted
to the Director of Public Works who shall make the final determination on the
request.
            3.   There shall be no fee charged to the adjacent property owner
for a tree removed by the village from the ROWs under the jurisdiction of the
village.
      (3)   Developer/adjacent property owner removed trees. The fee for the
removal of a tree from the ROW under the jurisdiction of the village, at the
request of either the adjacent property owner or the developer of the adjacent
property, where the Director has determined that the tree does not otherwise
need to be removed, and the village consents to the removal, shall be based
upon the following formula:
         (a)   All tree removal applications have a $50 fee that covers
removals of up to ten inches DBH and may be waived with the approval of the
Director. There shall be an additional fee of $100 for each additional ten
inches DBH of the tree with a maximum fee of $500 per tree. Said fee shall be
paid to the village prior to the removal of the tree and is in addition to the
direct costs associated with removing the tree. This fee may be waived with
approval from the Director and consent of the Tree Commission.
      (4)   Removal of unauthorized plantings/landscaping. If the Director, or
their designee, deems a planting is unauthorized, and/or landscaping and
hardscaping around public trees is unauthorized and/or is harming the health of
the public tree, the village may require the property owner remove any
unauthorized planting/landscaping within ten business days without compensation
to the property owner. If the property owner fails to comply, the village may
remove any unauthorized plantings/landscaping within any public place without
compensation to the owner.
      (5)   Developer tree removal on private property. The Village of Carol
Stream Community Development Department and village arborist may assist private
developers with creating a tree preservation plan for trees located on private
property. (See §
16-5-6(E) Landscape Tree preservation)
   (F)   Property owner responsibility. Property owners are responsible
parties. No property owner shall allow a tree, or other plant growing on his or
her property, to obstruct or interfere with pedestrians or vehicles or the view
of drivers, thereby creating a hazard. If an obstruction persists, the Director
shall notify the property owner to prune or remove the tree or plant. If the
owner fails to comply with the notice, the village may undertake the necessary
work and charge the cost to the property owner.
   (G)   Certain trees declared a nuisance. Nuisance trees pose a health or
safety hazard to the village. Nuisance trees shall be regulated as described in
municipal code Article 9, Chapter 4 of the Village Code (Health Regulations-
Trees).
   (H)   Violations and penalty. Violations of this section. It shall be a
violation of this code for any person, firm, or corporation, to plant a tree in
a parkway or damage a parkway tree without written approval from the Director.
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this section,
unless otherwise specified, shall be punishable in accordance with §
1-1-9.
      (1)   In addition to seeking the payment of a fine in accordance with §
1-1-9, the village, when it believes that a violation of this section has
occurred, may remove any tree or other unauthorized planting placed within the
parkway and take any other legal action to enforce its property rights.
      (2)   The village shall also maintain its right to seek restitution for
the costs associated with the removal, restoration, and replacement of damaged
public trees.
   (I)   Village Tree Commission.
      (1)   Establishment. The Village of Carol Stream hereby establishes a
Tree Commission which shall be a recommending body to provide assistance,
direction and expertise to the Village of Carol Stream regarding the
preservation, planting, management and protection of trees in the public right-
of-way.
         (a)   The Tree Commission shall develop and recommend implementation
of an Urban Forest Management Plan for guidance on urban forestry issues.
      (2)   Membership. The Tree Commission shall consist of three members and
one alternate member at the discretion of the Village Manager. The Tree
Commission shall consist of a representative from the Public Works Department,
representative from Administration, and a third representative from either
Community Development or Engineering Services. The Village Manager shall
designate one of the members to act as chairperson of the Tree Commission.
         (a)   If appointed by the Village Manager, an alternate shall attend
and participate in all meetings of the Tree Commission, but shall only vote in
the event one or more of the full members is absent.
         (b)   The appointed members shall serve for a period of three years.
If a vacancy shall occur in the full membership, an alternate member may be
appointed to fill such vacancy. Vacancies in full and alternate membership
shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments. Appointed members
may be reappointed at the discretion of the Village Manager.
         (c)   The Tree Commission members shall serve without compensation
related to participation in this Commission.
      (3)   Procedures. The Tree Commission shall meet at least twice a year
and provide recommendations to adopt, change or alter, rules and regulations of
organization and procedure consistent with Village of Carol Stream ordinances
and Illinois State laws.
         (a)   The Tree Commission shall keep written records of its
proceedings which shall be open at all times to public inspection. The
Commission shall provide an annual report to the Village of Carol Stream Board
on its past-year activities and recommendations for future action.
      (4)   Powers and duties. The Tree Commission shall have the following
powers and duties subject to the approval of the Village of Carol Stream Board:
         (a)   To provide recommendations on the preservation, care, management
and protection of trees within the Village of Carol Stream in accordance with
Urban Forest Management Plan, regional and local best management practices.
         (b)   To prepare and recommend to the Village Manager from time to
time specific improvements of the preservation, care, management and protection
of trees within the Village of Carol Stream.
         (c)   To review the Village of Carol Stream Urban Forest Management
Plan and provide recommendations for improvements.
         (d)   Manage and administer all plans, programs, projects and tasks
delegated to it by the Village Manager or designee.
(Ord. 2022-05-24, passed 5-16-2022)
§ 12-3-17 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT PRESERVATION BOND.
   (A)   When any person applies to the Community Development Department for a
building permit, the Village Engineer, or his or her designee, shall determine
whether the applicant for that permit shall be required to submit to the
village a bond or other security to guarantee to the village that the applicant
shall repair or replace any pipes, drainage structures, pavement, curbs,
gutters, street lights, fire hydrants or other public improvements appurtenant
to any street, road, highway or easement owned, dedicated or granted to the
village which is injured, damaged or destroyed during the course of
construction undertaken under the building permit to be issued. If the Village
Engineer, or his or her designee, determines that a bond is required, he or she
shall establish the amount of that bond with regard to the possible damage to
public property inherent in the type of construction or work sought to be
performed within the request for the building permit, and shall so advise the
Community Development Department in writing. No building permit shall be issued
by the Community Development Department until the Village Engineer, or his or
her designee, determines that no bond is needed, or in the event that a bond is
needed, until such time as a public improvement preservation bond from a surety
approved by the Village Attorney shall have been posted with the village.
Building permits may, however, be issued by the Community Development
Department in any area in which the Village Engineer, or his or her designee,
shall have indicated in writing to the Community Development Department that an
adequate bond or other security has previously been posted by the applicant.
   (B)   The form of the public improvement preservation bond shall be in a
form as approved by the Village Attorney.
(Ord. 92-06-71, passed 6-23-1992; Ord. 2013-04-11, passed 4-15-2013)
ARTICLE 4: DITCHES, DRAINS AND DRAINAGE STRUCTURES
Section
   
12-4-1   Definitions
   
12-4-2   Alteration of ditches, drains and drainage structures
   
12-4-3   Alteration of contour of land
   
12-4-4   Application; permit
   
12-4-5   Maintenance of ditches, drains, drainage structures or property
causing damage
   
12-4-6   Private complainants
§ 12-4-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DITCH or DRAIN. Any watercourse or conduit, whether open, covered or
enclosed, natural or artificial, by which waters coming or falling upon lands
are carried away.
   DRAINAGE STRUCTURES. Those structures other than ditches, drains or pumping
plants which are intended to promote or aid drainage. Such structures may be
independent from other drainage work or may be part of or incidental to such
work. The term includes, but is not restricted to, dams, catchbasins,
bulkheads, walls, spillways, flumes, dropboxes, pipe outlets, junction boxes
and structures, and the primary purpose of which is to prevent the erosion of
soil into a drain.
   PERSON. Any natural person, partnership, trust, unincorporated association,
corporation or joint venture.
§ 12-4-2 ALTERATION OF DITCHES, DRAINS AND DRAINAGE STRUCTURES.
   No person shall construct, alter, relocate, remove or destroy any ditch,
drain or drainage structure upon any real property within the village, whether
subdivided or not, without obtaining and complying with the permit provided for
in this code.
§ 12-4-3 ALTERATION OF CONTOUR OF LAND.
   No person shall alter the contours of any real property within the village,
whether subdivided or not, so as to change the flow of water into or through
any ditch, drain or drainage structure without obtaining and complying with the
permit provided for in this code.
§ 12-4-4 APPLICATION; PERMIT.
   (A)   Any person desirous of obtaining a permit required by this article
shall make application therefor to the village on a form provided. Such
application shall be accompanied by a fee of $10 and plans, calculations and
specifications showing the proposed alteration and the effect such alteration
will have upon existing ditches, drains, drainage structures and other
properties. The application shall be transmitted to the Village Manager, who
shall process the application using such village personnel as shall be
necessary to reach a decision upon whether the permit shall be granted. If the
Village Manager determines that an analysis of the application is required by
the Village Engineer, he or she shall collect in advance from the applicant a
permit fee, which shall equal the estimate of costs presented by the Engineer
to review the application. If the services of the Village Engineer are not
required, the permit shall be processed without further charge. The Village
Manager, after such review and after considering the standards hereinafter set
forth in this article, shall determine whether the permit shall be issued.
   (B)   No permit shall be issued for any proposed alteration which will:
      (1)   Increase the amount or rate, or adversely affect the quality, of
surface water draining onto other properties;
      (2)   Damage other properties; or
      (3)   Does not conform to the general drainage law of the state.
   (C)   Any person denied a permit under this section shall have the right to
appeal such denial to the Village Board.
§ 12-4-5 MAINTENANCE OF DITCHES, DRAINS, DRAINAGE STRUCTURES OR PROPERTY
CAUSING DAMAGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain upon any real property in
the village, whether subdivided or not, any ditch, drain, drainage structure or
real property which has been altered, constructed or contoured in such a manner
as to cause damage to other properties by the drainage of surface waters. Any
person determined to be in violation of this article by the Village Engineer
shall be notified of such violation in writing and shall be given 15 days to
correct such violation before any prosecution is commenced by the village.
Notice shall be made either by personal service, or by certified mail, return
receipt requested.
§ 12-4-6 PRIVATE COMPLAINANTS.
   In the event that a person is aggrieved by an alleged violation of this
article, such person may request the village to commence quasi-criminal
proceedings. If the village staff is unable to determine whether a violation
has taken place, the private complainant may be required to submit engineering
data as evidence of the alleged violation.
ARTICLE 5: CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Section
   
12-5-1   Purpose and scope
   
12-5-2   Definitions
   
12-5-3   Annual registration required
   
12-5-4   Permit required; applications and fees
   
12-5-5   Action on permit applications
   
12-5-6   Effect of permit
   
12-5-7   Revised permit drawings
   
12-5-8   Insurance
   
12-5-9   Indemnification
   
12-5-10   Security
   
12-5-11   Permit suspension and revocation
   
12-5-12   Change of ownership or owner’s identity or legal status
   
12-5-13   General construction standards
   
12-5-14   Traffic control
   
12-5-15   Location of facilities
   
12-5-16   Construction methods and materials
   
12-5-17   Vegetation control
   
12-5-18   Removal, relocation or modifications of utility facilities
   
12-5-19   Clean-up and restoration
   
12-5-20   Maintenance and emergency maintenance
   
12-5-21   Variances
   
12-5-22   Enforcement
   
12-5-23   As-built drawings
   
12-5-24   Penalty
§ 12-5-1 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the village's
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage and visual qualities of the village
rights-of-way and the village as a whole.
   (B)   Intent. In enacting this article, the village intends to exercise its
authority over the rights-of-way located within the village and, in particular,
the use of the public ways and property, by establishing uniform standards to
address issues presented by the presence of facilities in the public ways and
property, including without limitation:
      (1)   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
      (2)   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      (3)   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or
public property;
      (4)   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees,
from the installation of utility facilities;
      (5)   Protect against increased storm water run-off due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
      (6)   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
      (7)   Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined parkways that
characterize the village's residential neighborhoods;
      (8)   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the
rights-of-way; and
      (9)   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to facilities locations.
   (C)   Facilities subject to this article. This article applies to all
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the rights-of-
way within the jurisdictional boundaries of the village. A facility lawfully
established prior to the effective date of this article may continue to be
maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and
located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise,
license or similar agreement.
   (D)   Franchises, licenses or similar agreements. The village, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the village
rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the village enter into such an agreement. In such an
agreement, the village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with
this article.
   (E)   Effect of franchises, licenses or similar agreements.
      (1)   Utilities. In the event that a utility provider has entered into a
franchise, license or similar agreement with the village, such franchise,
license or similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such
agreement and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
      (2)   Telecommunications providers. In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this article and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the village and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   (F)   Conflicts with other articles. This article supersedes all articles or
parts of articles adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict.
   (G)   Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
article, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this article to the
maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
   (H)   Sound engineering judgment. The village shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this article and may vary the standards, conditions
and requirements expressed in this article when the village so determines.
Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the village to
regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health, safety and
welfare.
(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009; Am. Ord. 2017-03-08, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 12-5-2 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this article and unless the context clearly requires otherwise,
the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed
to it in 92 Ill. Adm. Code § 530.30, unless the context clearly requires
otherwise.
   AASHTO. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
   ANSI. American National Standards Institute.
   APPLICANT. A person applying for a permit under this article.
   ASTM. American Society for Testing and Materials.
   BACKFILL. The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a
trench or pit.
   BORE or BORING. To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the
insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
   CABLE OPERATOR. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(5).
   CABLE SERVICE. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).
   CABLE SYSTEM. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(7).
   CARRIER PIPE. The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be
transported.
   CASING. A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as:
carrier pipes, electrical conductors and fiber optic devices.
   CLEAR ZONE. The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope and a clear run-out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design
Guide.
   COATING. Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
   CODE. The Code of Ordinances of the Village of Carol Stream.
   COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR. The Village Director of Community
Development or his or her designee.
   CONDUCTOR. Wire carrying electrical current.
   CONDUIT. A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
   CONSTRUCTION or CONSTRUCT. The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of
facilities.
   COVER. The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
   CROSSING FACILITY. A facility having tracks or rails, wires, lines, cable,
fiber optic cable, conduit, ducts or pipes located either above or below ground
that cross one or more right-of-way lines of a right-of-way.
   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. The Village Director of Public Works or his or her
designee.
   DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY. For the purposes of this article, any work that
obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of
the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices or structures; damage
to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include
the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially
obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
   EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land by the
general public, a corporation or a certain person or persons for a specific
purpose or purposes.
   EMERGENCY. Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety
of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
   ENCASEMENT. Provision of a protective casing.
   ENGINEER. The Village Engineer or his or her designee.
   EQUIPMENT. Materials, tools, implements, supplies and/or other items used to
facilitate construction of facilities.
   EXCAVATION. The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying
bare by digging.
   EXTRA HEAVY PIPE. Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
   FACILITY. All structures, devices, objects and materials (including, but not
limited to, tracks and rails, wires, lines, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas,
vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits,
grates, covers, pipes, cables and appurtenances thereto) located on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across or within rights-of- way under this article.
For purposes of this article, the term FACILITY shall not include any facility
owned or operated by the village.
   FREESTANDING FACILITY. A facility that is not a crossing facility or a
parallel facility, such as an antenna, pole, transformer, pump or meter
station.
   FRONTAGE ROAD. Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent
to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location or other characteristics, is determined by the
Village Engineer or Director of Public Works or designee to pose an
unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or
property or to the ecological balance of the environment, including, but not
limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products
or gases, poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any
substance determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law,
statute or regulation.
   HIGHWAY. A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic
including rural or urban roads or streets. HIGHWAY includes all highway land
and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges,
drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
   HIGHWAY CODE. The Illinois Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., as
amended from time to time.
   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable and
Video Competition Law, 220 ILCS 5/21- 401.
   IDOT. Illinois Department of Transportation.
   ICC. Illinois Commerce Commission.
   JACKING. Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means
with or without boring.
   JETTING. Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to
create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
   JOINT USE. The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two or
more utilities.
   J.U.L.I.E. The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators utility
notification program.
   MAJOR INTERSECTION. The intersection of two or more major arterial highways.
   OCCUPANCY. The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way.
   PARALLEL FACILITY. A facility having tracks or rails, wires, lines, cable,
fiber optic cable, conduit, ducts or pipes either above or below ground, that
generally are located parallel or longitudinal to the centerline of a right-of-
way.
   PARKWAY. Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk,
trail, path or driveway apron.
   PAVEMENT CUT. The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or
for the construction of a facility.
   PERMITTEE. That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to §§
12-5-4 and
12-5-5.
   PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES. Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane or coal-slurry.
   PRACTICABLE. That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than
that which is simply convenient.
   PRESSURE. The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
   PRIVATE LINE. A dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single
customer that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a
communications channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified
locations to one or more other specified locations.
   PROMPT. That which is done within a period of time specified by the village.
If no time period is specified, the period shall be 30 days.
   PUBLIC ENTITY. A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at local, state or federal level.
   RESTORATION. The repair of a right-of- way, highway, roadway or other area
disrupted by the construction of a facility.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY. Any street, alley, other land or waterway,
dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar
purposes, including utility easements, in which the village has the right and
authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other
than those of the village. RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY shall not include any
real or personal village property that is not specifically described in the
previous two sentences and shall not include village buildings, fixtures and
other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in
the right-of-way.
   ROADWAY. The part of the highway that includes the pavement, curb and gutter
and shoulders.
   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
   SECURITY FUND. The amount of security required pursuant to §
12-5-10.
   SHOULDER. A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
   SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT. A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted
engineering principles, practices and experience.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer
exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile
telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any
other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite or similar facilities. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include value
added services in which computer processing applications are used to act on the
form, content, code and protocol of the information for purposes other than
transmission. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications provider for use as a component part
of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who
originates or terminates the end-to-end communications. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
shall not include the provision of cable services through a cable system as
defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. §§ 521 and
following), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other programming services
subject to an open video system fee payable to the village through an open
video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission
(47 C.F.R. § 76.1500 and following), as now or hereafter amended.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER. Any person that installs, owns, operates or
controls facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be used to transmit
telecommunications in any form.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER. Includes every person engaged in making sales
of telecommunications at retail, as defined herein.
   TRENCH. A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
   UTILITY. Any individual or entity owning or operating any facility, as
defined in this article, within the right-of-way. The term UTILITY includes any
public utility as defined in the Public Utility Act, 220 ILCS 5/3-105, any
telecommunications retailer or provider, and any public entity other than the
village.
   VENT. A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
   VIDEO SERVICE. That term as defined in the Illinois Cable and Video
Competition Law of 2007, 220 ILCS 5/21-201(v).
   VILLAGE. The Village of Carol Stream.
   VILLAGE MANAGER. The Village Manager or his or her designee.
   WATER LINES. Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
   WET BORING. Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.
(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009; Am. Ord. 2017-03-08, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 12-5-3 ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the village shall register
on January 1 of each year with the Engineer, providing the utility’s name,
address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or
more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in connection with
emergencies involving the utility’s facilities in the right-of-way and a 24-
hour telephone number for each such person, and evidence of insurance as
required in §
12-5-8, in the form of a certificate of insurance. No permit shall be issued to
any utility without meeting the regulation requirements of this section.
(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 12-5-4 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES.
   (A)   Permit required. No person shall construct (as defined in this
article) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within any
village right-of-way which changes the location of the facility, adds a new
facility, disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this article), or materially
increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above,
along, under, across or within the right- of-way, without first filing an
application with the Village Engineer and obtaining a permit from the village
therefor, except as otherwise provided in this article. No permit shall be
required for installation and maintenance of service connections to customers’
premises where there will be no disruption of the right-of-way.
   (B)   Permit application. All applications for permits pursuant to this
article shall be filed on a form provided by the village and shall be filed in
such number of duplicate copies as the village may designate. The applicant may
designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably
believes contain proprietary or confidential information as “proprietary” or
“confidential” by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
   (C)   Minimum general application requirements. The application shall be
made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at
a minimum, the following:
      (1)   The utility’s name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
      (2)   The applicant’s name and address, if different than the utility,
its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address and its interest in the work;
      (3)   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and email
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
      (4)   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      (5)   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the village:
         (a)   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
         (b)   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the village and shall
promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with
ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with
this section unless the village finds that additional information or assurances
are needed.
      (6)   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules and regulations;
      (7)   Evidence of insurance as required in §
12-5-8;
      (8)   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in §
12-5-10;
      (9)   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
article (see §
12-5-21); and
      (10)   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
village.
   (D)   Supplemental application requirements for specific types of utilities.
In addition to the requirements of division (C) of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific
utility that is the subject of the permit application:
      (1)   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or
natural gas distribution system, evidence that any “certificate of public
convenience and necessity” or other regulatory authorization that the applicant
is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has
been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
      (2)   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class and operating pressures;
      (3)   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies,
have been satisfied;
      (4)   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency,
Division of Water Pollution Control and Wheaton Sanitary District, have been
satisfied; or
      (5)   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or
types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure and the design
standard to be followed.
   (E)   Applicant’s duty to update information. Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the utility in writing to the village within 30 days after the
change necessitating the amendment.
   (F)   Application fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this article shall
be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $115 as compensation for regulatory
and administrative costs incurred in processing the application. No application
fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the
municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the
Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act, or by any telecommunications
retailer that is paying the municipal telecommunications infrastructure
maintenance fee or the optional state telecommunications infrastructure
maintenance fee pursuant to the Telecommunications Municipal Infrastructure
Maintenance Fee Act.
(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009; Am. Ord. 2017-03-08, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 12-5-5 ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Village review of permit applications. Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the Village
Engineer within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not
conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and
regulations, the Village Engineer shall reject such application in writing,
stating the reasons therefor. If the Village Engineer is satisfied that the
proposed work conforms to the requirements of this article and applicable
ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, the Village Engineer shall
issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be
the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Village
Engineer, that the construction proposed under the application shall be in full
compliance with the requirements of this article.
   (B)   Additional village review of applications of telecommunications
retailers.
      (1)   Pursuant to the Telephone Company Act, 220 ILCS 65/4, a
telecommunications retailer shall notify the village that it intends to
commence work governed by this article for facilities for the provision of
telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans, specifications
and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the
facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications retailer to the
village not less than ten days prior to the commencement of work requiring no
excavation and not less than 30 days prior to the commencement of work
requiring excavation. The Village Engineer shall specify the portion of the
right-of-way upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed.
      (2)   In the event that the Village Engineer fails to provide such
specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either ten
days after service of notice to the village by the telecommunications retailer
in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction or 25 days
after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work
involving excavation for new construction, the telecommunications retailer may
commence work without obtaining a permit under this article.
      (3)   Upon the provision of such specification by the village, where a
permit is required for work pursuant to §
12-5-4 the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the village an
application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such
application shall be subject to the requirements of division (A) above.
   (C)   Additional village review of applications of holders of state
authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007. Applications
by a utility that is a holder of a state-issued authorization under the Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted 45 days after
submission to the village, unless otherwise acted upon by the village;
provided, the holder has complied with all applicable village codes, ordinances
and regulations.
(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 12-5-6 EFFECT OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Authority granted; no property right or other interest created. A
permit from the village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this article on village rights-of-way, and does
not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon
the rights of others who may have an interest in the rights-of-way.
   (B)   Duration. No permit issued under this article shall be valid for a
period longer than six months unless construction is actually begun within that
period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
   (C)   Pre-construction meeting required. No construction shall begin
pursuant to a permit issued under this article prior to attendance by the
permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any
work under the permit at a pre-construction meeting. The pre-construction
meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the village with
such village representatives in attendance as the village deems necessary. The
meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and
reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur,
including, without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities
in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other
utilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access
and egress by adjacent property owners. The Village Engineer may waive the
mandatory attendance requirement for a pre-construction meeting.
   (D)   Compliance with all laws required. The issuance of a permit by the
village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the village and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.
(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 12-5-7 REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS.
   Any deviation from the permit shall require approval of the Village Engineer
or designee prior to the work being performed. The Village Engineer may require
revised plans, drawings and specifications as necessary to allow for the proper
review and approval of the deviation.
(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 12-5-8 INSURANCE.
   (A)   Required coverages and limits.
      (1)   Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license or similar
agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or constructing any facility in
the right-of-way not including utility easements, shall secure and maintain the
following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured
and naming the village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials,
agents and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in divisions
(A)(1)(a) and (A)(1)(b) below:
         (a)   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse and underground hazard (commonly referred to as
“X”, “C” and “U” coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with
limits not less than:
            1.   Five million dollars for bodily injury or death to each
person;
            2.   Five million dollars for property damage resulting from any
one accident; and
            3.   Five million dollars for all other types of liability;
         (b)   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles
with a combined single limit of $1,000,000 for personal injury and property
damage for each accident;
         (c)   Worker’s compensation with statutory limits; and
         (d)   Employer’s liability insurance with limits of not less than
$1,000,000 per employee and per accident.
      (2)   If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the
contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this section and shall meet with the approval
of the Village Manager.
   (B)   Excess or umbrella policies. The coverages required by this section
may be in any combination of primary, excess and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   (C)   Copies required. The utility shall provide copies of any of the
policies required by this section to the village within ten days following
receipt of a written request therefor from the village.
   (D)   Maintenance and renewal of required coverages.
      (1)   The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the
following endorsement:
“It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor
the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by
the village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of
a written notice addressed to the Village Manager of such intent to cancel or
not to renew.”
      (2)   Within ten days after receipt by the village of said notice, and in
no event later than ten days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall
obtain and furnish to the village evidence of replacement insurance policies
meeting the requirements of this section.
   (E)   Self-insurance. A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required by division (A) of this
section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such
self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional
insureds under division (A) of this section, or the requirements of divisions
(B), (C) and (D) of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall
provide to the village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability
to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under
division (A) of this section, such as evidence that the utility is a “private
self-insurer” under the Worker’s Compensation Act, being 820 ILCS 305/1 et seq.
   (F)   Effect of insurance and self-insurance on utility’s liability. The
legal liability of the utility to the village and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or
self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
   (G)   Insurance companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this section
shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the State of Illinois.
All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated “A-” or better
and of a class size “X” or higher by A.M. Best Company.
(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 12-5-9 INDEMNIFICATION.
   By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility shall
be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the village and its elected
and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives
harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs of
suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or
result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to
act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees,
agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction, maintenance and/or
repair of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or
offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are
authorized, allowed or prohibited by this article or by a franchise, license,
or similar agreement; provided, however, that, the utility’s indemnity
obligations hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands,
judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out of or resulting from the
negligence, misconduct or breach of this article by the village, its officials,
officers, employees, agents or representatives.
(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009; Am. Ord. 2017-03-08, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 12-5-10 SECURITY.
   (A)   Purpose. The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a form and
in an amount as set forth in this section. The Security Fund shall be
continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee’s sole
cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit.
The Security Fund shall serve as security for:
      (1)   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements
of this article;
      (2)   Any expenditure, damage or loss incurred by the village occasioned
by the permittee’s failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations,
orders, permits and other directives of the village issued pursuant to this
article; and
      (3)   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs, or expenses that the village may pay or incur by reason of any action or
non-performance by permittee in violation of this article including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this article to perform that the village must perform itself or
have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee’s failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the village from the permittee pursuant to
this article or any other applicable law.
   (B)   Form. The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the village in
the form, at the permittee’s election, of cash or an irrevocable in a form
acceptable to the village in a form acceptable to the village. Any letter of
credit provided pursuant to this division (B) shall be provided on the
village’s form.
   (C)   Amount. The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the Village Engineer, and may also include reasonable,
directly related costs that the village estimates are likely to be incurred if
the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the construction of
facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in phases in multiple
locations in the village, with each phase consisting of construction of
facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and where
construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial
completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the Village Engineer
may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single
amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction
under the permit. The amount of the Security Fund for phased construction shall
be equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the
provisions of this division (C) for any single phase.
   (D)   Withdrawals. The village, upon ten days’ advance written notice
clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights
under this division (D), may withdraw an amount from the Security Fund;
provided that, the permittee has not reimbursed the village for such amount
within the ten day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
      (1)   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      (2)   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid or if any of the improvements have been or are likely to be, the subject
of liens or other claims by contractors, subcontractors or third parties;
      (3)   Fails to reimburse the village for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or non-performance by the permittee;
      (4)   Fails to comply with any provision of this article that the village
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the Security Fund;
      (5)   Fails to satisfactorily complete or carry on the work of the
installation, construction and restoration of the permitted work in accordance
with its permit, the village’s rules and regulations and a schedule approved by
the village, or if no schedule is approved or even if no one is set out, in
accordance with the faster pace as deemed necessary by the village for the
installation of the improvement;
      (6)   Fails to provide a new letter of credit or amendment of the letter
of credit, containing equivalent terms, within 60 days of the actual expiration
of the original letter of credit; or
      (7)   If the sums remaining within the letter of credit are believed to
be insufficient.
   (E)   Replenishment. Within 14 days after receipt of written notice from the
village that any amount has been withdrawn from the Security Fund, the
permittee shall restore the Security Fund to the amount specified in division
(C) of this section.
   (F)   Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the Security Fund be returned to the permittee by the village,
upon written request for said withdrawal to the village, provided that any such
withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the minimum balance required
in division (C) of this section.
   (G)   Closing and return of Security Fund. Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the Security Fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
article or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the village as a result of said revocation; provided
that, any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.
   (H)   Rights not limited. The rights reserved to the village with respect to
the Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the village, whether
reserved by this article or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund shall affect
any other right the village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any
of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated.
(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 12-5-11 PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Village right to revoke permit. The village may revoke or suspend a
permit issued pursuant to this article for one or more of the following
reasons:
      (1)   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      (2)   Non-compliance with this article;
      (3)   Permittee’s physical presence or presence of permittee’s facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the rights-of-way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety or welfare;
or
      (4)   Permittee’s failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   (B)   Notice of revocation or suspension. The village shall send written
notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this
article stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this section.
   (C)   Permittee alternatives upon receipt of notice of revocation or
suspension.
      (1)   Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the village, the permittee shall have the following options:
         (a)   Immediately provide the village with ample documented evidence
that no cause exists for the revocation or suspension;
         (b)   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the village, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, and provide written proof of such
correction to the village within five working days after receipt of the written
notice of revocation; or
         (c)   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across or within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-
of-way to the satisfaction of the village and provide written proof of such
removal to the village within ten days after receipt of the written notice of
revocation.
      (2)   The village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend
the time periods provided in this division (C).
   (D)   Stop work order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the village may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within division (A) of
this section.
   (E)   Failure or refusal of the permittee to comply. If the permittee fails
to comply with the provisions of division (C) of this section, the village or
its designee may, at the option of the village: correct the deficiencies; upon
not less than 20 days notice to the permittee, unless deemed by the village an
emergency, remove the subject facilities or equipment; or after not less than
30 days notice to the permittee of failure to cure the non-compliance, deem
them abandoned and property of the village. The permittee shall be liable in
all events to the village for all costs of removal.
(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 12-5-12 CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER’S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS.
   (A)   Notification of change. A utility shall notify the village no less
than 30 days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right-
of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or
the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the
former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations, including this article, with respect to the work and
facilities in the right-of-way.
   (B)   Amended permit. A new owner shall request that any current permit and
registration be amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to
have a new or amended permit and registration issued in its name, the new owner
shall be presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and
conditions of the permit and registration if the new owner uses the facility or
allows it to remain on the village’s right-of-way.
   (C)   Insurance and bonding. All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.
(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 12-5-13 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Standards and principles. All construction in the right-of-way shall
be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations,
and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction
principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles
and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from
time to time:
      (1)   Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;
      (2)   Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;
      (3)   Highway Design Manual;
      (4)   Highway Standards Manual;
      (5)   Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;
      (6)   Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92 Ill. Adm.
Code § 545);
      (7)   Flagger’s Handbook; and
      (8)   Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations.
   (B)   Interpretation of municipal standards and principles. If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
article, the Village Engineer shall determine, in the exercise of sound
engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be final.
If requested, the Village Engineer shall state which standard or principle will
apply to the construction, maintenance or operation of a facility in the
future.
(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 12-5-14 TRAFFIC CONTROL.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. The village’s minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT’s Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices and this code.
   (B)   Warning signs, protective devices and flaggers. The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility’s workers when
performing any work on the rights-of-way.
   (C)   Interference with traffic. All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   (D)   Notice when access is blocked. At least 48 hours prior to beginning
work that will partially or completely block access to any residence, business
or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution
of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided, however,
that, in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to §
12-5-20, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable under the
circumstances.
   (E)   Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility’s attention by the village.
(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 12-5-15 LOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   General requirements. In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of
type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this division
(A).
      (1)   Facilities to be located underground. All new facilities shall be
located underground, unless not technically practicable.
      (2)   Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the
capacity of a right-of-way or utility easement to reasonably accommodate future
facilities, a permitee may be required to provide additional ducts, conduits,
manholes and other facilities for non-discriminatory access to future
permitees.
      (3)   No interference with the public ways. No facilities shall be placed
in any location if the Village Engineer determines that the proposed location
will require the relocation or displacement of any of the village’s facilities
or proposed village facilities or will otherwise interfere with use of the
right-of-way by the general public or the operation or maintenance of any of
the village’s facilities, proposed village facilities, or any other existing
facilities. The village may require any facilities causing such interference to
be moved, as determined by the Village Engineer.
      (4)   Minimum interference and impact. The proposed location shall cause
only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right-of-
way. Underground telecommunications facilities shall be installed within an
existing underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within
such duct or conduit.
      (5)   No interference with travel. No utility facility shall be placed in
any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way.
      (6)   No limitations on visibility. No utility facility shall be placed
in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way.
      (7)   Size of utility facilities. The proposed installation shall use the
smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the
particular application.
      (8)   No interference with drainage. No utility facility shall be placed
in any location that interferes with storm water drainage, storage or
conveyance or blocks overland flow routes.
   (B)   Parallel facilities located within highways.
      (1)   Overhead parallel facilities. An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   Wires, lines or cable are located as near as practicable to the
right-of-way line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable
pole alignment will permit;
         (b)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable
from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet behind the back of the curb,
where available;
         (c)   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet outside the outer
shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         (d)   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         (e)   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot of
the right-of- way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way line.
      (2)   Underground parallel facilities. An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable;
         (b)   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other underground locations are impracticable or inconsistent
with sound engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing
conduit without disrupting the pavement); and
         (c)   In the case of underground power or telecommunications wires,
lines or cable, the facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable and any above- grounded appurtenance shall be located within one
foot of the right-of-way line or as near as practicable.
   (C)   Facilities crossing highways.
      (1)   No future disruption. The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of village highways
may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement
or additional cover) as deemed necessary by the village to avoid settlement or
future repairs to the roadbed resulting from the installation of such crossing
facilities.
      (2)   Ninety-degree crossing required. Crossing facilities shall cross at
or as near to a 90-degree angle to the centerline as practicable.
      (3)   Overhead power or telecommunication facility. An overhead power or
telecommunication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC’s
rules entitled, Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines (83 Ill.
Adm. Code 305);
         (b)   Poles are located within one foot of the right-of-way line of
the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         (c)   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      (4)   Underground power or telecommunication facility. An underground
power or telecommunication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance-free service life; and
         (b)   Capacity for the permitee’s foreseeable future expansion needs
is provided in the initial installation.
      (5)   Markers. The village may require the permitee to provide a marker
at each right- of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or
telecommunication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the
type of facility, the permitee and an emergency phone number. Markers may also
be eliminated as provided in current federal regulations (49 C.F.R. § 192.707
(1989)).
   (D)   Facilities to be located within particular rights-of-way. The village
may require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are
not highways, rather than within particular highways.
   (E)   Freestanding facilities.
      (1)   The village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding
facility located within a right-of-way.
      (2)   The village may require any freestanding facility located within a
right-of-way to be screened from view.
   (F)   Facilities installed above ground. Aboveground facilities may be
installed only if:
      (1)   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      (2)   New underground installation is not technically practicable;
      (3)   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single- pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors
and cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever
practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly
discouraged; and
      (4)   The facility meets all the Zoning Code requirements of §§ 16-5-7,
16-12-1, 16- 12-2, 16-16-3, 16-16-8, 16-16-9 and 16-18-1.
   (G)   Facility attachments to bridges or roadway structures.
      (1)   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not
permitted.
      (2)   An applicant shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         (a)   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         (b)   The type, length, value and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         (c)   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         (d)   The proposed method of attachment;
         (e)   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         (f)   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         (g)   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         (h)   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved.
   (H)   Appearance standards.
      (1)   The village may prohibit the installation of facilities in
particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
      (2)   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it
does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.
      (3)   The facility must meet all the Zoning Code requirements of §§ 16-5-
7, 16-12-1, 16- 12-2, 16-16-3, 16-16-8, 16-16-9 and 16-18-1.
(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009; Am. Ord. 2017-03-08, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 12-5-16 CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS.
   (A)   Standards and requirements for particular types of construction
methods.
      (1)   Boring or jacking.
         (a)   Pits and shoring. Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the Village
Engineer from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be
excavated no more than 48 hours in advance of boring or jacking operations and
backfilled within 48 hours after boring or jacking operations are completed.
While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by barricades.
Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced and maintained so that it
will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it
during the boring or jacking operation.
         (b)   Wet boring or jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         (c)   Borings with diameters greater than six inches. Borings over six
inches in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and following pipe, and
the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the
following pipe by more than one inch.
         (d)   Borings with diameters six inches or less. Borings of six inches
or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with auger,
or auger and following pipe method.
         (e)   Tree preservation. Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the village to be preserved or protected shall be bored
under or around the root system.
      (2)   Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair or
maintenance on rights- of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of § 603 of IDOT’s Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, and only with the approval of the Village Engineer.
         (a)   Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only
one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special
permission is obtained from the Village Engineer.
         (b)   Open trench and excavated material. Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by Ch. 6 of the Illinois
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off-road location.
         (c)   Drip line of trees. The utility shall not trench within the drip
line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved.
      (3)   Backfilling.
         (a)   Any pit, trench or excavation created during the installation of
facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT’s Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction. When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         (b)   For a period of three years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the Engineer, the utility, at its expense, shall remove any pavement
and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly
compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs and
driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the Engineer.
      (4)   Pavement cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if allowed by the Village Engineer and
only if that portion of the highway is closed to traffic. If a variance to the
limitation set forth in this division (A)(4) is permitted under §
12-5-21, the following requirements shall apply.
         (a)   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted
as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA- 10 gradation, as
designated by the Engineer.
         (b)   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the village.
         (c)   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
         (d)   For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last ten years, or resurfaced in the last seven
years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an
emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before the
time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
J.U.L.I.E. locate.
      (5)   Encasement.
         (a)   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
village.
         (b)   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot of the right-of-way line. No above-ground vent pipes shall be located in
the area established as clear zone for that particular section of the highway.
         (c)   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or village approved
jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is
installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the village. Bell and spigot type
pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.
         (d)   In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less, encasement may
be eliminated.
         (e)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines
with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be eliminated only if:
extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and
cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
         (f)   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right-of-way.
      (6)   Minimum cover of underground facilities. Cover shall be provided
and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for
minimum cover for the type of facility:
 
   Type of Facility                   Minimum Cover
Communication, cable or video service 24 inches (or as determined by village)
lines
Electric lines                        30 inches
Gas or petroleum products             30 inches
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or       Sufficient cover to provide freeze
drainage line                         protection
Water line                            Sufficient cover to provide freeze
                                      protection - 66 inches minimum
 
   (B)   Standards and requirements for particular types of facilities.
      (1)   Electric power or telecommunication lines.
         (a)   Code compliance. Electric power or telecommunications facilities
within village rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code Part 305 (formerly General
Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled Rules for Construction
of Electric Power and Communications Lines, and the National Electrical Safety
Code.
         (b)   Overhead facilities. Overhead power or telecommunication
facilities shall use single pole construction and joint use of poles shall be
required unless not practicable. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort
to design the installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may
be allowed if there is no practicable alternative and if guy wires are equipped
with guy guards for maximum visibility.
         (c)   Underground facilities. Cable may be installed by trenching or
plowing, when approved by the Village Engineer; provided that, special
consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when crossing
improved entrances and side roads. If a crossing is installed by boring or
jacking, encasement shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement
may be eliminated only if: the crossing is installed by the use of “moles”,
“whip augers” or other village approved method which compress the earth to make
the opening for cable installation or the installation is by the open trench
method which is only permitted prior to roadway construction. Cable shall be
grounded in accordance with the National Electrical Safety Code.
         (d)   Burial of drops. All temporary service drops placed between
November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting,
unless otherwise permitted by the village. Weather permitting, utilities shall
bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten business days after
placement.
      (2)   Underground facilities other than electric power or
telecommunication lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or
telecommunication lines may be installed by:
         (a)   The use of “moles”, “whip augers” or other village approved
methods which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         (b)   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         (c)   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         (d)   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is
not possible by other means.
      (3)   Gas transmission, distribution and service. Gas pipelines within
rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a village
approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of
Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192 -
Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety
Standards (49 C.F.R. part 192), IDOT’s Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction and all other applicable laws, rules and regulations.
      (4)   Petroleum products pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines within
rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code
for Pressure Piping. (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-
B31.4).
      (5)   Waterlines, sanitary sewer lines, storm water sewer lines or
drainage lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines and
drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of
the current Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Illinois.
      (6)   Ground-mounted appurtenances. Ground-mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall
be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one foot in width beyond the
appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may be provided by an
extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material
approved by the Engineer. With the approval of the Community Development
Director, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of
vegetation-free area. The housing for ground-mounted appurtenances shall be
painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings. The facilities meet all
the Zoning Code requirements of §§ 16-5-7, 16-12-1, 16-12-2, 16-16-3, 16-16-8,
16-16-9 and 16-18-1.
   (C)   Materials.
      (1)   General standards. The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights- of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT’s Standards
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, the requirements of the
Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
      (2)   Material storage on right-of- way. No material shall be stored on
the right-of-way without the prior written approval of the Village Engineer.
When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms or
other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way prior to and during
installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to
right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and other property. If
material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval must be obtained from
the village.
      (3)   Hazardous materials. The plans submitted by the utility to the
village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the
construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   (D)   Operational restrictions.
      (1)   No permitee or any person acting on a permitee’s behalf shall take
any action or permit any action to be done which may impair or damage any
village property, right-of-way, or other property located in, on or adjacent to
the facilities being constructed.
      (2)   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of
the village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other
property.
      (3)   These restrictions may be waived by the Engineer when emergency
work is required to restore vital utility or telecommunication services.
      (4)   Unless otherwise permitted by the village, the hours of
construction are those set forth in §
14-2-17(H) of this code of ordinances.
   (E)   Location of existing facilities. Any utility proposing to construct
facilities in the village shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain the presence
and location of existing above-ground and underground facilities within the
rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The village will make
its permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying
possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the
village or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and physically mark its
underground facilities within 48 hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in
accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act (220
ILCS 50/1 et seq.)
(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009; Am. Ord. 2017-03-08, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 12-5-17 VEGETATION CONTROL.
   (A)   Electric utilities - compliance with state laws and regulations. An
electric utility shall conduct all tree-trimming and vegetation control
activities in the right-of-way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and
regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement
with the village as permitted by law.
   (B)   Other utilities - tree trimming permit required. Tree trimming that is
done by any other utility with facilities in the right-of-way and that is not
performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically
governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but
shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition
to any other permit required under this article.
      (1)   Application for tree trimming permit. Applications for tree
trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by
competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall be issued by the Director of Public
Works and shall designate an expiration date in the interest of assuring that
the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      (2)   Damage to trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees as determined by the Director of Public Works will not be
tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of the tree trimming permit and
for assessment of damages. The village will require compensation for trees
extensively damaged and for trees removed without authorization. The formula
developed by the International Society of Arboriculture will be used as a basis
for determining the compensation for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of
trees. The village may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming
or radical pruning would leave them in an unacceptable condition.
   (C)   Specimen trees or trees of special significance. The Director of
Public Works may require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen
trees or trees of special significance. The required measures may consist of
higher poles, side arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
   (D)   Chemical use.
      (1)   Except as provided in the following division, no utility shall
spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation
in the village for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or
disease.
      (2)   Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be
permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction
of the Director of Public Works that such spraying is the only practicable
method of vegetation control.
(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 12-5-18 REMOVAL, RELOCATION OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES.
   (A)   Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the village, a
utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently
disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility
facilities within the rights-of-way to the satisfaction of the village whenever
the corporate authorities have determined that such removal, relocation, change
or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair,
maintenance or installation of any village improvement in or upon, or the
operations of the village in or upon, the rights-of-way.
   (B)   Removal of unauthorized facilities. Within 30 days following written
notice from the village, any utility that owns, controls or maintains any
unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights-of-way shall,
at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances
from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in
the following circumstances:
      (1)   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee’s license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      (2)   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior
grant of a license or franchise, if required;
      (3)   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this article; or
      (4)   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee’s license or franchise or permit.
   (C)   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The village retains the
right and privilege to remove or relocate or alter any facilities located
within the rights-of-way of the village, as the village may determine to be
necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety
emergency. If circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify
the utility, if known, prior to removing or relocating or altering a facility
and shall notify the utility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility.
   (D)   Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility within the
rights-of-way of the village, the utility shall notify the village within 90
days. Following receipt of such notice, the village may direct the utility to
remove all or any portion of the facility if the Village Engineer determines
that such removal will be in the best interest of the village. In the event
that the village does not direct the utility that abandoned the facility to
remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the village, the abandoning
utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any
portion of the facility by another utility or person. All vegetation screening
shall also be removed and the disturbed area properly restored if requested by
the Community Development Director.
(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 12-5-19 CLEAN-UP AND RESTORATION.
   The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and
terrain and other property within ten days after any portion of the rights-of-
way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by
the utility, all to the satisfaction of the village. This includes restoration
of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made
using materials and methods approved by the Village Engineer. Such cleanup and
repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding,
resodding or any other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a condition
substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the
project. The time period provided in this section may be extended by the
Village Engineer for good cause shown.
(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 12-5-20 MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or
within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the village and at the utility’s expense.
   (B)   Emergency maintenance procedures. Emergencies may justify non-
compliance with normal procedures for securing a permit.
      (1)   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does
not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
      (2)   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the
Village Engineer or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency,
informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the
traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If
the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of
traffic, the village police shall be notified immediately.
      (3)   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to
complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to
the traveling public.
   (C)   Emergency repairs. The utility must file in writing with the village a
description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within 48 hours after
an emergency repair.
(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 12-5-21 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Request for variance. A utility requesting a variance from one or more
of the provisions of this article must do so in writing to the Village
Engineer, Director of Public Works or the Community Development Director as
appropriate and as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify
each provision of this article from which a variance is requested and the
reasons why a variance should be granted.
   (B)   Authority to grant variances. The Village Board shall decide whether a
variance is authorized for each provision of this article identified in the
variance request on an individual basis.
   (C)   Conditions for granting of variance. The Village Board may authorize a
variance only if the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that:
      (1)   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such
as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special
hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the
public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      (2)   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   (D)   Additional conditions for granting of a variance. As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the Village Engineer, Director of Public Works or the
Community Development Director as appropriate may require the utility
requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or
may not be expressly contained within this article but which carry out the
purposes of this article.
   (E)   Right to appeal. Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement,
decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the Village
Engineer under the provisions of this article shall have the right to appeal to
the Village Board, or such other board or commission as it may designate. The
application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the Village Clerk
within 30 days after the date of such order, requirement, decision or
determination. The Village Board shall commence its consideration of the appeal
at the Board’s next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least seven days
after the filing of the appeal. The Village Board shall timely decide the
appeal.
(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 12-5-22 ENFORCEMENT.
   Nothing in this article shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this article.
(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 12-5-23 AS-BUILT DRAWINGS.
   Upon the completion of the permitted work and prior to the release of any
security or insurance certificate, the utility shall provide the village with
as-built drawings depicting the actual locations and sizes of all improvements
within 30 days of the installation of the improvements.
(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 12-5-24 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to fine in accordance
with the penalty provisions of this code. There may be times when the village
will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the
utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this
article. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of
undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the
village’s costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying,
relocating or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other
administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related
cost apportionment of the village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that
does not pay the costs apportioned to it.
(Ord. 2009-05-22, passed 5-4-2009)
ARTICLE 6: MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY
Section
   
12-6-1   Definitions
   
12-6-2   Compliance with J.U.L.I.E.
   
12-6-3   Interference with the public ways
   
12-6-4   Damage to property
   
12-6-5   Notice of work
   
12-6-6   Repair and emergency work
   
12-6-7   Maintenance of facilities
   
12-6-8   Relocation or removal of facilities
   
12-6-9   Removal of unauthorized facilities
   
12-6-10   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities
   
12-6-11   Damage to grantee’s facilities
   
12-6-12   Restoration of public ways, other ways and village property
   
12-6-13   Facilities maps
   
12-6-14   Duty to provide information
   
12-6-15   Leased capacity
   
12-6-16   Coordination of construction activities
   
12-6-17   Revocation or termination of grant
   
12-6-18   Notice and duty to cure
   
12-6-19   Hearing
   
12-6-20   Standards for revocation or lesser sanctions
§ 12-6-1 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as provided herein, the words and terms used within this article
shall have the same meanings as ascribed to them as set forth herein or as set
forth in
Article 5, Construction of Facilities in the Rights-of-Way of this
Chapter 12.
   GRANTEE. Any person allowed to construct facilities in the rights-of-way
pursuant to a franchise, license or permit granted by the village.
(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 12-6-2 COMPLIANCE WITH J.U.L.I.E.
   All grantees shall, before commencing any construction in the public ways,
comply with all regulations of J.U.L.I.E.
(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 12-6-3 INTERFERENCE WITH THE PUBLIC WAYS.
   No grantee shall maintain its facilities so as to unreasonably interfere
with the use of the public ways by the village, by the general public or by
other persons authorized to use or be present in or upon the public ways. All
such facilities causing unreasonable interference shall be moved by the
grantee, temporarily or permanently, as determined by the Village Engineer.
(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 12-6-4 DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.
   No grantee nor any person acting on a grantee's behalf shall take any action
or permit any action to be done which may impair or damage any village
property, public ways of the village, other ways or other property located in,
on or adjacent thereto.
(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 12-6-5 NOTICE OF WORK.
   Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement, no grantee,
nor any person acting on the grantee's behalf, shall commence any non-emergency
work in or about the public ways of the village or other ways without ten
working days' advance notice to the village.
(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 12-6-6 REPAIR AND EMERGENCY WORK.
   In the event of an unexpected repair or emergency, a grantee may commence
such repair and emergency response work as required under the circumstances,
provided the grantee shall notify the village as promptly as possible, before
such repair or emergency work or as soon thereafter as possible if advance
notice is not practicable.
(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 12-6-7 MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES.
   Each grantee shall maintain its facilities in good and safe condition and in
a manner that complies with all applicable federal, state and local
requirements.
(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 12-6-8 RELOCATION OR REMOVAL OF FACILITIES.
   Within 30 days following written notice from the village, a grantee shall at
its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter
the position of any facilities within the public ways whenever the corporate
authorities shall have determined that such removal, relocation, change or
alteration is reasonably necessary for:
   (A)   The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any village
or other public improvement in or upon the public ways; and
   (B)   The operations of the village or other governmental entity in or upon
the public ways.
(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 12-6-9 REMOVAL OF UNAUTHORIZED FACILITIES.
   Within 30 days following written notice from the village, any person that
owns, controls or maintains any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances
within the public ways of the village shall, at its own expense, remove such
facilities or appurtenances from the public ways of the village. A facility is
unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:
   (A)   Upon expiration or termination of a grantee's license or franchise;
   (B)   Upon abandonment of a facility within the public ways of the village;
   (C)   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant
of a license or franchise;
   (D)   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior
issuance of a required permit; and/or
   (E)   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the grantee's license or franchise.
(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 12-6-10 EMERGENCY REMOVAL OR RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   The village retains the right and privilege to move any facilities located
within the public ways of the village, as the village may determine to be
necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety
emergency.
(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 12-6-11 DAMAGE TO GRANTEE'S FACILITIES.
   Unless directly and proximately caused by the willful, intentional or
malicious acts by the village, the village shall not be liable for any damage
to or loss of any facility within the public ways of the village as a result of
or in connection with any public works, public improvements, construction,
excavation, grading, filling, or work of any kind in the public ways by or on
behalf of the village.
(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 12-6-12 RESTORATION OF PUBLIC WAYS, OTHER WAYS AND VILLAGE PROPERTY.
   (A)   When a grantee, or any person acting on its behalf, does any work in
or affecting any public ways, other ways or village property, it shall, at its
own expense, promptly remove any obstructions therefrom and restore such ways
or property to as good a condition as existed before the work was undertaken,
unless otherwise directed by the village.
   (B)   If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete restoration
required by this section, the grantee shall temporarily restore the affected
ways or property. Such temporary restoration shall be at the grantee's sole
expense and the licensee shall promptly undertake and complete the required
permanent restoration when the weather or other conditions no longer prevent
such permanent restoration.
   (C)   A grantee or other person acting in its behalf shall use suitable
barricades, flags, flagmen, lights, flares and other measures as required for
the safety of all members of the general public and to prevent injury or damage
to any person, vehicle or property by reason of such work in or affecting such
ways or property.
(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 12-6-13 FACILITIES MAPS.
   Each grantee shall provide the village with an accurate map or maps
certifying the location of all facilities within the public ways. Each grantee
shall provide updated maps annually.
(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 12-6-14 DUTY TO PROVIDE INFORMATION.
   Within ten days of a written request from the Village Manager, each grantee
shall furnish the village with information sufficient to demonstrate:
   (A)   The grantee has complied with all requirements of this chapter;
   (B)   All municipal sales, message, telecommunications taxes or other taxes
required to be paid by the grantee in connection with the services and
facilities provided by the grantee have been properly collected and paid by the
grantee; and
   (C)   All books, records, maps and other documents, maintained by the
grantee with respect to its facilities within the public ways shall be made
available for inspection by the village at reasonable times and intervals.
(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 12-6-15 LEASED CAPACITY.
   A grantee providing telecommunications shall have the right, without prior
village approval, to offer or provide capacity or bandwidth to its customers;
provided:
   (A)   The grantee shall furnish the village with a copy of any such lease or
agreement; and
   (B)   The customer or lessee has complied, to the extent applicable, with
all village ordinances and requirements.
(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 12-6-16 COORDINATION OF CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   All grantees are required to cooperate with the village and with each
other.
   (B)   By February 1 of each year, grantees shall provide the village with a
schedule of their proposed construction activities in, around or that may
affect the public ways.
   (C)   Each grantee shall meet with the village, other grantees and users of
the public ways annually or as determined by the village to schedule and
coordinate construction in the public ways.
   (D)   All construction locations, activities and schedules shall be
coordinated, as ordered by the Village Engineer, to minimize public
inconvenience, disruption or damages.
(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 12-6-17 REVOCATION OR TERMINATION OF GRANT.
   A license, franchise or permit granted by the village to use or occupy
public ways of the village may be revoked for the following reasons:
   (A)   Construction or operation in the village or in the public ways of the
village without a license or franchise grant of authorization;
   (B)   Construction or operation at an unauthorized location;
   (C)   Unauthorized substantial transfer of control of the grantee;
   (D)   Unauthorized assignment of a license or franchise;
   (E)   Unauthorized sale, assignment or transfer of grantee's franchise or
license assets or a substantial interest therein;
   (F)   Misrepresentation or untruthfulness by or on behalf of a grantee in
any application to the village;
   (G)   Abandonment of facilities in the public ways;
   (H)   Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required in this chapter;
   (I)   Failure to pay taxes, compensations fees or costs when and as due the
village;
   (J)   Insolvency or bankruptcy of the grantee;
   (K)   Violation of material provisions of this chapter; and/or
   (L)   Violation of the material terms of a license or franchise agreement.
(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 12-6-18 NOTICE AND DUTY TO CURE.
   In the event that the Village Manager believes that grounds exist for
revocation of a license, franchise or permit, he or she shall give the grantee
written notice of the apparent violation or non-compliance, providing a short
and concise statement of the nature and general facts of the violation or non-
compliance, and providing the grantee a reasonable period of time not exceeding
30 days to furnish evidence that:
   (A)   Corrective action has been, or is being actively and expeditiously
pursued, to remedy the violation or non-compliance;
   (B)   Rebuts the alleged violation or non-compliance; and/or
   (C)   It would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or sanction
less than revocation.
(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 12-6-19 HEARING.
   In the event that a grantee fails to provide evidence reasonably
satisfactory to the Village Manager as provided in §
12-6-18, the Manager shall refer the apparent violation or non-compliance to
the corporate authorities. The corporate authorities shall provide the grantee
with notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard concerning the matter.
(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 12-6-20 STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION OR LESSER SANCTIONS.
   If persuaded that the grantee has violated or failed to comply with material
provisions of this chapter, or of a franchise, license agreement or permit, the
corporate authorities shall determine whether to revoke the license, franchise
or permit, or to establish some lesser sanction and cure, considering the
nature, circumstances, extent and gravity of the violation as reflected by one
or more of the following factors:
   (A)   Whether the misconduct was egregious;
   (B)   Whether substantial harm resulted;
   (C)   Whether the violation was intentional;
   (D)   Whether there is a history of prior violations of the same or other
requirements;
   (E)   Whether there is a history of overall compliance; and/or
   (F)   Whether the violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or cured.
(Ord. 2017-03-11, passed 3-20-2017)
ARTICLE 7: SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
Section
   
12-7-1   Purpose
   
12-7-2   Interaction with other code provisions and laws
   
12-7-3   Definitions
   
12-7-4   Zoning
   
12-7-5   Permits; application process
   
12-7-6   Construction
   
12-7-7   Permit duration
   
12-7-8   Height limitations
   
12-7-9   General requirements
   
12-7-10   Stealth, concealment and design standards
   
12-7-11   Reservation of village utility pole space
   
12-7-12   Applicability of existing agreements
   
12-7-13   Collocation on village-owned infrastructure
   
12-7-14   Notice of sale or transfer
   
12-7-15   Abandonment
   
12-7-16   Dispute resolution
   
12-7-17   Indemnification
   
12-7-18   Insurance
   
12-7-19   Maintenance of small wireless facilities
   
12-7-20   Revocation of permit
   
12-7-21   Exceptions to applicability
§ 12-7-1 PURPOSE.
   Consistent with the requirements of the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment
Act (Public Act 100-585), and in anticipation of a continued increased demand
for placement of small wireless facilities of the type regulated by the Act
both within the public rights-of-way and in other locations within the
jurisdiction of the village, the Village Board has found it to be in the best
interests of the public health, safety and general welfare of the village to
adopt the code amendments set forth in this article in order to establish
generally applicable standards for the design, permitting, location,
construction, deployment, regulation, operation, maintenance, repair and
removal of such small wireless facilities both within the public rights-of-way
and in other locations within the jurisdiction of the village so as to, among
other things:
   (A)   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
village’s utilities and of other utilities lawfully located both within public
rights-of-way and in other locations within the jurisdiction of the village;
   (B)   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which such small
wireless facilities are installed;
   (C)   Minimize any adverse visual impact of small wireless facilities and
prevent visual blight in the neighborhoods in which such facilities are
installed;
   (D)   Ensure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to small wireless facilities;
   (E)   Provide appropriate aesthetic protections to any designated historic
landmarks or districts within the village; and
   (F)   Ensure that the placement of small wireless facilities does not
negatively impact public safety and the village’s public safety technology.
(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 12-7-2 INTERACTION WITH OTHER CODE PROVISIONS AND LAWS.
   (A)   Other code provisions. The provisions of this article are intended to
supplement general requirements and standards relative to the siting of
telecommunication facilities and generally applicable requirements for
construction within public rights-of-way set forth elsewhere within this code,
including but not limited to the regulations set forth in
Chapter 12, Article 5 of this code. In the event of a conflict, however, the
provisions of this article shall control in all matters involving small
wireless facilities, as defined below.
   (B)   State and federal laws. In the event that applicable federal or state
laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this article, a wireless
provider shall comply with the requirements of this article to the maximum
extent possible without violating such federal or state laws or regulations.
(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 12-7-3 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   ACT. The Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act (Public Act 100-585).
   ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
   APPLICABLE CODES. Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or
mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local
amendments to those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
   APPLICANT. Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
   APPLICATION. A request submitted by an applicant to the village for a permit
to collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any
applicable fee for the review of such application.
   AUTHORITY. The village or other unit of local government that has
jurisdiction and control for use of public rights-of-way as provided by the
Illinois Highway Code for placements within public rights-of-way or has zoning
or land use control for placements not within public rights-of-way.
   COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
utility pole, whether existing or new.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6), as
amended; information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(53), as amended;
mobile service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153(33), as amended; or wireless
service other than mobile service.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER. A cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C. §
522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
§ 153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C. §
153(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
   FEE. A one-time charge.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT or HISTORIC LANDMARK. A building, property, or site, or
group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either (i) listed in the
National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for
listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been
delegated the authority by the federal agency to list properties and determine
their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with Section
VI.D.1.a.i through Section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement
codified at 47 CFR Part 1, Appendix C; or (ii) designated as a locally
landmarked building, property, site, or historic district by an ordinance
adopted by the village pursuant to a preservation program that meets the
requirements of the Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State
Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of the preservation
program by the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office is pending.
   LAW. A federal or state statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order,
or local ordinance or resolution.
   MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY. A small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height
and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches.
   PERMIT. A written authorization required by the village or other permitting
authority to perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, trust, or other entity or organization, including an authority.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY. The functional division of the federal government, the
state, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in
whole or in part within this state, that provides or has authority to provide
firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to
respond to and manage emergency incidents.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. As set forth in § 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act, 220
ILCS 5/3-105.
   RATE. A recurring charge.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible
use. RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include authority-owned aerial lines.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no
more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has
exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within
an imaginary enclosure of no more than six cubic feet; and (ii) all other
wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the
facility is cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in volume. The following
types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of
equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications
demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer
switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and
other services.
   STRUCTURAL ENGINEER. A person licensed under the laws of the State of
Illinois to practice structural engineering.
   UTILITY POLE. A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part
by a communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting,
traffic control, or a similar function.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Carol Stream.
   VILLAGE ENGINEER. That individual appointed as the Village Engineer or his
or her designee.
   VILLAGE UTILITY POLE. A utility pole owned or operated by the village in
public rights-of-way.
   WIRELESS FACILITY. Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including:
(i) equipment associated with wireless communications; and (ii) radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration.
WIRELESS FACILITY includes small wireless facilities. WIRELESS FACILITY does
not include: (i) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated; or (ii) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber
optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or
coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or
directly associated with an antenna.
   WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER. Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the state that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the village.
   WIRELESS PROVIDER. A wireless infrastructure provider and/or a wireless
services provider. This does not include, and expressly excludes, any person
who is providing service to or for a private niche market.
   WIRELESS SERVICES. Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
   WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER. A person who provides wireless services.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE does not include a utility pole.
(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 12-7-4 ZONING.
   (A)   Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses and
shall not be subject to zoning review, if collocated in rights-of-way in any
zoning district, or outside rights-of-way in the following zoning districts:
      (1)   B-1 Town Center District;
      (2)   B-2 Neighborhood Business District;
      (3)   B-3 General Business District;
      (4)   O-S Office and Service District;
      (5)   I-1 Industrial District.
   (B)   In all other zoning districts, the village's normal zoning approvals,
processes and restrictions shall apply, if zoning approval, processes or
restrictions are required by the village's zoning ordinance.
(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018; Ord. 2022-02-10, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 12-7-5 PERMITS; APPLICATION PROCESS.
   Unless otherwise specifically exempted in this article, a permit to
collocate a small wireless facility within the village is required in all
cases. Permits are subject to the following:
   (A)   Permit applications. Permit applications for the collocation of small
wireless facilities shall be made on a form provided by the village for such
purpose. In addition to any generally applicable information required of other
communications service providers or for other installations in the public
right-of-way, applicants must, when requesting to collocate small wireless
facilities on a utility pole or wireless support structure, provide the
following information:
      (1)   Site specific structural integrity and, for a village utility pole,
make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined
in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
      (2)   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility
pole would be installed and digital photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each
proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility
poles or structures would be installed. The photographs shall include a digital
photo simulation of the proposed location providing "before and after" views
demonstrating the true visual impact of the proposed small wireless facilities
on the surrounding environment;
      (3)   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as
that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as
it is proposed to be installed;
      (4)   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other
equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
      (5)   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved;
      (6)   Certification that, to the best of the applicant's knowledge, the
collocation complies with the written design standards established by the
village, and with the various other requirements set forth in this article and
code;
      (7)   Copies of all licenses, permits and approvals required by or from
the village (i.e., zoning approval, where required), other agencies and units
of government with jurisdiction over the design, construction, location and
operation of said small wireless facility. The applicant shall maintain such
licenses, permits and approvals in full force and effect and provide evidence
of renewal or extension thereof when granted; and
      (8)   In the event the small wireless facility is proposed to be attached
to an existing utility pole or wireless support structure owned by an entity
other than the village, legally competent evidence of the consent of the owner
of such pole or wireless support structure to the proposed collocation.
   (B)   Means of submission. Permit applications, along with all supporting
information, for the collocation of small wireless facilities shall be
submitted by personal delivery or by other means approved by the village.
   (C)   Multiple applications for same location. Multiple applications for
collocation on the same utility pole or wireless support structure shall be
processed based on a first fully complete application, first-served basis.
   (D)   Permit application fees. All applications for collocation of small
wireless facilities shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in
the following amounts:
 
Request to collocate a small wireless facility
that includes the installation of a new        $1,000
utility pole
Request to collocate a single small wireless
facility on an existing utility pole or        $650
wireless support structure
Request to collocate multiple small wireless
facilities on existing utility poles or        $350 per small wireless facility
wireless support structures addressed in a
single application
 
   (E)   Permit review timelines.
      (1)   Completeness of application.
         (a)   Requests for the collocation of small wireless facilities shall
be reviewed for conformance with the requirements of the Act, this article, and
other applicable provisions of this code. Within 30 days after receiving an
application, the village must determine whether the application is complete and
notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the village must
specifically identify the missing information. Processing deadlines are tolled
from the time the village sends a notice of incompleteness to the time the
applicant provides the missing information.
         (b)   An application shall be deemed complete if the village fails to
provide notification to the applicant within 30 days of the date when all
documents, information, and fees specifically enumerated in the village's
permit application form are submitted by the applicant to the village.
      (2)   Existing pole or wireless support structure. Requests for the
collocation of small wireless facilities on an existing utility pole or
wireless support structure shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and
either approved or denied within 90 days of submission of a completed
application. A permit application shall be deemed approved if the village fails
to approve or deny the application within 90 days, subject to the following: if
an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed
approved basis, the applicant shall notify the village in writing of its
intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than 75 days after the
submission of a completed application. The permit shall be deemed approved on
the later of the ninetieth day after submission of the completed application,
or the tenth day after receipt of the deemed approved notice by the village.
Receipt of a deemed approved notice by the village shall not preclude the
village from denying the permit within the allowed time limit.
      (3)   New utility pole. Requests for the collocation of small wireless
facilities that include the installation of a new utility pole shall be
processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and either approved or denied within 120
days of submission of a completed application. A permit application shall be
deemed approved if the village fails to approve or deny the application within
120 days, subject to the following: if an applicant intends to proceed with the
permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the
village in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no
sooner than 105 days after the submission of a completed application. The
permit shall be deemed approved on the later of the one hundred twentieth day
after submission of the completed application, or the tenth day after receipt
of the deemed approved notice by the village. Receipt of a deemed approved
notice by the village shall not preclude the village from denying the permit
within the allowed time limit.
   (F)   Tolling. The time limitations for approval or denial of applications
shall be tolled by notice to an applicant that its application is incomplete as
set forth above, upon mutual agreement of the parties, or by a local, state or
federal disaster declaration or similar emergency that causes a delay.
   (G)   Pole replacement. Permit approval shall be conditioned on the
replacement of a utility pole or wireless support structure at the applicant's
sole cost where such replacement is deemed necessary for compliance with the
requirements of this article or code relative to the siting of small wireless
facilities, or other applicable codes and regulations that concern public
safety.
   (H)   Denial. The village shall deny an application that does not meet the
requirements of this article. The reasons for any denial of a permit shall be
provided in a written notice of denial sent to the applicant, and shall include
the specific code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is
based.
   (I)   Resubmittal after denial. In the case of a permit denial, an applicant
may cure the deficiencies identified in the notice of denial and resubmit a
revised application once within 30 days after the notice of denial is sent
without payment of an additional application fee. The village shall have 30
days to approve or deny the resubmitted application or it is deemed approved,
if the applicant has notified the village of its intention to proceed with the
permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which notification may be
submitted with the resubmitted application. Review of a resubmitted application
is limited to the deficiencies cited in the original notice of denial. This
division (I) does not apply if a revised application is not resubmitted within
30 days, or curing any deficiencies in the original application requires review
of a new location, new or different structure for collocation, new antennas, or
other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility. In such
cases, a new application and application fee are required.
   (J)   Consolidated applications. Consolidated applications for small
wireless facilities for the collocation of up to 25 small wireless facilities
shall be allowed if the collocations each involve substantially the same type
of small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure. Each
consolidated application shall provide all the information required by this
article for each small wireless facility at each location. If such an
application includes incomplete information for one or more small wireless
facility collocations, or includes requests for small wireless facilities that
do not qualify for consolidated treatment, or that are otherwise denied, the
village may remove such collocation requests from the application and treat
them as separate requests. Separate permits may be issued for each collocation
approved in a consolidated application.
   (K)   Alternate locations. If an applicant is seeking to install a new
utility pole as part of its application, the village may propose that the small
wireless facility be located on an existing utility pole or existing wireless
support structure within 100 feet of the proposed collocation. The applicant
shall accept the proposed alternate location so long as it has the right to use
the location on reasonable terms and conditions, unless the alternate location
imposes technical limits or additional material costs as determined by the
applicant. If the applicant refuses an alternate location based on the
foregoing, the applicant shall provide legally competent evidence in the form
of a written certification, under oath, describing the property rights,
technical limits or material cost reasons that prevent the alternate location
from being utilized.
   (L)   Exemptions.
      (1)   No application, permit approval or fee shall be required from a
communications service provider authorized to occupy the right-of-way when the
work in question is for:
         (a)   Routine maintenance not requiring replacement of wireless
facilities if the wireless provider notifies the village in writing at least 48
hours prior to the planned maintenance;
         (b)   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities
that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless
provider notifies the village in writing at least ten days prior to the planned
replacement and includes equipment specifications, including (i) equipment type
and model numbers, for the replacement of equipment consistent with the
equipment specifications information required on a permit application for
original installation; and (ii) information sufficient to establish that the
replacement is substantially similar. The wireless provider shall provide all
information necessary and requested by the village to establish that the
replacement is substantially similar. The village has the sole right and
responsibility to determine if a proposed small wireless facility is
substantially similar to the existing small wireless facility; or
         (c)   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or
replacement of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cables that are
strung between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety
codes.
      (2)   The foregoing shall not exempt communications service providers
from village permitting requirements where traffic patterns are affected or
lane closures are required.
(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 12-7-6 CONSTRUCTION.
   Collocations for which permits are approved shall be completed within 180
days of issuance of the permit, unless the village agrees to extend the period
or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a village utility pole or by the
lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided the
applicant has made a timely request within 60 days after the issuance of the
permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time to
complete installation does not exceed 360 days after issuance of the permit.
Permits that are not completed within applicable timelines shall be void absent
an extension granted in writing by the village.
(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 12-7-7 PERMIT DURATION.
   Permits issued for small wireless facilities pursuant to this article shall
be for a period of five years. Permits are subject to renewal at the end of the
five-year permit period for a successive five-year term so long as the
installation complies with the applicable code provisions in force at the time
of renewal. A finding by the village at the time of a request for renewal that
an installation does not comply with the applicable code provisions in force at
the time of the renewal request shall be in writing. If the Act is repealed or
found unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, all permits
granted by the village under this article shall terminate at the end of their
current term.
(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 12-7-8 HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Antenna installations. The maximum permitted height of a small
wireless facility is ten feet above the utility pole or wireless support
structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
   (B)   New poles. The maximum permitted height of new or replacement utility
pole or wireless support structure on which a small wireless facility is
collocated is the higher of:
      (1)   Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other
than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on
the date the application is submitted, and that is located within 300 feet of
the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure and that is
in the same right-of-way within the village. The village may designate which
intersecting right-of-way within 300 feet of the proposed utility pole or
wireless support structures shall control the height limitation for such
facility; or
      (2)   Forty-five feet above ground level.
   (C)   Waiver process. A wireless provider may receive a waiver from the
Village Engineer from the maximum permitted height of a new pole set forth in
this section, if the wireless provider can establish that:
      (1)   Because of a particular unusual condition, a particular hardship or
practical difficulty to the wireless provider would result, as distinguished
from a mere inconvenience, and such hardship or difficulty has not been created
by the wireless provider; and
      (2)   Existing utility poles or wireless support structures, or a new
utility pole at the maximum permitted height for a new pole allowed by this
section cannot accommodate the wireless facility at a height necessary to
function effectively, under reasonable terms and conditions; and
      (3)   The use of existing utility poles or other wireless support
structures, or a new utility pole at the maximum permitted height for a new
pole allowed by this section, is not technically feasible.
(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 12-7-9 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Public safety technology. A wireless provider's operation of a small
wireless facility may not interfere with the frequencies used by a public
safety agency for public safety communications. A wireless provider must
install small wireless facilities of the type and frequency that will not cause
unacceptable interference with a public safety agency's communications
equipment. Unacceptable interference is determined by and measured in
accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum
licenses by a public safety agency. If a small wireless facility causes such
interference, and the wireless provider has been given written notice of the
interference by the public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own
expense, shall take all reasonable steps necessary to correct and eliminate the
interference, including, but not limited to, powering down the small wireless
facility and later powering up the small wireless facility for intermittent
testing, if necessary. The village may terminate a permit for a small wireless
facility based on such interference if the wireless provider is not making a
good faith effort to remedy the problem in a manner consistent with the
abatement and resolution procedures for interference with public safety
spectrum established by the FCC, including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973
and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR 90.675. The burden to establish the good faith
effort shall be on the wireless provider, which shall timely deliver to the
village all information necessary to demonstrate its efforts to resolve the
interference consistent with the Code of Federal Regulations sections cited
above. Failure to remedy the interference as required herein shall constitute a
public nuisance and the small wireless facility may be abated through the
procedures for abatement of such nuisances set forth in this code.
   (B)   A wireless provider shall not construct or maintain any small wireless
facility that:
      (1)   Obstructs, impedes or hinders the usual travel or public safety on
a right-of-way;
      (2)   Obstructs the legal use of right-of-way by utility users;
      (3)   Violates nondiscriminatory applicable codes;
      (4)   Violates or conflicts with
Chapter 12, Article 7, or other applicable regulations set forth in this code
or otherwise adopted by the village, except to the extent such chapters,
sections or regulations may be modified by the provisions of this article; or
      (5)   Violates the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42
U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq.)
   (C)   Contractual requirements. Wireless providers shall comply with all
requirements imposed by a contract between the village and any private property
owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to utility poles
and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
   (D)   Ground mounted equipment. Wireless providers shall comply with the
ground mounted equipment spacing requirements within rights-of-way as set forth
in
Chapter 12, Article 5 of this code.
   (E)   Undergrounding.
      (1)   The wireless provider shall comply with village code provisions or
regulations concerning undergrounding requirements, if any, that prohibit the
installation of new or the modification of existing utility poles or equipment
in the right-of-way.
      (2)   A wireless provider may receive a waiver from the Village Engineer
to allow small wireless facilities to be located above ground in an area where
village ordinances or regulations prohibit or restrict above ground facilities
if the wireless provider can establish that:
         (a)   Underground equipment is not technically feasible and there is
no reasonable alternative or location that is more aesthetically favorable to
adjacent property owners and to effective use and management of the right-of-
way; and
         (b)   An above ground small wireless facility at the proposed location
is necessary at the proposed location to provide coverage in a specified area;
and
         (c)   An above ground small wireless facility at the proposed location
will not disrupt traffic or pedestrian circulation or constitute a safety
hazard; and
         (d)   An above ground small wireless facility at the proposed location
will not interfere with public safety uses or frequencies; and
         (e)   Space exists within the public right-of-way to accommodate the
above ground small wireless facility at the proposed location; and
         (f)   An above ground small wireless facility at the proposed location
will not create a safety hazard; and
         (g)   The above ground small wireless facility is located and designed
in such a way so as to minimize its visual impact on adjacent properties; and
         (h)   In any historical area, that the above ground small wireless
facility will not detrimentally affect the historical nature of the area.
      (3)   Screening for ground mounted facilities. Where a ground mounted
facility is allowed, such equipment shall be screened around the perimeter in
accordance with a landscape plan sealed by a professional landscape engineer.
Plant materials shall include a mixture of deciduous and coniferous planting
materials. The owner or wireless provider shall be responsible for maintenance
of all landscaping as provided in the approved landscape plan.
      (4)   Future undergrounding. The village may, from time to time, make a
decision to eliminate above ground utility poles of a particular type
generally, such as electric utility poles, in all or a significant portion of
the village. In the event that such a utility pole has a collocated small
wireless facility in place at the time of such a decision, the village shall
either:
         (a)   Continue to maintain the utility pole, or install and maintain a
reasonable utility pole or wireless support structure for the collocation of
the small wireless facility; or
         (b)   Offer to sell the utility pole to the wireless provider at a
reasonable cost, or allow the wireless provider to install its own utility pole
so it can maintain service from that location.
   (F)   Collocation limits.
      (1)   Wireless providers shall not collocate small wireless facilities on
village utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or transmission
system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric
supply zone of the pole.
      (2)   However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless
facility may be located in the communications space on the village utility pole
and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless
provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
      (3)   For purposes of this division (F), the terms COMMUNICATIONS SPACE,
COMMUNICATION WORKER SAFETY ZONE, and ELECTRIC SUPPLY ZONE have the meanings
given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published by the
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
   (G)   Code compliance. Wireless providers shall comply with applicable codes
and local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety.
(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 12-7-10 STEALTH, CONCEALMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS.
   Every small wireless facility installation shall comply with the following
standards:
   (A)   General stealth, concealment and design standards. Installations shall
comply with any stealth, concealment, design and aesthetic standards applicable
to utility installations in the public right-of-way, as set forth in
Chapter 12, Article 7 of this code, as well as any written design standards
that are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or reasonable
stealth, concealment, design and aesthetic requirements that are otherwise
identified by the village in an ordinance, written policy adopted by the
Village Board of Trustees, in the village's comprehensive plan, or in a written
design plan that applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-way, including on
a historic landmark or in a historic district.
   (B)   Historic districts and landmarks. For areas designated as historic
districts, or on buildings or structures designated as historic landmarks, in
addition to the stealth, concealment and design requirements referenced above,
small wireless facilities shall be comprised of materials that are consistent
with the surrounding elements so as to blend architecturally with any buildings
or structures designated as historic landmarks or located within a designated
historic district, and shall be designed to blend with the surrounding
historical landmarks and/or district in design and color. Small wireless
facilities shall also comply with any additional design/stealth restrictions or
conditions adopted for historic landmarks.
   (C)   Limitations.
      (1)   Any stealth, concealment and design standards, including
restrictions on a specific category of utility poles, may not have the effect
of prohibiting any provider's technology. Such stealth, concealment and design
measures shall not be considered a part of the small wireless facility for
purposes of the size restrictions of a small wireless facility.
      (2)   This division (C) shall not be construed to limit the village's
enforcement of historic preservation in conformance with the requirements
adopted pursuant to the Illinois State Agency Historic Resources Preservation
Act or the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, 54 U.S.C. §§ 300101 et
seq., and the regulations adopted to implement those laws.
(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 12-7-11 RESERVATION OF VILLAGE UTILITY POLE SPACE.
   The village may reserve space on village-owned utility poles for future
public safety uses or for village electric utility uses. Such reservation may
preclude collocation of small wireless facilities if the village reasonably
determines that the village's utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 12-7-12 APPLICABILITY OF EXISTING AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   Existing installations. Subject to any applicable termination
provisions, where an existing agreement is in place between the village and a
wireless provider relating to the collocation of small wireless facilities on
village utility poles on June 1, 2018, such agreement shall remain in effect
for all small wireless facilities collocated on the village's utility poles
pursuant to applications submitted prior to June 1, 2018.
   (B)   Applications received between June 1, 2018 and June 1, 2020. Subject
to any applicable termination provisions, where an existing agreement is in
place between the village and a wireless provider relating to the collocation
of small wireless facilities on village utility poles on June 1, 2018, such
agreement shall remain in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated
on the village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted after June 1,
2018, but prior to June 1, 2020, until June 1, 2020 or receipt by the village
from the wireless provider of a notice that it is opting to accept the rates,
fees and terms of this article and the Act received after June 1, 2020,
whichever is later.
   (C)   Applications received after June 1, 2020. Subject to any applicable
termination provisions, where an existing agreement is in place between the
village and a wireless provider relating to the collocation of small wireless
facilities on village utility poles on June 1, 2018, such agreement shall
remain in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated on the village's
utility poles pursuant to applications submitted after June 1, 2020, until
receipt by the village of a notice from the wireless provider that it is
accepting the rates, fees, terms and conditions of this article.
(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 12-7-13 COLLOCATION ON VILLAGE-OWNED INFRASTRUCTURE.
   (A)   Fee. The annual fee to collocate a small wireless facility on a
village-owned utility pole located in a right-of-way shall be the higher of:
      (1)   Two hundred dollars per year per small wireless facility; or
      (2)   The actual, direct, and reasonable costs related to the wireless
providers use of space on the pole.
   (B)   Exception. Small wireless facilities collocated on village-owned
utility poles located outside of public right-of-way are not subject to the
rate limitations in this section.
   (C)   Attachment agreement. An attachment agreement in a form approved by
the village is required for any collocation upon any village-owned utility pole
or wireless support structure.
(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 12-7-14 NOTICE OF SALE OR TRANSFER.
   A wireless provider shall, prior to any sale or transfer of ownership or
control of a small wireless facility located within the jurisdiction of the
village, provide written notice to the village of such sale or transfer of
control. Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new
wireless provider.
(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 12-7-15 ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period
of 12 months shall be considered abandoned and the owner of the facility shall
remove the small wireless facility within 90 days after receipt of written
notice from the village notifying it of the abandonment. The notice shall be
sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, by the village
to the owner at its last known address. If the small wireless facility is not
removed within 90 days after receipt of such notice, such wireless facility
shall be deemed to be a nuisance and the village may remove or cause the
removal of such facility, and recover or place a lien for its costs, pursuant
to the terms of its pole attachment or other agreement for village utility
poles or through the procedures for abatement of nuisances set forth in this
code.
   (B)   In the event the village suspects that the wireless provider is no
longer using the small wireless facilities to provide wireless service, it may
send the wireless provider written notice that requires the wireless provider
to remove the small wireless facility or provide proof that the small wireless
facility is operational and still being used within 30 days, and informs the
wireless provider that failure to provide proof or to remove the small wireless
facility will result in the village removing the small wireless facility at the
wireless provider's cost.
(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 12-7-16 DISPUTE RESOLUTION.
   The Circuit Court of Du Page County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to
resolve all disputes arising under the Act. Pending resolution of a dispute
concerning rates for collocation of small wireless facilities on village
utility poles within the right-of-way, the village shall allow the collocating
person to collocate on its poles at annual rates of no more than $200 per year
per pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute.
(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 12-7-17 INDEMNIFICATION.
   Other than for liabilities and losses due to or caused by the sole
negligence of the village or its employees or agents, a wireless provider shall
indemnify and hold the village harmless against any and all liability or loss
from personal injury or property damage resulting from or arising out of, in
whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the village infrastructure or
improvements, or right-of-way associated with such infrastructure or
improvements by the wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors
arising out of the rights and privileges granted under this article and the
Act. A wireless provider proceeding under this article waives any claims it may
have against the village with respect to consequential, incidental, or special
damages, however caused, based on the theory of liability.
(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 12-7-18 INSURANCE.
   At all times during the period in which a wireless provider's facilities are
located on village infrastructure, improvements or in right-of-way, the
wireless provider shall, at its own sole cost and expense, carry the following
insurance coverages:
   (A)   Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all
risks;
   (B)   Workers' compensation insurance within statutory limits as required by
law; and
   (C)   (1)   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its
activities on the village infrastructure, improvements or rights-of-way,
including coverage for bodily injury and property damage, with limits not less
than:
         (a)   Five million dollars for bodily injury or death to each person;
         (b)   Five million dollars for property damage resulting from any one
accident; and
         (c)   Five million dollars for all other types of liability.
      (2)   The wireless provider shall include the village as an additional
insured on the commercial general liability policy and shall provide
certificates of insurance and proof of inclusion of the village in a commercial
general liability policy to the village prior to the collocation of any small
wireless facility, and shall keep updated certificates and proof of inclusion
on file with the village at all times that the provider maintains small
wireless facilities within the village.
   (D)   A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance
coverage and limits required by the village. A wireless provider that self-
insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with
the requirement that the village be named an additional insured. A wireless
provider that self-insures shall provide to the village evidence sufficient to
demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance limits required
by the village.
(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 12-7-19 MAINTENANCE OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES.
   (A)   A wireless provider shall maintain all small wireless facilities
installed within the village in a condition that maintains the safety,
integrity and aesthetics of such facilities. Small wireless facilities shall
not appear to be unkempt. In the event of a failure to properly maintain such
facilities, the village shall notify the wireless provider, in writing, who
shall have 30 days to correct the identified maintenance violation. If not
corrected within such period, the village reserves the right to take such
action as it deems necessary, including revocation of the permit. Maintenance
and replacement of small wireless facilities shall be performed by the wireless
provider at the wireless provider's sole cost and expense.
   (B)   In the event of an emergency involving an imminent threat to life or
property, the village may take corrective action to eliminate such emergency at
the wireless provider's expense.
(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 12-7-20 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   A permit to collocate a small wireless facility may be revoked for one
or more of the following reasons:
      (1)   The wireless provider obtained approval by means of fraud or made a
misrepresentation of a material fact with respect to the permit application, or
any required documentation or submittal.
      (2)   The wireless provider failed to construct the small wireless
facility in accordance with the approved plans.
      (3)   The wireless provider failed to comply within any material
condition of a permit issued.
      (4)   The wireless provider substantially expanded or altered the use or
the structure of the small wireless facility beyond what was requested in the
permit application or approved, without the approval of the village.
      (5)   The wireless provider failed to notify the village of the
replacement of small wireless facilities as required by this article.
      (6)   A substantial change of law has occurred affecting the wireless
provider's authority to occupy or use the property upon which the small
wireless facility is located.
      (7)   The small wireless facility interferes with vehicular or pedestrian
use of the public right-of-way.
      (8)   The wireless provider has failed to make a safe and timely
restoration of the right-of-way or the property upon which the small wireless
facility is located.
      (9)   The wireless provider has failed to properly maintain the wireless
facility as required by this article.
      (10)   The wireless provider has failed to abate interference with public
safety communications in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC
including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR
90.675.
      (11)   The small wireless facility has been abandoned and the wireless
provider has failed to remove the small wireless facilities as provided in this
article.
   (B)   Written notification of the permit revocation shall be sent by
certified mail or shall be personally delivered to the wireless provider
setting forth the basis for the revocation. The wireless provider shall, within
14 days of the notice of revocation, file a written response with the Village
Engineer setting forth the reasons why the permit should not be revoked along
with such evidence in opposition to the revocation as the wireless provider
determines necessary. Failure to file a response with the Village Engineer
shall be deemed an admission of the facts set forth in the notification of
written notification and shall result in automatic revocation of the permit.
The Village Engineer shall render findings and a decision within 21 days of the
date of receipt of the wireless provider's response, if any.
   (C)   If the Village Engineer revokes the permit, the wireless provider may
file a written notice of appeal with the Village Clerk within 21 days of
notification of the permit revocation. Such notice shall contain a response to
the decision of the Village Engineer. The Village Board shall hear the
revocation appeal and render a decision on such appeal.
(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)
§ 12-7-21 EXCEPTIONS TO APPLICABILITY.
   This article does not apply to the collocation of small wireless facilities
on:
   (A)   Property owned by a private party;
   (B)   Property owned or controlled by a unit of local government that is not
located within rights-of-way (local governments are, however, required to
authorize the collocation of small wireless facilities on utility poles owned
or controlled by the local government or located within rights-of-way to the
same extent the local government permits access to utility poles for other
commercial projects or uses);
   (C)   A privately-owned utility pole or wireless support structure, without
the consent of the property owner;
   (D)   Property owned, leased or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes, without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code (605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.);
   (E)   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under § 18c-7201 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/18c-7201), Metra Commuter Rail or any other
public commuter rail service, or an electric utility as defined in § 16-102 of
the Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/16-102), without the consent of the rail
carrier, public commuter rail service, or electric utility;
   (F)   Facilities of an electric or gas public utility or such utility's
wireless facilities if the facilities are being used, developed and maintained
consistent with the provisions of § 16-108.5(i) of the Public Utilities Act
(220 ILCS 5/16-108.5(i)); or
   (G)   Small wireless facilities owned by the village.
(Ord. 2018-07-30, passed 7-16-2018)
CHAPTER 13: WATER AND SEWER REGULATIONS
      Article
         
1.   ADMINISTRATION
         
2.   WATER AND SEWER CONNECTIONS, CHARGES AND REGULATIONS
         
3.   WATER SERVICE REGULATIONS, METERS, RATES AND COLLECTIONS
         
4.   INFORMATION REQUIRED OF NON-RESIDENTIAL WASTEWATER SYSTEM USERS
         
5.   GENERAL WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT PROVISIONS
         
6.   GENERAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE REQUIREMENTS
         
7.   GENERAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE COMPLIANCE
         
8.   WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND APPLICATION
         
9.   WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS
         
10.   WASTEWATER DISCHARGE REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
         
11.   WASTEWATER DISCHARGE COMPLIANCE MONITORING
         
12.   CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
         
13.   PUBLICATION OF WASTEWATER SYSTEM USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE
         
14.   ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
         
15.   PENALTIES AND JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
         
16.   SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION
         
17.   AFFIRMATIVE DISEASES TO WASTEWATER DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS
         
18.   MISCELLANEOUS FEES
         
19.   USER & SURCHARGE INDUSTRIAL WASTE COST RECOVERY
         
20.   MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
         
21.   STORM DRAINAGE; ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION
ARTICLE 1: ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
13-1-1   Waterworks as combined utility
   
13-1-2   Compliance with specifications required
   
13-1-3   Village Manager to run combined system
   
13-1-4   Superintendent, office created; appointment
   
13-1-5   Reading meters, collecting bills and the like
   
13-1-6   Records to be open
   
13-1-7   Reports
   
13-1-8   Waterworks and Sewerage Fund
   
13-1-9   Records, accounts, audit
   
13-1-10   Moneys to be held separate and apart
   
13-1-11   Permit required for repairs
   
13-1-12   Who may break seal
   
13-1-13   Liability
   
13-1-14   Enforcement
§ 13-1-1 WATERWORKS AS COMBINED UTILITY.
   The waterworks system of the village and the sanitary sewerage system owned
and operated by the village as a combined utility shall be known as the
“combined waterworks and sewerage system”.
§ 13-1-2 COMPLIANCE WITH SPECIFICATIONS REQUIRED.
   All service pipes and connections to the combined waterworks and sewerage
system shall comply with such specifications and rules. Any person not
complying with the specifications and rules for connection to the waterworks
and sewerage system shall be subject to a penalty as provided in §
1-1-9 of this code.
§ 13-1-3 VILLAGE MANAGER TO RUN COMBINED SYSTEM.
   The Village Manager shall have jurisdiction over the supervision, management
and control of the maintenance, enlargement and operation of the combined
waterworks and sewerage system subject to the control exercised by the Village
President and Board of Trustees.
§ 13-1-4 SUPERINTENDENT, OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT.
   There shall be a Superintendent of the waterworks and sewerage system. Such
Superintendent shall be appointed by the Village Manager to enforce all of the
provisions of this chapter and to observe and obey and carry out the orders and
directions of the Village Manager.
§ 13-1-5 READING METERS, COLLECTING BILLS AND THE LIKE.
   The Village Manager, or such officer or employees of the waterworks and
sewerage system as he or she shall direct, shall read water meters, prepare and
distribute bills, collect the water and sewer rates, issue water and sewer
permits, and shall perform such other duties as now are or may hereafter be
imposed upon him or her by law or the ordinances of the village.
§ 13-1-6 RECORDS TO BE OPEN.
   The Finance Director shall keep, or cause to be kept, full and complete
books of accounts relative to the combined system separate and apart from any
other records of the village, showing in detail all money received by him or
her with dates and sources and all matters pertaining to his or her office in a
clear and methodical manner. He or she shall also keep such other books
relative to such system as the Village President and Board of Trustees may,
from time to time, direct. All such books, accounts and papers pertaining to
such office shall, at all reasonable times, be open to the inspection of the
Village President and Board of Trustees, any member thereof, the holder of any
outstanding waterworks and sewerage revenue bonds, or any duly authorized agent
or agents of such holder.
§ 13-1-7 REPORTS.
   (A)   The Village Manager, together with the Finance Director, shall submit
a monthly report to the Village President and Board of Trustees, listing
therein, but not limited to, the following data received to the combined
system:
      (1)   Billings for services rendered;
      (2)   Collections;
      (3)   Expenditures and accounts charged; and
      (4)   Cash balances at beginning and end of period.
   (B)   In addition to the filing of a monthly report, the Village Manager and
the Finance Director shall file an annual report, listing, in addition to the
above divisions (A)(1) through (A)(4), the following:
      (1)   Applications for service approved and fees received;
      (2)   Volume of water purchased, billed and unaccounted for;
      (3)   Number of metered and unmetered customers connected to the system
at the beginning and at the end of period; and
      (4)   Details of any major repairs and extensions to mains or other
pertinent facts.
§ 13-1-8 WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE FUND.
   The Finance Director shall receive all revenues from the combined waterworks
and sewerage system and all other funds and moneys incident to the operation of
such system as the same may be delivered to him or her and deposit the same in
a separate fund designated as the “Waterworks and Sewerage Fund of the Village
of Carol Stream”, and the Finance Director shall administer such fund in every
respect in the manner provided by the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/11-139-1 et seq.,
and all laws amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto.
§ 13-1-9 RECORDS, ACCOUNTS, AUDIT.
   The Finance Director shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall
keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct entries
shall be made of all transactions relative to the combined waterworks and
sewerage system and, at regular annual intervals, he or she shall cause to be
made an audit of the books by an independent auditing concern to show the
receipts and disbursements of the combined waterworks and sewerage system.
§ 13-1-10 MONEYS TO BE HELD SEPARATE AND APART.
   All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the combined
waterworks and sewerage system shall be held by the Village Treasurer separate
and apart from his or her private funds and separate and apart from all other
funds of the village.
§ 13-1-11 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR REPAIRS.
   No person shall repair any sanitary building sewer or water main or service
without first obtaining a written permit for such work from the Public Works
Department.
§ 13-1-12 WHO MAY BREAK SEAL.
   No seal placed by the village for the protection of any meter, valve,
fitting or other water connection shall be defaced or broken, except on written
authority from the Village Manager or his or her designated representative.
§ 13-1-13 LIABILITY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the village for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the village by
reason of such violation.
§ 13-1-14 ENFORCEMENT.
   The following officers or employees of the village are granted police powers
for the purpose of seeing to compliance and enforcement of sections of
Ch. 13 of this code: the Superintendent of the combined waterworks and sewerage
system, the Wastewater Treatment Plant Foreperson and the Water and Sewer
System Forepersons.
ARTICLE 2: WATER AND SEWER CONNECTIONS, CHARGES AND REGULATIONS
Section
   
13-2-1   When connection to system is required for new construction
   
13-2-2   Application; permit
   
13-2-3   Classes of building sewer permits
   
13-2-4   Adequate capacity of sewerage system required for permit issuance
   
13-2-5   Construction by licensed plumber required; inspection
   
13-2-6   Liability for costs joint and severable
   
13-2-7   Insurance required for water or sewer connection, extension
   
13-2-8   Performance security for sewer connection, extension
   
13-2-9   Indemnification for harm done
   
13-2-10   Cost of water and sewer service
   
13-2-11   Establishing a connection fee; when assessed; determination
   
13-2-12   Water connection tap-on fee
   
13-2-13   Sewer connection tap-on fee
   
13-2-14   Water and sewer expansion connection fee; residential
   
13-2-15   Water and sewer expansion connection fee; commercial, institutional,
industrial
   
13-2-16   Report required
   
13-2-17   Disposition of revenue
   
13-2-18   Acceptance of donations in lieu of fees
   
13-2-19   Connections to conform to prescribed method
   
13-2-20   Discharge in compliance with federal, state and local requirements
   
13-2-21   Inspection of connections of sewer and water services
   
13-2-22   Excavations to be lighted, guarded; restoring property
   
13-2-23   Excavations; backfill
   
13-2-24   Cross-connections with system prohibited
   
13-2-25   Service lines and curb stops for multi-unit commercial buildings or
incubator-type buildings
   
13-2-26   Separate building sewer for each building required; exception
   
13-2-27   When old building sewers may be used
   
13-2-28   Prohibition of connection of surface runoff or ground water to a
sewer
   
13-2-29   Size, slope, materials, joints and the like of building sewers
   
13-2-30   Depth, grade and alignment of sewer
   
13-2-31   Connection of building sewer service to sewer main
   
13-2-32   Use of water pressure ejectors, pumps and the like to discharge
sewage
   
13-2-33   Use of public sewers required
   
13-2-34   Private sewage disposal
   
13-2-35   Sewer use standards
   
13-2-36   Food service establishments
   
13-2-37   Sewer line maintenance/replacement
§ 13-2-1 WHEN CONNECTION TO SYSTEM IS REQUIRED FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION.
   It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant or party or parties in
possession of any house, structure, factory, industrial or commercial
establishment, or any other building of any other character located on property
abutting on the public waterworks and sewerage system, to cause such house,
structure, factory, industrial or commercial establishment, or any other
building of any other character to be connected with the combined waterworks
and sewerage system within 90 days from the date that water or sewerage
facilities become available to such property.
§ 13-2-2 APPLICATION; PERMIT.
   No person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use,
alter or disturb the water mains or the sewer mains of the combined waterworks
and sewerage system of the village without a permit from the Community
Development Department.
§ 13-2-3 CLASSES OF BUILDING SEWER PERMITS.
   (A)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
      (1)   For users producing sanitary waste-water; and
      (2)   For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
   (B)   In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make application
on a form furnished by the village. The application shall be supplemented by
any plans, specifications or other information reasonably required by the
Village Engineer. Connection fees for a residential or commercial building
sewer permit shall be paid to the village at the time the application is filed.
An industrial applicant, as a condition of permit authorization, must provide
such information describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics and
type of activity, as the Engineer may reasonably require.
§ 13-2-4 ADEQUATE CAPACITY OF SEWERAGE SYSTEM REQUIRED FOR PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection shall
only be allowed if the downstream sewerage facilities, including sewers, pump
stations and wastewater treatment facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity
adequately and efficiently to handle the additional anticipated waste load.
§ 13-2-5 CONSTRUCTION BY LICENSED PLUMBER REQUIRED; INSPECTION.
   The construction work in connection with the water and sewer service shall
be performed by a licensed plumber who shall file a copy of a current license
with the Community Development Department when requested to do so.
§ 13-2-6 LIABILITY FOR COSTS JOINT AND SEVERABLE.
   The liability of the owner or occupant of any premises for the cost of
constructing, maintaining and repairing water or sewer service shall be both
joint and severable.
§ 13-2-7 INSURANCE REQUIRED FOR WATER OR SEWER CONNECTION, EXTENSION.
   No permit for a water or sewer connection or a water or sewer extension
shall be issued by the Village Manager or his or her designee unless the person
applying therefor, or the contractor, shall have first procured public
liability insurance, in a form acceptable to the village, in an amount not less
than $1,000,000 for injuries, including accidental death, to any one person and
subject to the same limit for each person in an amount not less than $1,000,000
on account of one accident, and property damage insurance in an amount not less
than $1,000,000. The persons to be indemnified and saved harmless in such
insurance policy shall be the village, its officers, agents and employees, and
the applicant for water or sewer connection or extension. A certificate of such
insurance shall be filed with the village naming the Village of Carol Stream as
an additional insured on the general liability policy.
(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010)
§ 13-2-8 PERFORMANCE SECURITY FOR SEWER CONNECTION, EXTENSION.
   No permit for a water or sewer connection or extension shall be issued by
the Village Manager or his or her designee unless the person applying therefor,
or the contractor, shall have provided cash, an irrevocable letter of credit or
a surety bond in an amount equal to the cost of the improvements as estimated
by the Village Engineer or his or her designee and conditioned upon the
completion and acceptance by the Village Engineer of all work required by the
permit. Such performance surety shall be approved by the Village Attorney,
conditioned upon the applicant indemnifying, saving harmless and agreeing to
pay for the costs of defense incurred by the village, for all damage to
underground utilities, or to the water and sewer mains and laterals of the
village, and from any failure to restore any road, ditch, pavement or portion
thereof damaged during the construction of the sewer connection, or the sewer
extension to the condition existing at the commencement of construction.
(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010)
§ 13-2-9 INDEMNIFICATION FOR HARM DONE.
   The owner shall indemnify the village for any loss or damage that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer
or water service on his or her premises.
§ 13-2-10 COST OF WATER AND SEWER SERVICE.
   All applicants for water and sewer service shall provide and pay the costs
of construction, maintenance and repair, both labor and material, of the water
service from the main to the premises to be served.
§ 13-2-11 ESTABLISHING A CONNECTION FEE; WHEN ASSESSED; DETERMINATION.
   (A)   Pursuant to authority granted in 65 ILCS 5/11-150-1, there is hereby
established within the village a charge for connection to the waterworks or
sewerage systems of the village, such a charge to be assessed against new or
additional users within connections to the sewerage collection and treatment
system or the water system of the village and to be known as a connection
charge. The charge shall be as prescribed in §
6-13-8.
   (B)   For the connection charge, the village will inspect the water service
to determine that the construction hereof is in accordance with specifications
established by the village for the regulations of the water and sewerage
system.
   (C)   The connection charge shall be determined by adding together three
subcharges, as prescribed in §
6-13-8, the sum of which shall constitute the total connection fee for entrance
into the water and/or sewer system. The three subcharges shall be known as:
      (1)   The water connection tap-on fee;
      (2)   The sewer connection tap-on fee; and
      (3)   The water and sewer expansion connection fee.
(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010)
§ 13-2-12 WATER CONNECTION TAP-ON FEE.
   The water connection tap-on fee shall be as prescribed in §
6-13-8.
(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010)
§ 13-2-13 SEWER CONNECTION TAP-ON FEE.
   The sewer connection tap-on fee shall be as prescribed in §
6-13-8.
(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010)
§ 13-2-14 WATER AND SEWER EXPANSION CONNECTION FEE; RESIDENTIAL.
   The water and sewer expansion connection fee shall be as prescribed in §
6-13-8.
(Ord. 91-02-14, passed 2-26-1991; Ord. 99-12-68, passed 12-6-1999; Ord. 2010-
04-23, passed 4-5-2010)
§ 13-2-15 WATER AND SEWER EXPANSION CONNECTION FEE; COMMERCIAL, INSTITUTIONAL,
INDUSTRIAL.
   The water and sewer expansion connection fee for commercial, institutional
and industrial users shall be as prescribed in §
6-13-8.
(Ord. 91-02-14, passed 2-26-1991; Ord. 99-12-68, passed 12-6-1999; Ord. 2010-
04-23, passed 4-5-2010)
§ 13-2-16 REPORT REQUIRED.
   The Village Manager shall be required to report to the corporate authorities
on at least an annual basis as to whether the amount of the water and sewer
expansion connection fee is sufficient to cause the reproduction of the amount
of water and sewer capacity taken up by connections to the system.
§ 13-2-17 DISPOSITION OF REVENUE.
   (A)   The revenue received by the village from the water connection tap-on
fee and sewer connection tap-on fee shall be deposited in the existing
Waterworks and Sewerage Fund of the village.
   (B)   The revenue received by the village from the “water and sewer
expansion connection fee” shall be used by the village for its general
corporate purposes, with primary application thereof being made by the
necessary expansion of the works of the system to meet the requirements of the
new users thereof; such funds shall be placed (until they are used) into a fund
which shall be known as the Waterworks and Sewer Expansion Connection Fund. The
moneys to the credit of such fund may be invested from time to time by the
Village Treasurer.
§ 13-2-18 ACCEPTANCE OF DONATIONS IN LIEU OF FEES.
   The village may accept a donation of construction, expansion or extension of
the works of its system in lieu of all or part of connection fees established
in §
6-13-8.
(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010)
§ 13-2-19 CONNECTIONS TO CONFORM TO PRESCRIBED METHOD.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to make any connection or opening with the
waterworks and sewerage system in any manner different from the method
prescribed for such opening or connection.
   (B)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer and the
water service into the water main shall conform to the requirements of the
village’s Building Code and Plumbing Code, and other applicable rules and
regulations of the village, and the procedures set forth in that publication
entitled Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Illinois, published by the Standard Specifications Committee of the Illinois
Society of Professional Engineers, and other similar organizations, third
edition. All such connections shall be made gas-tight and water-tight. Any
deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved in
writing by the Village Engineer before installation.
§ 13-2-20 DISCHARGE IN COMPLIANCE WITH FEDERAL, STATE AND LOCAL REQUIREMENTS.
   All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful, except those
discharges in compliance with regulations promulgated under federal law or more
stringent state and local standards, pursuant to the State Environmental
Protection Act or this chapter.
§ 13-2-21 INSPECTION OF CONNECTIONS OF SEWER AND WATER SERVICES.
   The applicant for the building permit shall notify the Community Development
Department when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to
the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
Village Engineer or his or her designee.
(Ord. 2010-04-23, passed 4-5-2010)
§ 13-2-22 EXCAVATIONS TO BE LIGHTED, GUARDED; RESTORING PROPERTY.
   All excavations for building sewer installations undertaken by private
parties shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect
the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property
disturbed in the course of work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to
the village.
§ 13-2-23 EXCAVATIONS; BACKFILL.
   All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be
open trench work unless otherwise approved by the village. Pipe laying and
backfill shall be performed in accordance with the latest ASTM specifications;
except that, no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected.
§ 13-2-24 CROSS-CONNECTIONS WITH SYSTEM PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Whenever a system of water supply piping, either inside or outside of
any building, receives its supply from any source other than the waterworks
system of the village, such system shall be kept entirely separate from and no
cross-connections or connections of any kind shall be made with any pipe or
system of piping which receives its supply from the village waterworks system.
   (B)   Water which has once been used for any purpose whatsoever shall not be
returned to the building’s water supply system.
§ 13-2-25 SERVICE LINES AND CURB STOPS FOR MULTI-UNIT COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS OR
INCUBATOR-TYPE BUILDINGS.
   No multi-unit commercial building or incubator-type building shall be
constructed with only one service line and one curb stop. An INCUBATOR-TYPE
BUILDING is defined as a commercial or industrial structure which is built with
the intention of dividing the usage among a number of tenants. Each unit within
a multi-unit commercial building or incubator-type building shall be served
with a separate meter and service line with a curb stop on each service. The
separate meter and service line shall be located outside of the building near
the supply line in a location where the meter can be easily read. A common
header main shall run for the entire length of the building on the outside of
the structure with individual service lines branching from the common header
main to each separate unit; provided, however, that, a single meter is allowed
to serve a multi-unit commercial building or incubator-type building where the
building is in single ownership or in unified control so that the owner of the
building or the managing agent of the building is responsible for paying the
unified water bill, and the property owner agrees to place a covenant on the
title of the property running to the benefit of the village whereby, upon the
sale of the property to more than one individual, firm or corporation, or upon
the partition of the property into more than one parcel, separately needed
water services in accordance with the provisions of this chapter will be
installed.
§ 13-2-26 SEPARATE BUILDING SEWER FOR EACH BUILDING REQUIRED; EXCEPTION.
   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except that, where one stands at the rear of another on an interior
lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear
building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer.
§ 13-2-27 WHEN OLD BUILDING SEWERS MAY BE USED.
   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when
they are found by the Village Engineer to meet all requirements of this code.
§ 13-2-28 PROHIBITION OF CONNECTION OF SURFACE RUNOFF OR GROUND WATER TO A
SEWER.
   No person shall make connection of roof down-spouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a
building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
§ 13-2-29 SIZE, SLOPE, MATERIALS, JOINTS AND THE LIKE OF BUILDING SEWERS.
   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer,
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, joining, testing
and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the
Building Code and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of
the village. In no event shall the diameter of the pipe be less than six
inches. The slope of such six inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth inch
per foot. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois,
published by the Standard Specification Committee of the Illinois Society of
Professional Engineers and other similar organizations, third edition, shall
apply.
§ 13-2-30 DEPTH, GRADE AND ALIGNMENT OF SEWER.
   (A)   No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of
any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be
sufficient to afford protection from frost. The building sewer shall be laid at
uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in
direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings.
   (B)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is not four feet above the top of the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a means which is
approved by the Village Engineer and discharged by the building sewer.
§ 13-2-31 CONNECTION OF BUILDING SEWER SERVICE TO SEWER MAIN.
   (A)   The building sewer shall generally enter the sewer main or lateral by
way of an existing “Y” or tee. In the event of absence of the “Y” or tee, the
connection to the sewer main or lateral shall be made by the following methods:
      (1)   Installation of a manhole;
      (2)   Circular saw cut of sewer main by proper tools and proper
installation of hub “Y” saddle or hub tee saddle in accordance with
manufacturer’s recommended instructions; and
      (3)   Use of pipe cutter to neatly and accurately cut out the desired
length of pipe for inserting a “Y” or tee fitting. Use stainless steel shear
rings and band seal couplings for connecting sewer pipes together.
   (B)   Indiscriminate breaking of the sewer main pipe for break-in connection
is expressly prohibited. The invert of the building sewer at the point of
connection shall be at the same or at a higher elevation than the invert of the
public sewer.
§ 13-2-32 USE OF WATER PRESSURE EJECTORS, PUMPS AND THE LIKE TO DISCHARGE
SEWAGE.
   Water pressure ejectors, siphons or pumps of any nature shall not be
installed for discharging any sewage or waste, unless adequately protected
against back-siphonage, without the permission of the Village Engineer, and
such permission shall be revocable at will.
§ 13-2-33 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
village or in any area under the jurisdiction of the village any human or
animal excretion, garbage or other unsanitary waste.    
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any storm sewer, natural
watercourse within the village, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the
village, any sewage, industrial waste or other polluted waters, except where
suitable treatment has been provided and permitted by the village.    
   (C)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
   (D)   The owner of any house, building or property used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purpose situated within the village and
abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or
may in the future be located any public sanitary sewer of the village, is
hereby required at his or her expense to install suitable toilet facilities
therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer
as required herein, within 90 days after date of written notice to do so is
served upon him or her by the village; provided that, such public sewer is
within 100 feet (30.48 meters) of the property line.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-2-34 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
§
13-2-33(D), the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Before the village will approve a new private sewage disposal system,
the owner shall provide documentation that demonstrates the inability to
connect to a public sanitary sewer and that connection to a public sanitary
sewer will cause hardship to the owner.
   (C)   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Director of
Public Works. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished
by the village, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans,
specifications and other information as are reasonably deemed necessary by the
Director of Public Works.
   (D)   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed and approved by the Village
Engineer. The Village Engineer shall be allowed to inspect the work at any
stage of construction and the applicant for the permit shall notify the Village
Engineer when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any
underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within a
reasonable time by the Village Engineer after receipt of such notice.
   (E)   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the State Private Sewage
Disposal Licensing Act (225 ILCS 225/1); the Private Sewage Disposal Code
promulgated thereunder, and all regulations of the State Environmental
Protection Agency. No permit shall be issued for any private disposal system
employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is
less than 43,560 square feet (4,046 square meters). No septic tank or cesspool
shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
   (F)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in §
13-2-33(D), a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance
with this Article, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage
disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.   
   (G)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times and at no expense to the village.
   (H)   No statement contained in this Article shall be construed to supersede
more stringent requirements that may be imposed by the DuPage County Health
Department.
   (I)   When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be
connected to the public sewer within 60 days of written notice from the Village
Engineer and the private sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of bio-solids
and filled with clean bank-run gravel or dirt.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-2-35 SEWER USE STANDARDS.
   (A)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in §
13-6-2, and which in the judgment of the Village Engineer may have a
deleterious effect upon the POTW, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or
which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the
Engineer may:
      (1)   Reject the wastes;
      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
      (4)   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions
of §
13-19-1 through
13-19-4. If the Village Engineer permits the pretreatment or equalization of
waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Village Engineer, and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
   (E)   Where preliminary treatment of flow-equalizing facilities is provided,
such facilities shall be continuously maintained in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at his or her expense.
   (F)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Village Engineer, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes,
sand or other harmful ingredients; except that, such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall
be of a type and capacity approved by the Village Engineer, and shall be
located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
   (G)   Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and, when
required by the Village Engineer, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the
wastes. Such manhole when required shall be accessibly and safely located, and
shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Village Engineer.
The manhole and equipment shall be installed by the owner at his or her
expense, and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible
at all times.
      (1)   Each sampling chamber shall contain a Palmer-Bowlus flume unless a
weir or similar device is approved by the POTW with a recording and totalizing
register for measurement of the liquid quantity; or, at the discretion of the
village, the metered water supply to the industrial plant may be used as the
liquid quantity where it is substantiated to the village that the metered water
supply and waste quantities are approximately the same, or where a measurable
adjustment agreed to by the POTW is made in the metered water supply to
determine the liquid quantity.
   (E)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests and analysis of
waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this Article and any special
conditions for discharge established by the village or regulatory agencies
having jurisdiction over the discharge. The number, type and frequency of
laboratory analysis to be performed by the owner shall be stipulated by the
village, but no less than twice per year the industry must supply a complete
analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharged to assure that
compliance with the federal, state and local standards are being met. The owner
shall report the results of measurements and laboratory analysis to the Village
Engineer at such times and in such manner as he or she prescribes. The owner
shall bear the expense of all measurements, analysis and reporting required by
the village. At such time as deemed necessary, the village reserves the right
to take measurements and samples for analysis by an outside laboratory service.
   (F)   All measurements, tests and analysis of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this Article shall be determined in
accordance with that publication entitled Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Wastewater, Fifteenth Edition, published by the American Public
Health Association, as amended from time to time, and shall be determined at
the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at the control
manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control
manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public
sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be
carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of
constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to
life, limb and property. The particular analysis involved will determine
whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or
whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
   (G)   No statement contained herein shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the village and any industrial concern
whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by
the village for treatment, subject to payment therefore, in accordance with §
13-19-1 through 13-19-4, by the industrial concern.   
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-2-36 FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS.
   All food service establishments are required to install a grease interceptor
and obtain all required permits (e.g. village, county, etc.) for the
installation. The user is required to routinely clean and properly maintain the
grease interceptor so that the discharge to the POTW is in compliance with §
13-6-5(A). All permits and cleaning and maintenance records shall be kept on-
site for a minimum of three years. Upon request, the village shall be allowed
access to inspect the FSE grease interceptor.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-2-37 SEWER LINE MAINTENANCE/ REPLACEMENT.
   (A)   The property owner is responsible for the maintenance and repair of
the private sewer line from their structure to the main sewer or public sewer
including the connection into the main/public sewer.   
   (B)   In the event the property owner finds it necessary to excavate the
private sewer line for maintenance or replacement, such excavation shall be the
property owner’s responsibility.
   (C)   In those instances when property owners have had to excavate and as a
result the sidewalk, curb and street have been dug out or damaged, the property
owner will be responsible for the restoration of the street (surface and sub-
surface) curb and sidewalk.
   (D)   In those instances where division (C) is involved, it is recommended
tunneling under the curb and sidewalk whenever practical. Sidewalk and curb
must be cut when removal is required.
   (E)   All work, as it is related to the replacement and/or repair of the
private sewer line, shall be in conformance with the village standard
construction specifications and will be inspected by a duly authorized agent of
the village during the repair and replacement.
   (F)   The village will participate in the repair or replacement of a private
sanitary sewer service line located under the paved roadway within the
village’s right-of-way subject to the following:
      (1)   The sanitary sewer service line has been televised by the property
owner and based on the evidence provided to the village, to include video and
evidence of location of the potential issue, the Village Engineer or Public
Works Director have determined the sewer service line under the paved roadway
presents the potential to damage the village’s paved roadway or the village’s
sewer main if uncorrected; and
      (2)   The only method of repair or replacement of the sanitary sewer
service line requires excavation of the village’s paved roadway.
      (3)   The village will reimburse the property owner 50% of the costs
toward the repair or replacement of the private sanitary sewer line under the
village paved roadway and pavement repair in an amount not to exceed $10,000.
The applicant will be responsible for all additional costs associated with the
sanitary sewer service line repair or replacement in excess of these amounts.
      (4)   The applicant will indemnify, hold and release the village from any
and all liability arising from the repair of the sanitary sewer service line by
the village.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020; Ord. 2023-08-40, passed 8-7-2023)
ARTICLE 3: WATER SERVICE REGULATIONS, METERS, RATES AND COLLECTIONS
Section
   
13-3-1   Tampering with water system - unlawfully turning on water supply
   
13-3-2   Water to be supplied through meters; exception
   
13-3-3   Meters property of village
   
13-3-4   Type of meters
   
13-3-5   Cost of meters
   
13-3-6   Location of meters
   
13-3-7   Removal and repair of meters; meter stop
   
13-3-8   Maintenance cost; damage to meter
   
13-3-9   Notice of defective meter
   
13-3-10   Use of water without meter; temporary meter
   
13-3-11   No interest paid on deposit; return of deposit
   
13-3-12   Rate making method
   
13-3-13   Rates
   
13-3-14   Estimated bills
   
13-3-15   Joint, several liability for charges
   
13-3-16   When charges are payable; penalty
   
13-3-17   Delinquent accounts; lien claims; foreclosure
   
13-3-18   Discontinuation of service for non-payment; obstructing access to
equipment; reinstatement
   
13-3-19   Meter reading required upon entering or vacating premises
   
13-3-20   Payment of previous charges prior to commencement of new service
   
13-3-21   Waste of water; misrepresentation, fraud
   
13-3-22   Supplying water to other persons
   
13-3-23   Use of water from fire hydrants
   
13-3-24   Sale of water outside village prohibited
   
13-3-25   Obstructing access to equipment
   
13-3-26   Use of water for cleaning sanitary sewer mains prohibited
   
13-3-27   Practices regulated; lawn sprinkling
   
13-3-28   Emergency provisions
   
13-3-29   Special provisions for new lawns, existing lawns, new and restorative
landscaping
   
13-3-30   Exemptions
   
13-3-31   Enforcement authority
   
13-3-32   Penalties
§ 13-3-1 TAMPERING WITH WATER SYSTEM - UNLAWFULLY TURNING ON WATER SUPPLY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person not duly authorized by the
Director of Public Works to tamper with, alter or injure any part of the
village water system including but not limited to shutoff boxes, valves, fire
hydrants, meters, or automatic meter reading devices.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to take any water from any valve,
faucet, pipe, fire hydrant or any other portion of the village water system,
except where such person has received permission from the Director of Public
Works or made application for the use of water and received permission from the
Director of Finance.
   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of this section, in addition to
the penalties set forth in §
13-3-32, shall be liable for the cost of all water used at the then applicable
rate and for the cost of repairs to the village water system so damaged or
injured.
(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000; Ord. 2020-05-15, passed 5-18-2020)
§ 13-3-2 WATER TO BE SUPPLIED THROUGH METERS; EXCEPTION.
   All water supplied to consumers by the village shall be supplied through
meters and, whenever possible, outfitted with an automatic meter reading device
to digitally transmit the usage data. However, where it is temporarily
impractical to set a meter and/or automatic meter reading device, the use and
consumption of water shall be governed by other applicable provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000; Ord. 2020-05-15, passed 5-18-2020)
§ 13-3-3 METERS PROPERTY OF VILLAGE.
   All water meters and automatic meter reading devices used in connection with
the waterworks and sewerage system shall be and remain for all time the
property of the village.
(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000; Ord. 2020- 05-15, passed 5-18-2020)
§ 13-3-4 TYPE OF METERS.
   The Village Manager or his or her designee shall, in all cases, determine
the kind and pattern of water meters and automatic meter reading devices to be
installed, and no other kind shall be installed at any time.
(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000; Ord. 2020-05-15, passed 5-18-2020)
§ 13-3-5 COST OF METERS.
   The water meter and automatic meter reading device shall be furnished by the
village and a charge may be made to cover the cost of the meter and/or
automatic meter reading device.
(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000; Ord. 2020-05-15, passed 5-18-2020)
§ 13-3-6 LOCATION OF METERS.
   Water meters and automatic meter reading devices shall be located at such
places and in such manner as the Director of Public Works or his or her
designee shall direct, within the premises to be served or in boxes or vaults
as he or she shall determine, and all such installations shall be made in
accordance with the specifications to be prescribed by the Director of Public
Works or his or her designee and such meter locations must be so situated as to
prevent freezing or water flowing through such meters.
(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000; Ord. 2020-05-15, passed 5-18-2020)
§ 13-3-7 REMOVAL AND REPAIR OF METERS; METER STOP.
   After any water meter and/or automatic meter reading device is placed, only
officers or employees of the Public Works Department shall be allowed to
repair, remove, or in any manner interfere with such meter and/or automatic
meter reading device. A meter stop or valve shall be placed on each side of the
meter.
(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000; Ord. 2020-05-15, passed 5-18-2020)
§ 13-3-8 MAINTENANCE COST; DAMAGE TO METER.
   The ordinary cost of keeping each meter and/or automatic meter reading
device in repair shall be paid by the village. The person upon whose
application for any meter and/or automatic meter reading device is installed,
or the then owner and/or occupant of the premises served, shall be jointly and
severally liable for any tampering, breakage, or damage done to such meter and/
or automatic meter reading device, including damage by freezing, hot water, or
breakage, and also for the theft thereof. The cost of making good such loss or
damage shall be paid by the owner and/or the occupant of the premises in which
such meter and/or automatic meter reading device was installed as soon as the
bill for same is presented, and the amount therefore shall be a lien against
the premises for which such meter and/or automatic meter reading device was
installed to the extent and with the same effect as water rates.
(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000; Ord. 2020-05-15, passed 5-18-2020)
§ 13-3-9 NOTICE OF DEFECTIVE METER.
   It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant to promptly notify the Public
Works Department of defects in any such meter and/or automatic meter reading
device, or of its failure to properly register the quantity of water passing
through the same.
(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000; Ord. 2020-05-15, passed 5-18-2020)
§ 13-3-10 USE OF WATER WITHOUT METER; TEMPORARY METER.
   (A)   Before a permit for the use of water shall be issued where meters
cannot be conveniently used, the person applying for such permission shall
deposit $100 as a payment on account of water to be used by him or her. On or
before 30 days from the date of the permit, the person to whom such permit is
issued shall file with the Public Works Department a statement in writing,
verified by his or her affidavit, showing fully the purpose for which the water
was used by him or her for that time, and the amount and location of all work
done by him or her during that time in connection with which any water was
used, or required. The Village Manager shall ascertain from such statement and
any other information the amount due for water so used. If the amount so found
to be due, with all other fees and costs chargeable against such person, is
less than the sum deposited, the surplus shall be paid back to the depositor.
If the amount due for water so used is more than the sum deposited, then the
excess shall be paid at once to the Finance Department by such person. If such
person desires to continue to use the water after he or she shall have filed
his or her statement, he or she shall again deposit $100 with the Finance
Department and shall continue to make deposits thereafter, and in the same
manner as is provided herein with respect to the first deposit, and the method
of determining the amount of water used and the charge for the same shall be
the same as the provisions respecting the first deposit as hereinbefore
provided.
   (B)   Where water is furnished to a consumer through a temporary meter hook-
up, there shall be added to the cost of the actual water used a charge to be
determined from time to time by the Village Manager such that the village shall
recover the cost of the installation and removal of the temporary water meter.
(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)
§ 13-3-11 NO INTEREST PAID ON DEPOSIT; RETURN OF DEPOSIT.
   The village shall pay no interest on the waterworks and sewerage deposit
charge moneys required of the users of the combined waterworks and sewerage
system of the village.
(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)
§ 13-3-12 RATE MAKING METHOD.
   All consumers, users or properties in the village shall pay such rates for
the use and service of the waterworks and sewerage system in such manner and
amounts as may be prescribed by ordinance from time to time by the Board of
Trustees.
(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)
§ 13-3-13 RATES.
   (A)   There are hereby established rates or charges for the use of and for
the service supplied by the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the
village based upon the amount of water consumed, as shown by the water meters,
as set forth in this article.
   (B)   For each residential single-family, commercial or industrial user of
the combined waterworks and sewerage system within the corporate limits, the
charge for water and sewer service shall be as follows: The charge shall be
$14.69 per each 1,000 gallons or a fraction thereof.
   (C)   For each residential single-family and multi-family, commercial, or
industrial user of water service only, within the corporate limits, the charge
for water service only shall be as follows: For each 1,000 gallons, the charge
shall be $9.54 per each 1,000 gallons or fraction thereof.
   (D)   For each residential single-family and multi-family, commercial or
industrial user of the sewer service only, within the corporate limits, the
charge for sewer service only shall be as follows: For each 1,000 gallons, the
charge shall be $5.15 for each 1,000 gallons or fraction thereof.
   (E)   The payment of such rate for all metered users shall cover all
reasonable usage, but not any other usage which the Mayor and Board of Trustees
determines to be unreasonable. In cases where the character of sewage from an
industrial plant, building or premises shall be such as to impose a burden upon
the sewage treatment plant system, in addition to the burden imposed by the
average sewage entering into the sewerage system of the village, or in cases
where a private water supply is used and returned to the sewerage system of the
village, then the Mayor and Board of Trustees reserve the right to enter into
separate contracts with such industrial plant, building or premises for special
rates and charges where the particular circumstances render the regular rates
for service inadequate or unjust.
(Ord. 91-10-76, passed 10-22-1991; Ord. 94-06-50, passed 6-14-1994; Ord. 97-10-
69, passed 10-6-1997; Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000; Ord. 2001-11-54, passed
11-5-2001; Ord. 2003-04-15, passed 4-7-2003; Ord. 2003-07-45, passed 7-21-2003;
Ord. 2004-02-09, passed 2-2-2004; Ord. 2005-02-10, passed 2-22-2005; Ord. 2005-
05-21, passed 5-2-2005; Ord. 2008-04-08, passed 4-7-2008; Ord. 2009-02-02,
passed 2-2-2009; Ord. 2010-01-03, passed 1-19-2010; Ord. 2010-03-11, passed 3-
15-2010; Ord. 2011-04-07, passed 4-4-2011; Ord. 2011-12-40, passed 12-5-2011;
Ord. 2012-12-43, passed 12-17-2012; Ord. 2013-12- 50, passed 12-16-2013; Ord.
2014-12-55, passed 12-15-2014; Ord. 2016-03-15, passed 3-21-2016; Ord. 2017-04-
12, passed 4-3-2017; Ord. 2018-4-11, passed 4-2-2018; Ord. 2019-04-12, passed
4-1-2019; Ord. 2020-04-10, passed 4-6- 2020; Ord. 2022-04-17, passed 4-4-2022;
Ord. 2024-03-10, passed 3-18-2024; Ord. 2025-03-07, passed 3-17-2025)
§ 13-3-14 ESTIMATED BILLS.
   The water used for which rates and methods of measurement are not
specifically provided for by ordinance or this code shall be estimated by the
Finance Director or by such officer as may be designated by the Village
Manager.
(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)
§ 13-3-15 JOINT, SEVERAL LIABILITY FOR CHARGES.
   The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the water
and sewer service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service
on such premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by the village
only upon the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of
the service are jointly and severally liable therefor to the village.
(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)
§ 13-3-16 WHEN CHARGES ARE PAYABLE; PENALTY.
   (A)   Charges for water and sewer service shall be payable 20 days after the
billing date as shown on the bill or on the next regularly scheduled business
day if the due date falls on a Saturday or Sunday. If payment of the full
amount of the bill is not made within such period, then a late charge penalty
of 10% of the amount of the bill shall be added thereto. An administrative fee
of $15 shall be charged each time a notice of shut-off is issued.
   (B)   An additional administrative fee of $50 shall be charged each time
Public Works is dispatched out to turn the water off for non-payment
(administrative shut-off fee).
(Ord. 92-10-111, passed 10-13-1992; Ord. 2001-04-16, passed 4-2-2001; Ord.
2001-04-16, passed 4-2-2001)
§ 13-3-17 DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS; LIEN CLAIMS; FORECLOSURE.
   In the event the charges for water and sewer are not paid within 44 days
after rendition of the bill for such monthly service, such charges shall be
deemed and are hereby declared to be delinquent, and there-after such
delinquencies shall constitute liens upon the real estate for which such
service is supplied, and the Finance Director is authorized and directed to
file sworn statements showing such delinquencies in the office of the Recorder
of Deeds of DuPage County, Illinois, and the filing of such statements in such
office shall be deemed notice for the payment of such charges for such service.
(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)
§ 13-3-18 DISCONTINUATION OF SERVICE FOR NON-PAYMENT; OBSTRUCTING ACCESS TO
EQUIPMENT; REINSTATEMENT.
   (A)   If the rates or charges for water and sewer services are not paid
within 44 days after rendition of the bill for monthly service, such services
shall be discontinued and shall not be reinstated until any previous balance
and penalties or fees, and administrative fees thereon, are paid in full,
together with payment made of $50 for the administrative shut-off fee. If water
has been shut-off and payment is received after 3:30 p.m., the water will
remain off until the following day unless, for an additional fee of $50, the
customer chooses to have it turned on prior to the following day.
   (B)   Water service may be discontinued by the village if access to
equipment, including the meter and/or automatic meter reading device, is
obstructed or prevented.
   (C)   Provided, however, that, where a customer disputes the accuracy of the
charges for water and sewer services, or the determination that the equipment
has been obstructed, the village will offer the customer an opportunity to have
a meeting with regard to the matters in dispute.
(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000; Ord. 2001-04-16, passed 4-2-2001; Ord. 2020-
05-15, passed 5-18-2020)
§ 13-3-19 METER READING REQUIRED UPON ENTERING OR VACATING PREMISES.
   Any person who shall vacate any premises shall immediately, before vacating
such premises, notify the Finance Department, and secure reading of the water
meter for final billing purposes.
(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)
§ 13-3-20 PAYMENT OF PREVIOUS CHARGES PRIOR TO COMMENCEMENT OF NEW SERVICE.
   No person owing water charges and moving to other premises where there are
water connections or where connections shall afterwards be made shall be
supplied with water until such charges in arrears are paid in full.
(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)
§ 13-3-21 WASTE OF WATER; MISREPRESENTATION, FRAUD.
   If, after the water supply shall have been turned on to any building,
structure or premises, it shall be found by any officer or employee of the
village that fraudulent representations have been made by the applicant for
such water supply, or that water is being used in or upon such building,
structure or premises for purposes not set forth in the application made for
such water supply, or that there is willful and unreasonable use or waste of
water, the Village Manager, or such employee of the village as he or she shall
designate, shall have the authority and it shall be his or her duty to cut off
and stop the supply of water to such building, structure or premises forthwith,
and the water shall not be turned on to such building, structure or premises
until the person or persons responsible for such fraudulent representation or
for such use of water or willful or unreasonable waste thereof, shall pay the
village such additional sum of money for such water supply or on account of
such unreasonable waste of water as the Mayor and Board of Trustees shall find
properly to be due the village. Except in the case of an emergency, the village
shall give the customer an opportunity to have a meeting with regard to the
matters in dispute.
(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)
§ 13-3-22 SUPPLYING WATER TO OTHER PERSONS.
   No person, whether the owner or occupant in possession or control of any
building, structure or premises into which water is supplied through the
village waterworks and sewerage system, shall be allowed, without written
permission from the Village Manager, to supply other persons or families or to
supply water from such building or premises to any other building structure or
premises. The supply of water to a building, structure or premises or any
person who violates this section shall be shut off and stopped forthwith, and
the water shall not again be turned on to such building, structure or premises
from which it was cut off until there shall have been paid to the village such
sum of money as the Mayor and Board of Trustees shall deem properly due the
village.
(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)
§ 13-3-23 USE OF WATER FROM FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (A)   No person, other than members of the Fire Department of the village,
shall use water from any fire hydrant connected with the village waterworks and
sewerage system, except for extinguishing fires or unless especially authorized
by the Village Manager or his or her designee.
   (B)   Persons who receive authorization by the Village Manager or his or her
designee may receive water from a hydrant at the Public Works Center. A minimum
fee of $25 will be charged. This fee is for consumption during a calendar
month. Each month will require a new $25 fee. The water will be metered and, if
the cost of the water purchased is more than $25, the balance will be billed to
the purchaser. If the cost of consumption is less than the $25 fee, there will
be no refund. Any balance due must be paid prior to receiving any additional
water. This fee will be waived for contractors who are working on a village
project.
   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined not less than $50, nor more than $750.
(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000; Ord. 2004-06-36, passed 6-21-2004)
§ 13-3-24 SALE OF WATER OUTSIDE VILLAGE PROHIBITED.
   The village shall not sell water to an applicant for property outside its
corporate boundaries, except that water may be sold on an emergency basis and
as part of an emergency interconnection agreement with other municipalities.
(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)
§ 13-3-25 OBSTRUCTING ACCESS TO EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   The Public Works Director, and all persons authorized by him or her,
shall be given ready access to the premises wherein water meters and/or
automatic meter reading devices are located for the purpose of reading,
examining, testing, repairing, and replacing such meters and appurtenant wires
and reading devices.
      (1)   Access to the water meters and automatic meter reading devices
shall be maintained for the aforementioned reasons, at all times. The village
shall not be responsible for any costs incurred and associated with gaining
access to the water meters and automatic meter reading devices.
      (2)   They may, if necessary, remove or replace meters and/or automatic
meter reading devices for such purpose or for testing the consumption, use, and
flow of water.
      (3)   Should any person unreasonably refuse to allow entry of a duly-
authorized representative of the village for the purpose of reading, examining,
testing, repairing or replacing water meters and appurtenant wires and reading
devices, then the village shall have the right to disconnect and refuse further
service to the premises.
   (B)   (1)   If water meters and/or automatic meter reading devices require
removal or replacement and the work cannot be accomplished by the village due
to defects in the interior plumbing of the premises, the owner of the premises
shall make the necessary repairs required to allow for the removal or
replacement of the water meters and/or automatic meter reading devices.
      (2)   In the event the owner does not complete the required repairs in a
reasonable time, as determined by the Public Works Director, then the village
shall have the right to disconnect and refuse further service to the premises
until the repairs have been completed.
(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000; Ord. 2003-07-45, passed 7-21-2003; Ord.
2020-05-15, passed 5-18-2020)
§ 13-3-26 USE OF WATER FOR CLEANING SANITARY SEWER MAINS PROHIBITED.
   Neither the village nor any person, whether the owner or occupant in
possession or control of any building, structure or premises into which water
is supplied through the village waterworks and sewerage system, shall be
allowed to use village potable water for flushing or cleaning sanitary sewer
mains.
(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)
§ 13-3-27 PRACTICES REGULATED; LAWN SPRINKLING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sprinkle or water lawns within the
corporate limits of the village, except in accordance with the following
guidelines.
   (A)   All persons owning or controlling property bearing an odd-numbered
street address may use water for sprinkling or watering lawns on days having an
odd-numbered calendar date.
   (B)   All persons owning or controlling property bearing an even-numbered
street address may use water for sprinkling or watering lawns on days having an
even-numbered calendar date.
   (C)   The sprinkling or watering of lawns, trees and other vegetation is
prohibited between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. daily. New lawns may
be exempted from this provision, subject to the approval of the Director of
Engineering Services in accordance with the provisions of §
13-3-29.
(Ord. 91-03-20, passed 3-12-1991; Ord. 92-01-04, passed 1-14-1992; Ord. 93-03-
36, passed 2-9-1993; Ord. 94-02-19, passed 2-22-1994; Ord. 98-03-18, passed 3-
2-1998; Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000; Ord. 2015-10-21, passed 10-19-2015)
§ 13-3-28 EMERGENCY PROVISIONS.
   Whenever it is determined that there is a serious water shortage in the
village as to endanger the health, safety and welfare of its residents, the use
of village water for sprinkling or watering of lawns, landscaping and gardens,
filling of swimming pools, washing of vehicles and for water toys requiring
connection to or use of the village water system may be prohibited in the
following manner.
   (A)   The Village Manager may, by administrative decree, prohibit such use
of village water for a maximum period of three days or until the next Village
Board meeting, whichever is less. However, the Village Manager shall not
exercise this emergency power until after he or she has signed a statement
under oath finding that a water shortage exists that endangers the health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the village, setting forth facts to
substantiate such finding. Such statement shall be filed with the Village Clerk
as soon as practicable.
   (B)   The Mayor may, by executive order, prohibit such use of village water
for a maximum period of two weeks or until the next Village Board meeting,
whichever is less. However, the Mayor shall not exercise this emergency power
until after signing a statement under oath finding that a water shortage exists
that endangers the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the village,
setting forth facts to substantiate such finding. Such statement shall be filed
with the Village Clerk as soon as practicable.
   (C)   The Village Board, by resolution, may establish limits on the use of
water, or extend, expand or shorten limits already in place as declared by the
Village Manager or by the Mayor, for any time period deemed necessary to remedy
the water shortage situation.
   (D)   Any limitation in the use of water declared by the Village Manager,
Mayor or Board of Trustees shall supersede the provisions of this code
regarding the use of water.
(Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)
§ 13-3-29 SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR NEW LAWNS, EXISTING LAWNS, NEW AND RESTORATIVE
LANDSCAPING.
   (A)   Except during an emergency called in the manner provided for in §
13-3-28, the area of an existing lawn being restored, but not replaced, newly
sodded or seeded areas or the replacement of an entire lawn may be sprinkled
all day on the date of installation until midnight and then each consecutive
day for a period up to two weeks following the date of installation.
   (B)   The Engineering Services Department shall maintain a “Sod List” which
contains the name, address and lawn installation/restoration date of persons
wishing to water new or existing lawns. Any person wishing to water a new or
existing lawn under the provisions of this section must contact the Engineering
Services Department to request to have their name placed on the “Sod List”
prior to watering their lawn outside of the odd-even daily restrictions.
(Ord. 92-01-04, passed 1-14-1992; Ord. 94-02-19, passed 2-22-1994; Ord. 98-03-
18, passed 3-2-1998; Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)
§ 13-3-30 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   If exceptional circumstances result in a significant increase in the
village’s water supply, such as, but not limited to, weather conditions,
sufficient to accommodate additional demands upon water usage, or in any other
instance where the strict application of this code would be grossly
inequitable, the Village Manager may grant an exemption from the restrictions
imposed in this article.
   (B)   A person desirous of relief must submit to the Village Manager a
written request for an exemption setting forth the relief requested and the
reasons therefor. Any party granted an exemption shall be subject to the
conditions stated in the exemption.
   (C)   Governmental bodies, where the use of water is inherent or necessary
to the delivery of programs or services to its customers, are eligible for a
waiver from the surcharge upon a written request to the Village Manager stating
the types of programs or services which would be subject to the surcharge and
the period of time within which those programs or services are provided.
   (D)   The Village Manager shall report any exemptions granted at the next
regular meeting of the Village Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 92-01-04, passed 1-14-1992; Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000)
§ 13-3-31 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
   In addition to other village officers with police powers, the Village Code
Enforcement Officers and Engineering Inspectors, and any other designee of the
Village Manager, shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this
article pertaining to regulation of water usage, and to issue ordinance
citations to persons found violating such provisions.
(Ord. 92-01-04, passed 1-14-1992; Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000; Ord. 2020-
05-15, passed 5-18-2020)
§ 13-3-32 PENALTIES.
   The owner or occupant of the premises where any violation of this article
has occurred or any other person violating the provisions of the article shall
be responsible for such violation and subject to a fine as set forth in Chapter
15, Article 4 of this Code; and, if the offense is of a continuing nature, each
day that such violation shall continue or each occasion during a single day
when such violation occurs after a person has been cited for a violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 92-01-04, passed 1-14-1992; Ord. 2000-08-63, passed 8-7-2000; Ord. 2020-
05-15, passed 5-18-2020)
ARTICLE 4: INFORMATION REQUIRED OF NON-RESIDENTIAL WASTEWATER SYSTEM USERS
Section
   
13-4-1   Initial survey (questionnaire)
   
13-4-2   Affirmation to initial survey
   
13-4-3   Reports of changed conditions
   
13-4-4   Additional survey information
§ 13-4-1 INITIAL SURVEY (QUESTIONNAIRE).
   The initial survey shall be completed in order to ensure that said non-
residential users of the POTW of the village adhere to and comply with the
restrictions and prohibitions pertaining to pretreatment standards of wastes
discharged into the POTW of the village set forth in Article 6, spill control
of raw materials, intermediates and waste as set forth in §
13-7-4, and to facilitate the village's investigation of apparent or suspected
violations thereof. The requirements are as follows:
   (A)   All existing or new non-residential users, or in areas receiving sewer
service from the village, shall complete and submit an initial survey on a form
provided by the village when requested by the village.
   (B)   All users defined in §
13-4-1(A) seeking to establish a new account for sanitary sewer service from
the village or to establish a new connection to the POTW of the village shall
file a completed initial survey with the village as a condition to the
establishment of such new sanitary sewer service account or connection to the
POTW of the village.
   (C)   The initial survey shall contain a statement affirming the truth,
completeness and correctness of information submitted signed by an authorized
representative of the user as defined in §
13-5-6.
   (D)   All users defined above that fail to complete and submit to the
village an initial survey shall be in violation of the provisions of this
division (§
13-4-1) and shall be subject to all of the applicable penalties provided for in
this chapter, including but expressly not limited to the revocation of all
permits and approvals previously granted to the commercial or industrial user
in question for the discharge of sewage or wastewater into the POTW of the
village.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-4-2 AFFIRMATION TO INITIAL SURVEY.
   (A)   The village shall determine based on building, zoning and occupant
usage whether the user shall be required to file a periodic affirmation of
survey. The users status will be defined by the village after review of the
initial survey submitted as required in §
13-4-1.
   (B)   Any user, defined in §
13-4-1, having filed an initial survey where the information remains true,
complete and correct in all respects may be required to submit a statement that
the information remains current as part of a discharge permit application
process.
      (1)   The statement is required to be signed by an authorized
representative of the firm.
      (2)   The statement will be required to be submitted upon request by the
village.
      (3)   All users defined above that fail to file an affirmation with the
village shall be in violation of the provisions of this division and shall be
subject to all of the applicable penalties provided for in this chapter,
including but expressly not limited to the revocation of all permits and
approvals previously granted to the commercial or industrial user in question
for the discharge of sewage or wastewater into the POTW of the village.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-4-3 REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS.
   Any user, defined in §
13-4-1, that makes any changes determined to be substantial as defined in §
13-10-6 shall report said changes as required in §
13-10-6. Reports of changed conditions are required to be made prior to the
change. The user may be required to file an updated survey as a result of
changed conditions.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-4-4 ADDITIONAL SURVEY INFORMATION.
   (A)   After review of the initial survey completed per §
13-4-1, all non-residential users that the village has defined to have the
potential to be defined a significant industrial user (SIU) or a non-
significant regulated user (NSRU) shall be required to complete and file a more
detailed wastewater survey on a form provided by the village. At a minimum, a
description of processes, water usage and wastewater characteristics for the
facility will be required to be submitted. This information will be evaluated
by the village for determination of the requirement to issue an individual
wastewater discharge permit per Articles 8 and 9 or a general wastewater
discharge permit.
   (B)   Periodic updates of wastewater survey information. The information
provided in the wastewater survey may be required to be revised and/or updated
for the following conditions:
      (1)   A report of changed conditions is filed as required in §
13-10-6;
      (2)   An application for a wastewater discharge permit is required to be
filed per Articles 8 and 9; or
      (3)   A re-issuance of a wastewater discharge permit occurs per §
13-9-7.
   (C)   In addition to the wastewater survey defined in §
13-4-4, categorical industrial users may be required to complete a category
specific survey that identifies sub-processes and processes performed at the
site in order to define which sub-processes and processes are regulated by a
USEPA Effluent Guideline category.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
ARTICLE 5: GENERAL WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT PROVISIONS
Section
   
13-5-1   Enactment
   
13-5-2   Purpose and policy
   
13-5-3   Administration
   
13-5-4   Jurisdiction
   
13-5-5   Abbreviations
   
13-5-6   Definitions
§ 13-5-1 ENACTMENT.
   Pursuant to the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act and regulations
promulgated thereunder, the Illinois Environmental Protection Act of 1970, as
amended, and in accordance with Illinois Municipal Code, Chapter 13, Articles 5
- 20, hereby known as Sewer Use and Pretreatment Ordinance, is enacted by the
Board of Trustees of the Village of Carol Stream.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-5-2 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   (A)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly
owned treatment works (POTW) for the Village of Carol Stream, hereafter
referred to interchangeably as the village. This chapter provides for the use
of public and private sewers and drains, private sewage disposal, and
authorizes the installation and continuing of connections into the sewage works
of the village upon certain conditions, including permission thereof; providing
for the installation and maintenance of such connections and enforcements
thereto; regulating the use of municipal and private sewers and drains;
individual wastewater disposal, the installation, connection and disconnection
of building sewers, the discharge of water and waste in the public sewer
system; and providing for penalties for violation thereof; and providing for
termination of permits issued by the village pursuant to the provisions hereof.
   (B)   This chapter enables the village to comply with all applicable state
and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251
et seq.) and General Pretreatment Regulations of 40 CFR Part 403. Additional
objectives of this chapter are:
      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will
interfere with its operation;
      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will
pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or
otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works;
      (3)   To protect POTW personnel who may be affected by air, wastewater
and bio-solids in the course of their employment and the general public;
      (4)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and bio-
solids from the POTW;
      (5)   To enable the village to comply with its National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, bio-solids use and disposal
requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the POTW is subject;
      (6)   To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance, and improvement of the POTW; and
      (7)   To regulate private wastewater disposal systems.
   (C)   This chapter shall apply to all users of the POTW and provides for the
enforcement of general requirements for users. The chapter authorizes the
issuance of wastewater connection and discharge permits; provides for
monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative
review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of
fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the programs
established herein. The chapter authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge
permits that do not allow the discharge of defined process waste streams but
continue to allow the discharge of domestic or sanitary wastewater.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-5-3 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided herein, the Pretreatment Coordinator and/
or duly authorized agent(s) shall administer, implement, and enforce the
provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the
Pretreatment Coordinator and/or duly authorized agent(s) may be delegated by
the village or Pretreatment Coordinator to other village personnel or other
duly authorized agent(s) of the village.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of employees of the Police, Community Development
and Engineering Services departments to give vigilant aid to the Department of
Public Works in the enforcement of this chapter and to this end they shall
report all violations thereof, which come to their knowledge, to the Director
of Public Works.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-5-4 JURISDICTION.
   This chapter shall apply to all persons within the village and to persons
outside the village, who are within the Carol Stream facility planning area or
who by contract or agreement with the village are users of the village POTW.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-5-5 ABBREVIATIONS.
   The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the
designated meanings:
   BOD   -   Biochemical Oxygen Demand
   BMP   -   Best Management Practices
   BMR   -   Baseline Monitoring Report
   CFR   -   Code of Federal Regulations
   CIU      -   Categorical Industrial User
   COD   -   Chemical Oxygen Demand
   CWA   -   Clean Water Act
   DPW   -   Director of Public Works
   FOG   -   Fats, Oils and Grease, interchangeable with Oil and Grease
   FSE   -   Food Service Establishment
   GI      -   Grease Interceptor
   gpd      -   Gallons per day
   IAC      -   Illinois Administrative Code
   IEPA   -   Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
   IU      -   Industrial User
   mg/l   -   Milligrams per liter
   NCPS   -   National Categorical Pretreatment Standard
   NPDES   -   National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
   NSCIU   -   Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User
   NSRU   -   Non-Significant Regulated User
   POTW   -   Publicly Owned Treatment Works
   PSES   -   Pretreatment Standards for Existing Sources
   PSNS   -   Pretreatment Standards for New Sources
   ppm   -   Part per million
   RCRA   -   Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
   SDWA   -   Safe Drinking Water Act
   SIU      -   Significant Industrial User
   SNC   -   Significant Non-Compliance
   SSO   -   Sewer System Overflows
   SWDA   -   Solid Waste Disposal Act
   TSS   -   Total Suspended Solids
   TTO   -   Total Toxic Organics
   U.S.C.   -   United States Code
   USEPA   -   U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
   VE      -   Village Engineer
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-5-6 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated.
   ACT or THE ACT or CLEAN WATER ACT or FEDERAL ACT means the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act (CWA), as amended, 33
U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
   AGENCY means the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA).
   APPROVAL AUTHORITY means the Regional Administrator of Region V of USEPA,
until such time that the State of Illinois has a USEPA approved pretreatment
program.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER means:
      (1)   If the user is a corporation:
         (a)   By a responsible corporate officer - the president, secretary,
treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal
business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-
making functions for the corporation; or
         (b)   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operation facilities provided the manager is authorized to make management
decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having
the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure
long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can
ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather
complete and accurate information for individual wastewater permit (or general
permit) requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned
or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
      (2)   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general
partner or proprietor, respectively.
      (3)   If the user is a limited liability company (LLC): any managing
member of the company.
      (4)   If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a
director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation
and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their
designee.
      (5)   The individuals described in divisions (1) through (4), above, may
designate a duly authorized representative, if the authorization is in writing,
the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the
overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the
written authorization is submitted to the Village of Carol Stream.
      (6)   If an authorization under division (5) of this definition is no
longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility
for the overall operation of the facility, or overall environmental matters for
the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of division (5) of
this definition must be submitted to the Village of Carol Stream within 30
days. If an authorization under division (5) of this definition is no longer
accurate because the individual described in divisions (1) through (4) above
has changed, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of division (5)
must be submitted to the Village of Carol Stream within 30 days.
   BASIC USER CHARGE means the basic assessment levied on all users of the
public sewer system.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) means schedules of activities, prohibitions
of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to
implement the prohibitions listed in §
13-6-2 [40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b)] and/or prevent or reduce the pollution
conveyed to the POTW. BMPs include treatment requirements, operating
procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, bio-
solids or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) OR (BOD5) means the quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures approved in 40 CFR 136 for five days at 20 degrees
centigrade (20°C), usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., milligrams per
liter (mg/l)).
   BIO-SOLIDS refers to the anaerobically digested and stabilized organic
solids removed from the POTW and disposed of on agricultural land or at a
landfill.
   BUILDING DRAIN means that part of the lowest piping of a drainage system
which receives the discharge from waste, and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved
point of discharge, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of
the building wall. Discharge of stormwater runoff to the building drain is
prohibited.
   BUILDING SEWER means the extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.
   BYPASS means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a
user's treatment or pretreatment facility.
   CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER (CIU) means an industrial user subject to a
categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. A CIU is considered
to be a significant industrial user.
   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD means any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by USEPA in
accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which
apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I,
Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the
chemical oxidation of all compounds, both organic and inorganic in water, under
standard laboratory procedures as described in 40 CFR 136 usually expressed as
a concentration (e.g. mg/l).
   COMBINED SEWER means a pipe or conduit that is designed and constructed to
carry wastewater, stormwater, surface water and ground water drainage. The
village prohibits combined sewers.
   COMBINED WASTE STREAM FORMULA means the formula set forth in 40 CFR Section
403.6(e).
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT means biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), chemical oxygen
demand (COD), total suspended solids (TSS), pH, and fecal coliform bacteria.
   COMPOSITE SAMPLE means a sample of wastewater composed of two or more
discrete samples collected, based on a flow-proportional or time-proportional
method.
   CONTROL AUTHORITY means Village of Carol Stream.
   CONTROL MANHOLE means a structure located on a site from which industrial
wastes are discharged. The purpose of a control manhole is to provide access
for the village representative to sample and/or measure discharges.
   COOLING WATER means the water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, to which the only pollutant added is
heat.
   DAILY MAXIMUM means the arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a
pollutant collected during a calendar day.
   DAILY MAXIMUM LIMIT means the maximum allowable discharge limit of a
pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in
terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average
measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken
that day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in units of mass, the daily
discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of a day.
   DIRECTOR PUBLIC WORKS means the Director of Public Works of the Village of
Carol Stream, or his authorized agent.
   DISCHARGER means any person, firm, establishment or institution that
discharges wastewater, excluding inflow and infiltration, into the POTW from
any non-domestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act
and 35 Ill Adm. Code (IAC) 307. DISCHARGER is used interchangeably with USER.
   DISCHARGE PERMIT means an individual or general permit issued to a user
which specifies the requirements for discharge of wastewater or the
requirements for zero discharge of wastewater as appropriate.
   DULY AUTHORIZED AGENT means the Mayor and Board of Trustees of Carol Stream
and designated employees and agents of the village.
   DWELLING means a unit designed for occupancy by one family. It may be a
house designed for the exclusive use of one family or it may be a portion of a
building designed and intended to be used by one family.
   EASEMENT means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   EFFLUENT CRITERIA means those criteria defined in any applicable "NPDES"
Permit.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY means the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division Director,
the Regional Administrator, or other duly authorized official of said agency.
   EXISTING SOURCE means any source of discharge that is not a NEW SOURCE.
   FATS, OIL, AND GREASE (FOG) is used interchangeably with OILS AND GREASE.
   FECAL COLIFORM BACTERIA means any number of organisms common to the
intestinal tract of humans or animals whose presence in sanitary sewage is an
indicator of pollution.
   FEDERAL GRANT means the United States government participation in the
financing of the construction of POTW as provided by Title II-Grants for
Construction of Treatment Works of the Act and implementing regulations.
   FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT (FSE) means any user engaged in the activities of
manufacturing, preparing, serving, or otherwise making available for
consumption foodstuffs that use one or more of the following preparation
activities: blending, cooking by frying (all methods), baking (all methods),
grilling, sautéing, rotisserie cooking, broiling (all methods), boiling,
blanching, roasting, toasting, or poaching and infrared heating, searing,
barbecuing, and any other food preparation or servicing activity that produces
a consumable food product in or on a receptacle requiring washing to be reused.
A limited food preparation establishment is not considered to be a FSE when
only engaged in reheating, hot holding or assembly of ready to eat food
products and as a result, there is no wastewater discharge containing
significant amounts of FOG.
   FLOATABLE OIL means oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility.
   FLOW means volume of wastewater per unit of time.
   GARBAGE means solid wastes from domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the commercial handling, storage, and
sale of produce or food.
   GRAB SAMPLE means a sample which is taken from a wastestream on a one-time
basis without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time
not to exceed 15 minutes.
   HAULED WASTE means sanitary or process wastewater transported as a
commercial venture.
   HOT SPOTS means areas in sewer lines that have experienced sanitary sewer
overflows or that must be cleaned and maintained frequently to avoid blockages
of the sewer system.
   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT means any pollutant not a compatible pollutant.
   INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE means the introduction of pollutants into
POTW from any non-domestic source.
   INDUSTRIAL USER (IU) or USER means a source of indirect discharge from a
non-residential source.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE means a combination of liquid and water carried wastes
discharged, permitted to flow or escaping from any non-residential source,
including the wastewater from pretreatment facilities and polluted cooling
water.
   INSTANTANEOUS DAILY MAXIMUM means the maximum concentration of a pollutant
allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any
discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow
rate and the duration of the sampling event.
   INTERFERENCE or INTERFERE means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges by other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW,
its treatment processes or operations, or its bio-solids processes, use or
disposal and therefore, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the
POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation) or of the prevention of wastewater or bio-solids use or disposal by
the POTW in accordance with the following statutory provisions and regulations
or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations):
Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA)
(including title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (RCRA), and including state regulations contained in any state
bio-solids management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA) the
Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection,
Research and Sanctuaries Act.
   LOCAL LIMIT means specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the
village upon non-residential users or facilities to implement the general and
specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b).
   MEDICAL WASTES means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and
blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding,
surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis
wastes.
   MILLIGRAMS PER LITER means a unit of the concentration of water or
wastewater constituent representing 0.001 g of the constituent in 1,000 ml of
water.
   MONTHLY AVERAGE means the sum of all "daily discharges" measured during a
calendar month divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured during that
month.
   MONTHLY AVERAGE LIMIT means the highest allowable average of "daily
discharges" over a calendar month, calculated as a sum of all the "daily
discharges" measured during a calendar month divided by the number of "daily
discharges" measured during that month.
   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD, CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT
STANDARD, or CATEGORICAL STANDARD means any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by USEPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and
(c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and
which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) means the national
program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating, monitoring
and enforcing permits from point sources to waters of the United States, and
imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT (NPDES PERMIT) means
a permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the CWA. The village operates its
POTW under NPDES Permit No. IL0026352.
   NATURAL OUTLET means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface or ground water.
   NEW SOURCE means:
      (1)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there
is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307 (c)
of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that one of
the following is true:
         (a)   The building, structure, facility, or installation is
constructed at a site on which no other source is located;
         (b)   The building, structure, facility, or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
         (c)   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility, or installations are substantially independent
of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should
be considered.
      (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the
criteria of division (1)(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or
adds to existing process or production equipment.
      (3)   Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has
commenced if the owner or operator has done one of the following:
         (a)   Begun, or caused one of the following to begin as part of a
continuous onsite construction program:
            1.   Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
            2.   Significant site preparation work including, clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which
is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source
facilities or equipment; or
         (b)   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation
within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be
terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility,
engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation
under this paragraph.
      (4)   New sources shall install and have in operating condition and shall
"start-up" all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable
pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge.
   NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER means water used for cooling which does not come
into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product,
or finished product.
   NON-RESIDENTIAL USER means all users not defined RESIDENTIAL USERS.
   NON-SIGNIFICANT REGULATED USER means a non-residential user that meets the
criteria outlined in §
13-8-2(C)(5).
   OILS AND GREASE means any hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps, fats, waxes,
oils and any other material that is extracted by a solvent in a method approved
in 40 CFR 136.
   OVERHEAD SEWER means a sewer that does not discharge to a public or private
sewer main through the use of gravity. Overhead sewers utilize a pump to lift
the sewage to an elevation where gravity can then carry away the wastewater.
Non-residential wastes discharged from overhead sewers are subject to all the
same limits and requirements of sanitary sewers.
   PASS THROUGH means a discharge that exits the POTW into waters of the United
States in quantities or concentrations, which alone or in conjunction with
discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude
or duration of a violation.
   PERMITTEE means person or non-residential user that is issued a wastewater
discharge permit.
   PERSON means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental
entities.
   pH means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, calculated by
taking the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration,
expressed in standard units.
   POLLUTANT means any dredged spoil, solid waste, filter backwash, incinerator
residue, sewage, garbage, wastewater bio-solids, munitions, medical wastes,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or
discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt or municipal, agricultural and
industrial wastes and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH,
temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
   POPULATION EQUIVALENT means a term used to evaluate the impact of industrial
or other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is 100
gallons (380 liters) of sewage per day, containing 0.17 pounds (77 g) of BOD5
(five-day biochemical oxygen demand) and 0.20 pounds (91 g) of total suspended
solids. The impact on a treatment works is evaluated or defined as the highest
population equivalent of the three (four) parameters. (IEPA 301.345)
   POTENTIAL PROBLEM means any discharge which alone or in combination with
discharges from other sources inhibits or disrupts the POTW or any of its
processes or operations including plant emissions or any conditions which
create public nuisance causing the POTW to expend additional resources or
manpower or take additional steps to protect the POTW processes or receiving
stream.
   ppm means parts per million.
   PRETREATMENT means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, discharging or otherwise
introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be
obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or
by other means, except by diluting the concentrations of the pollutants unless
allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.
   PRETREATMENT COORDINATOR means the Director of Public Works of the Village
of Carol Stream or his designee.
   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS means any substantive or procedural requirement
related to pretreatment imposed on an industrial user, other than a
pretreatment standard.
   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS means village prohibitive discharge
standards as set forth in §
13-6-2, village specific limitations on discharge as set forth in §
13-6-5, State of Illinois Pretreatment Standards in Ill. Adm. Code Section 307,
or the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, whichever standard is most
stringent.
   PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES means absolute
prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions
appear in §
13-6-2.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any
dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER means a sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the
village. It shall also include sewers within or outside the village limits that
serve one or more persons and, ultimately discharge into the village sanitary
sewer, even though those sewers may not have been constructed with village
funds.
   PUBLICLY-OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) means a treatment works, as defined by
Section 212 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. section 1292) which is owned by the village.
This definition includes any devices and systems used in the collection,
conveyance, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or
industrial wastes, of a liquid nature that are connected to the village POTW
regardless of ownership, but does not include sewers, pipes, and other
conveyances not connected to the village POTW. Synonymous with POTW, wastewater
treatment works, water pollution control facility, and wastewater facilities.
   REGIONAL ADMINISTRATOR means the Regional Administrator for the USEPA Region
V.
   RESIDENTIAL SOURCE or RESIDENTIAL USER means any single family or multi-
family dwelling unit designed primarily as a place of human habitation which
discharges only domestic wastewater to the village's system.
   SANITARY SEWER means a pipe of conduit designed and/or intended to carry
wastewater from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions, and to which stormwater, surface water, ground water and
unpolluted non-contact cooling water are not intentionally admitted.
   SEPTIC TANK WASTE means any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
   SEWAGE means human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing
operations, etc.) Used interchangeably with WASTEWATER.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT WORKS see PUBLICLY-OWNED TREATMENT WORKS.
   SEWERAGE means the system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage and industrial wastes.
   SHALL/MAY. When used herein, the term "shall" is mandatory and the term
"may" is permissive.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER means a user of the POTW (except as provided by
paragraphs (3) and (4)) who is:
      (1)   A user subject to any National Categorical Pretreatment Standards;
or
      (2)   A user that:
         (a)   Has an average process wastewater discharge flow of 25,000
gallons or more per work day (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and
boiler blow-down wastewater);
         (b)   Has a discharge flow of process wastewater that makes up 5% or
more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW; or
         (c)   Is designated as such by the village on the basis that it has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.
      (3)   The village may determine that a user subject to categorical
pretreatment standards is a non-significant categorical industrial user rather
than a significant industrial user on a finding that the user never discharges
more than 100 gallons per day (gpd) of total categorical wastewater (excluding
sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless
specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and the following
conditions are met:
         (a)   The user, prior to the village's finding, has consistently
complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards and
requirements;
         (b)   The user annually submits the certification statement required
in §
13-10-3(C) [see 40 CFR 403.12(q)], together with any additional information
necessary to support the certification statement; and
         (c)   The user never discharges any untreated concentrated wastewater.
      (4)   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in division (2) of
this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the
village may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition
received from a user, determine that such user should not be considered a
significant industrial user in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6).
   SLUDGE see BIO-SOLIDS.
   SLUG or SLUG LOAD means any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature,
including but not limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch
discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass
through, or in any other way violate the POTW's regulations, local limits or
permit conditions or any discharge of flow rate or concentration that could
cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in §
13-6-2.
   STATE ACT means the Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970.
   STATE GRANT means the State of Illinois participation in the financing of
the construction of treatment works as provided by the Illinois Anti-Pollution
Bond Act and for making such grants as filed with the Secretary of the State of
Illinois.
   STORM SEWER means a sewer that carries rain water, snow melt and surface
drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted
cooling water.
   STORMWATER means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.
   SUMP PUMP means any electrical and/or mechanical device designed to raise
water from a lower level to a higher level and is designed to remove collected
storm water from a pit to a storm sewer or other approved point of discharge.
   SURCHARGE means the assessment in addition to the basic user charge and debt
service charge which is levied on those users whose wastes are greater in
strength than the concentration values established in §
14-04-150.
   T as in Cyanide-T means total.
   TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS) means total suspended matter, expressed in
milligrams per liter, that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension
in water, wastewater or other liquids and is removable by laboratory
filtration, under standard laboratory procedures approved in 40 CFR 136.
   TOTAL TOXIC ORGANICS means the summation of all quantifiable values greater
than 0.01 mg/l for the toxic organics specified in the applicable regulation.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER means water quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and POTW provided.
   UPSET means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and
temporary noncompliance with pretreatment standards because of factors beyond
the reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset does not include
noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive
maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
   USER means any person or source that contributes, causes or allows the
source of indirect discharge into the POTW. It may also include such persons or
sources that are prohibited from discharging specific pollutants or waste
streams to the POTW.
   USER CHARGE means a charge levied on osers of treatment works for the cost
of operation and maintenance.
   VILLAGE means the Village of Carol Stream and any reference to "within the
village" shall mean all territory within the perimeter of the Village of Carol
Stream boundaries or wastewater service area.
   VILLAGE ENGINEER or VE means the Director of Engineering Services of the
Village of Carol Stream or his designee.
   WASTEWATER means the combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from
residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.
      (1)   SANITARY WASTEWATER means the combination of liquid and water
carried wastes discharged from toilets and other sanitary plumbing facilities.
      (2)   INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER means a combination of liquid and water
carried wastes discharged from any industrial user, including the wastewater
from pretreatment facilities and polluted cooling water.
   WASTEWATER FUND means the principal accounting designation for all revenues
received in the operation of the wastewater system.
   WASTEWATER HAULER means any person, partnership or corporation engaged in
transporting sanitary wastewater as a commercial venture.
   WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE means the charge per month levied on all users of
the wastewater facilities. The service charge shall be computed as outlined in
§
13-19-1, and shall consist of the total of the basic user charge, the debt
service charge and surcharge, if applicable.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS see PUBLICLY-OWNED TREATMENT WORKS.
   WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT means the document or documents issued to a user
by the village pursuant to Article 9 of this chapter.
   WATER COURSE means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
   WATER QUALITY STANDARDS means those standards defined in the Water Pollution
Regulations of Illinois, Title 35, Subtitle C, Chapter I.
   WATERS OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
water courses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through, or border upon the State of Illinois or any
portion thereof.
   WORK DAY means a day on which work or service is performed by an industry.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
ARTICLE 6: GENERAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE REQUIREMENTS
Section
   
13-6-1   Applicability
   
13-6-2   Prohibited discharge standards
   
13-6-3   National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
   
13-6-4   State limits
   
13-6-5   Local limits
   
13-6-6   Right of revision
   
13-6-7   Monitoring facilities
   
13-6-8   Monitoring requirements
   
13-6-9   Analytical requirements
   
13-6-10   Protection of village sampling and flow metering equipment from
damage
§ 13-6-1 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to discharge or cause to be discharged to any
facility served by the village, without having first complied with the terms of
this chapter.
   (B)   Users must meet the most stringent applicable requirements and
limitations at all times either as set forth in this chapter, or in individual
wastewater discharge permits, federal pretreatment standards as established by
40 CFR 403, or State of Illinois Standards as codified in 35 IAC 307. Said
users shall provide the necessary wastewater treatment to achieve compliance
with all National Categorical Pretreatment Standards and requirements within
the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations, and
with any other pretreatment standards including local limits and requirements,
by applicable deadlines.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-6-2 PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.
   These following prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not
they are subject to a categorical pretreatment standard or any other national,
state or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
   (A)   No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly to the village treatment works, any pollutant or wastewater
contaminant which will cause pass through, cause interference with, inhibition
of, or cause potential problems to the operation of the POTW;
   (B)   No user shall increase the use of potable or process water, or in any
other way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute
for adequate treatment in order to achieve compliance with a pretreatment
standard or requirement except where expressly authorized to do so by an
applicable pretreatment standard or requirement and in a wastewater discharge
permit; and   
   (C)   No user shall introduce, or cause to be introduced, either directly or
indirectly, any of the following described pollutants, substances or wastewater
into the POTW:
      (1)   Any unpolluted water including, but not limited to, uncontaminated
non-contact cooling water, storm-water, surface and ground-waters, subsurface
drainage, roof run-off, spill contaminant area run-off, footing drains or
construction drainage except as specifically permitted by the Pretreatment
Coordinator;
      (2)   Any pollutant which by reason of their nature or quantity, are or
may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction, to cause safety hazards,
fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the facilities or
personnel of the village, or to the operation of village POTW. Materials
considered in this regard are those with a closed cup flashpoint of less than
140º F. or 60º C. using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
      (3)   Any solid, solid waste or viscous substance which will cause
obstruction to the flow in a sewer or POTW, or other interference to the
operation of the POTW. Prohibited materials include but are not limited to:
waste cooking oil, grease, grease interceptor wastes, garbage with particles
greater than one-half inch in any direction, animal guts or tissues, paunch
manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers,
ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw,
shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains or hops, paper, wood, plastics,
residues from gas, tar or asphalt, residues from refining or processing of fuel
or lubricating oils, mud or glass grinding or polishing waste, fatty acids or
esters of fatty acids, or any material which can be disposed of as trash;
      (4)   Any wastewater containing noxious or malodorous solids, liquids, or
gases, which either singly or by their interaction are capable of creating a
public nuisance or hazard to life, or to interfere with, inhibit or cause
potential problems of any operation of the POTW, including but not limited to,
prevention of entry into sewers for their maintenance and repair;    
      (5)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems or which necessitates the village taking special measures to
counteract and/or alleviate the impact of the pollutant(s);    
      (6)   Any wastewater containing substances in sufficient quantity to
interfere with the POTW;   
      (7)   Any toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction, to injure, interfere with or cause potential problems of any POTW
treatment processes or facilities, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or
to exceed limitation as set forth in the existing Act, or the Act as it may be
amended;    
      (8)   Any wastewater having a temperature which shall inhibit biological
activity or cause interference in the village's POTW facilities, but in no case
heat in such a quantity that the influent temperature at the POTW will exceed
40º C. (104º F.);
      (9)   Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or higher than 10 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment or personnel in the POTW. The pH limits are instantaneous
limits that shall be met at all times, and are not subject to averaging;
      (10)   Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants, released in
a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration (including any slug
load), either singly or by interaction with other pollutants which may cause
interference with, inhibit, or cause potential problems at the POTW;
      (11)   Ammonia nitrogen in amounts that would cause a violation of the
water quality standards of the receiving waters of the POTW;   
      (12)   Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, aqueous
firefighting foam or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the
collection system or the treatment process that result in POTW interferences
and/or pass through and/or is shown to inhibit the nitrification process.
Wastes prohibited in this section shall not be processed or stored in such a
manner that they could be discharged to the POTW;    
      (13)   Additives for the purpose of emulsifying or biologically/
chemically treating FOG for grease remediation or as a supplement to
interceptor maintenance that have a content of enzymes, surfactants or solvents
that is greater than 10% of the volume without the written consent of the
Pretreatment Coordinator;
      (14)   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through;
      (15)   Any wastewater containing any organism, including viruses,
considered pathogenic and/or detrimental to POTW organisms other than by direct
excrement and any other wastes defined as medical wastes;
      (16)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes,
except in accordance with village, state and federal rules governing such
discharges;
      (17)   Wastewater or wastes containing iron pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not;
      (18)   Any leachate, groundwater remediation wastewater or waste
material, originating within the POTW service area, which does not meet
discharge limitations as set forth in this chapter or determined by this
chapter except at discharge points designated by the Pretreatment Coordinator;
      (19)   All trucked or hauled wastes;
      (20)   Any bio-solids, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment
of non-residential wastes;
      (21)   Any solid, solid waste or viscous substances that have caused an
obstruction to the flow in a sewer that is eliminated by a professional service
or contractor;
      (22)   Inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to Fullers earth,
lime slurries and lime residues) or dissolved solids (such as, but not limited
to sodium chloride and sodium sulfate) that cause potential problems or
interfere with POTW operations;
      (23)   Any substance with objectionable color which is not removed in the
treatment processes, such as, but not limited to: dye waste, ink waste and
vegetable tanning solutions;
      (24)   Any substances that inhibit the use of UV for disinfection
purposes;
      (25)   Wastewater or wastes containing substances which are not amenable
to treatment or reduction by the POTW treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the POTW effluent cannot meet
the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the
receiving waters;
      (26)   Any substance or combination of substances which shall cause the
POTW to be in violation of its NPDES permit(s), or to cause the village's POTW
to violate receiving stream water quality and/or general effluent discharge
standards;
      (27)   Any wastewater causing the POTW effluent to fail a toxicity test;
or
      (28)   Any substance which may cause the village's POTW effluent or bio-
solids, to be unsuitable for reclamation and re-use, or interfere with the
reclamation processes. In no case shall a substance discharged to the village's
POTW cause the village to be in noncompliance with any bio-solids use or
disposal regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act; or any regulations
affecting bio-solids use or disposal developed pursuant to the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act, Solids Waste Disposal Act, Toxic Substance
Control Act, or any state or local standards applicable to any bio-solids
management methods either being used, or considered by the village.
   (D)   Wastes prohibited in this section shall not be processed or stored in
such manner that they could be discharged or introduced to the POTW. All users
with prohibited wastes described in this section or those that have hazardous
wastes as defined in §
13-10-9 shall develop and implement a Spill Prevention/Slug Control Containment
and Countermeasures Plan consistent with the requirements in §
13-7-4. The Pretreatment Coordinator may also determine spill prevention/slug
control is required of liquids and solids not previously described on either
list based on an evaluation of a site potential to cause spills or slug loads
to be introduced to the POTW. Notice requirements shall be permanently posted
as provided in §§
13-7-4 and
13-10-7. Spill planning applies to all users not just classified SIU or
regulated NSRU.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020; Ord. 2020-11-41, passed 11-16-2020)
§ 13-6-3 NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   These pretreatment requirements shall apply to all non-residential users
subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, promulgated by the
USEPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act, currently
discharging or scheduled to discharge to the village. The National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards, found in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405 –
471 are hereby incorporated into this chapter.
   Limits in categorical pretreatment standards shall apply to the discharge
from the process regulated by the standard or as otherwise specified by the
standard. Compliance with National Categorical Pretreatment Standards is
mandatory.
   (A)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms
of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the
Pretreatment Coordinator may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in
accordance with divisions (B) and (F) of this section and 40 CFR 403.6(c)
unless specifically restricted by the categorical pretreatment standard. These
equivalent limitations calculated in accordance with the following requirements
are deemed pretreatment standards. Users shall be required to comply with the
equivalent limitations instead of the promulgated categorical standards from
which the equivalent limitations were derived. An alternative pretreatment
limit shall not be used if the alternative limit is below the analytical
detection limit for any of the regulated pollutants.
   (B)   When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed
only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit production, the village may convert
the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of pollutant
discharged per day or effluent concentration for purposes of calculating
effluent limitations applicable to individual users see 40 CFR 403.6(c)(2)).
   (C)   The village calculating equivalent mass-per-day limitations shall
calculate such limitations by multiplying the limits in the standard by the
user's average rate of production. This average rate of production shall be
based not upon the designed production capacity, but rather upon a reasonable
measure of the user's actual long-term daily production during a representative
year. For new sources, actual production shall be estimated using projected
production.
   (D)   The village calculating equivalent concentration limitations shall
calculate such limitations by dividing the mass limitations by the average
daily flow rate of the user's regulated process wastewater. This average daily
flow rate must be based upon a reasonable measure of the user's actual long-
term average flow rate, such as the average daily flow rate during the
representative year.
   (E)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the Pretreatment
Coordinator shall impose an alternate limit using the Combined Waste Stream
Formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e) provided that the regulation allows the wastewaters
to be mixed and the user can supply the information necessary to allow issuance
of an alternative limit.
   (F)   A user may request a variance from categorical pretreatment standards
from USEPA based on fundamentally different factors. The request must comply
with the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13.
   (G)   A user may request a net gross adjustment to a categorical
pretreatment standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15.
   (H)   When a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of
pollutant concentrations, a user may request that the village convert the
limits to equivalent mass limits (see 40 CFR 403.6(c)(4)). The determination to
convert concentration limits to mass limits is within the discretion of the
Pretreatment Coordinator. The village may establish equivalent mass limits only
if the user meets all the conditions set forth in divisions (H)(1)(a) through
(e) of this section.
      (1)   To be eligible for equivalent mass limits, the user must:
         (a)   Employ, or demonstrate that it will employ water conservation
methods and technologies that substantially reduce water during the term of its
individual wastewater discharge permit;
         (b)   Currently use control and treatment technologies adequate to
achieve compliance with the applicable categorical pretreatment standard, and
not have used dilution as a substitute for treatment;
         (c)   Provide sufficient information to establish the facility's
actual average daily flow rate for all wastestreams, based on data from a
continuous effluent flow monitoring device, as well as the facility's long-term
average production rate. Both the actual average daily flow rate and the long-
term average production rate must be representative of current operating
conditions;
         (d)   Not have daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant
levels that vary so significantly that equivalent mass limits are not
appropriate to control the discharge; and
         (e)   Have consistently complied with all applicable categorical
pretreatment standards during the period prior to the user's request for
equivalent mass limits.
      (2)   A user subject to equivalent mass limits must:
         (a)   Maintain and effectively operate control and treatment
technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the equivalent mass limits;
         (b)   Continue to record the facility's flow rates through the use of
a continuous effluent Flow monitoring device;
         (c)   Continue to record the facility's production rates and notify
the Pretreatment Coordinator whenever production rates are expected to vary by
more than 20% from its baseline production rates determined in division (H)(1)
(c) of this section. Upon notification of a revised production rate, the
Pretreatment Coordinator will reassess the equivalent mass limit and revise the
limit as necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility; and
         (d)   Continue to employ the same or comparable water conservation
methods and technologies as those implemented pursuant to division (H)(1)(a) of
this section so long as it discharges under an equivalent mass limit.
      (3)   When developing equivalent mass limits, the Pretreatment
Coordinator:
         (a)   Will calculate the equivalent mass limit by multiplying the
actual average daily flow rate of the regulated process(es) of the user by the
concentration-based daily maximum and monthly average standard for the
applicable categorical pretreatment standard and the appropriate unit
conversion factor;
         (b)   Upon notification of a revised production rate, will reassess
the equivalent mass limit and recalculate the limit as necessary to reflect
changed conditions at the facility; and
         (c)   May retain the same equivalent mass limit in subsequent
individual wastewater discharge permit terms if the user's actual average daily
flow rate was reduced solely as a result of the implementation of water
conservation methods and technologies, and the actual average daily flow rates
used in the original calculation of the equivalent mass limit were not based on
the use of dilution as a substitute for treatment pursuant to §
13-6-2(B). The user must be in compliance with §
13-17-2 regarding the prohibition of bypass.
   (I)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may convert the mass limits of the
categorical pretreatment standards of 40 CFR Parts 414, 419 and 455 to
concentration limits for purposes of calculating limitations applicable to
individual users. The conversion is at the discretion of the Pretreatment
Coordinator.
   (J)   Once included in its wastewater discharge permit, the user must comply
with the equivalent limitations developed in this section in lieu of the
promulgated categorical pretreatment standards from which the equivalent
limitations were derived.
   (K)   Many categorical pretreatment standards specify one limit for
calculating maximum daily discharge limitations and a second limit for
calculating maximum monthly average, or four-day average, limitations. Where
such standards are being applied, the same production or flow figure shall be
used in calculating both the average and the maximum equivalent limitations.
   (L)   Any user operating under a permit incorporating equivalent mass or
concentration limits calculated from a production-based standard shall notify
the Pretreatment Coordinator with two business days after the user has a
reasonable basis to know that the production level will significantly change
within the next calendar month. Any user not notifying the Pretreatment
Coordinator of such anticipated change will be required to meet the mass or
concentration limits in its permit that were based on the original estimate of
the long term average production rate.
   (M)   All users that are subject to National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards are required to file reports as required in this chapter, signed by
an authorized representative per §§
13-10-2 and 13-10-3. These reports shall include all information that the
village deems necessary to make compliance determinations.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-6-4 STATE LIMITS.
   (A)   All users are subject to state standards and requirements as defined
in 35 Ill Adm. Code (IAC) 307. Specifically, the standard for discharge of
mercury is as follows:
      (1)   Mercury (35 IAC 307.1102)
         (a)   Except as provided below, no person shall cause or allow the
concentration of mercury in any discharge to a publicly owned or publicly
regulated sewer system to exceed the following level, subject to the averaging
rule contained in 35 IAC 304.104(a):
 
CONSTITUENT STORET NUMBER CONCENTRATION (mg/1)
Mercury     71900         0.0005
 
         (b)   It shall be an exception to division (A)(1)(a) if the discharge
is to a publicly owned or publicly regulated sewer system which is required to
meet a limitation less stringent than the 0.0005 mg/l mercury concentration in
which case the discharge limitation shall be the same as that applicable to the
publicly owned or regulated sewer system to which it discharges.
         (c)   It shall be an exception to division (A)(1)(a) if all the
following conditions are met:
            1.   The discharger does not use mercury; or, the discharger uses
mercury and this use cannot be eliminated; or, the discharger uses mercury only
in chemical analysis or in laboratory or other equipment and takes reasonable
care to avoid contamination of wastewater; and,
            2.   The discharge mercury concentration is less than 0.003 mg/l,
as determined by application of the averaging rules of 35 IAC 304.104(a); and,
            3.   The discharger is providing the best degree of treatment
consistent with technological feasibility, economic reasonableness and sound
engineering judgment. This may include no treatment for mercury; and,
            4.   The discharger has an inspection and maintenance program
likely to reduce or to prevent an increase in the level of mercury discharges.
         (d)   The discharge of wastes from medicinal or therapeutic use of
mercury, exclusive of laboratory use, shall be exempt from the limitations of
division (A)(1)(a) if all the following conditions are met:
            1.   The total discharge is less than 227 g (one-half pound) as
mercury (Hg) in any year;
            2.   This discharge is to a public sewer system; and
            3.   The discharge does not, alone or in conjunction with other
sources, cause the effluent from the sewer system or treatment plant to exceed
0.0005 mg/l of mercury.
         (e)   No person shall cause or allow any discharge of mercury to a
publicly owned or publicly regulated sewer system which, alone or in
combination with other sources, causes a violation by the sewer treatment plant
discharge of the Water Quality Standard of 35 IAC 302 for mercury applicable in
the receiving stream.
         (f)   For purposes of permit issuance, the IEPA may consider
application of the exception of division (A)(1)(b) or (c) of this section to
determine compliance with this section. The IEPA may impose permit conditions
necessary or required to assure continued application of the exception. When
division (A)(1)(b) or (c) of this section applies, the IEPA may impose an
effluent limitation in the permit which allows the discharge of a concentration
of mercury greater than 0.0005 mg/l but not more than 0.003 mg/l.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-6-5 LOCAL LIMITS.
   The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass
through and interference.
   (A)   Non-toxic pollutants.
 
POLLUTANT (Total unless otherwise    CONCENTRATION Instantaneous Daily Maximum
listed)                              (mg/l)
Oil and Grease - at non-food service
establishment (FSE) or food          200
manufacturing sites
Oil and Grease - at FSE              200
 
      (1)   The village reserves the right to apply the FSE Local Limit as
appropriate above at an end-of-pipe discharge location that connects to the
public sewer system in the event that a unique sampling location in the end
compartment of a grease interceptor (GI) is not available or there is no
external GI.
      (2)   The village also reserves the right to apply the FSE Local Limit to
the wastewater in the next sanitary sewer manhole downstream of the facility in
the event that there is neither a GI sampling location nor a sampling manhole
at the site.
   (B)   Toxic pollutants. No user shall discharge any wastewater containing
concentrations greater than the daily maximum local limits as set forth below
into any sewers that connect either directly or indirectly to the POTW.
POLLUTANT (total unless otherwise listed) CONCENTRATION (mg/l)
                                          Daily Maximum Instantaneous Maximum
POLLUTANT (total unless otherwise listed) CONCENTRATION (mg/l)
                                          Daily Maximum Instantaneous Maximum
Arsenic                                   1.0            
Cadmium                                   0.4            
Chromium                                  5.0            
Chromium (hexavalent)                                  1.2
Copper                                    1.1            
Cyanide                                                0.3
Lead                                      0.7            
Mercury (see §                           0.0005         
13-6-4)
Nickel                                    0.9            
Silver                                    0.5            
Zinc                                      1.4            
 
   (C)   The village will apply the local limits found in divisions (A) and (B)
of this section normally at the end-of-pipe point where the non-residential
waste is discharged to the municipal sewer system.
   (D)   The village reserves the right to establish requirements, by ordinance
or in a wastewater discharge permit or general permit, the quantities and rates
of discharge from any user.   
   (E)   The village reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in a
wastewater discharge permit, mass limitations rather than concentration
limitations on discharges particularly if users are using dilution to meet
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the
imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
   (F)   The village reserves the right to set specific limits for those
pollutants not identified in divisions (A) or (B) of this section on a case by
case basis for impacts caused to the POTW including but not limited to
interference, potential problems, pass through and prevention of beneficial
bio-solids re-use. Those limits shall be set forth in a wastewater discharge
permit per Article 9.
      (1)   Local limits for additional pollutants not identified in divisions
(A) or (B) of this section will be noticed to the permit holder a minimum of 30
days prior to the effective date of the wastewater discharge permit. In the
event that the village receives written comment on said limit during the
comment period, the limit will take effect within 60 days of the public notice
date to allow review and comment by the village.
   (G)   The village may develop best management practices (BMPs), by ordinance
or in individual wastewater discharge permits or general permits, to implement
local limits and the requirements of §
13-6-2.
   (H)   Any user whose discharge may be pretreated and/or treated more
effectively by the village and discharges to the village's POTW that cause the
village to alter its method of wastewater treatment or bio-solids disposal to a
more costly method shall be assessed the differential cost between the more
costly method of treatment and the less costly method of treatment. Such costs
shall only be assessed upon approval of the Village Board.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-6-6 RIGHT OF REVISION.
   (A)   The village reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in
wastewater discharge permits or general permits, more stringent limitations or
requirements on discharges to the POTW consistent with the purpose of this
chapter. The specific limitations on discharge listed in §
13-6-5 are derived from the maximum allowable industrial loading (MAIL)
calculation. The MAILs are allocated only to those IUs, at the village's
discretion, that contribute the regulated pollutant and all remaining IUs are
held to either the background concentration or slightly higher than background
but lower than the specific discharge limit. In no case shall the total of all
allocations exceed the MAIL.
   (B)   The village will maintain a reserve of the maximum allowable headworks
pollutant loading for each pollutant for new industries or increase with
existing industries. The village will recalculate the maximum concentrations
from time to time using site specific data taking into consideration revisions
to state and federal regulations that may impact the calculations.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-6-7 MONITORING FACILITIES.
   (A)   Sampling manhole applicability.
      (1)   All non-residential users are required to install a sampling
manhole for each separate discharge in the building sewer in accordance with
the plans and specifications approved by the village and §
13-2-35(D).
         (a)   When required by the village, a SIU or NSRU, that does not have
a unique sampling chamber at end-of-pipe, shall install a monitoring manhole or
sampling chamber for use as the regulation location of local limits in the
building sewer in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the
village.
         (b)   When required by the village, a categorical industrial user
shall install a monitoring manhole or sampling chamber for use as the
regulation location of the categorically regulated discharge in the building
sewer in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the village. This
sampling chamber may be required to be installed within the building and may be
in addition to an end-of-pipe manhole.
      (2)   The village reserves the right to apply said local limits in §
13-6-5(A) and (B) at an end-of process discharge location that connects to the
POTW sewer system in the event that:
         (a)   A unique sampling manhole at end-of-pipe is not available;
         (b)   A more representative sample can be taken of a process batch
discharge even though an end-of-pipe manhole exists;
         (c)   A more representative sample can be taken at the end-of-process
location than the end-of-pipe location as a result of impacts from dilute
wastestreams;
         (d)   An end-of process location is used because the IU is unable to
provide adequate flow documentation to use a combined wastestream formula.
      (2)   In the event that a suitable sampling manhole does not exist as per
§
13-6-7 and no end-of-process discharge sampling location exists, the "sampling
facility" shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the
public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.    
   (B)   Wastewater monitoring and/or flow measurement facility operation and
maintenance.
      (1)   Such facilities will be installed and maintained at all times at
the user's expense. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in
good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that the sample
results are unrepresentative of its discharge. Installation will be consistent
with the requirements of §
13-2-35(D).
      (2)   The manhole or chamber located on a building sewer discharge
located in dedicated easements shall be easily accessible to representatives of
the village 24 hours per day, seven days per week.
      (3)   The manhole or chamber at a discharge location within the building
shall be accessible to representatives of the village during normal user
operating hours.
      (4)   Metered water supply may be used to determine wastewater flow if it
is substantiated to the village that the metered water supply and wastewater
quantities are approximately the same, or where an adjustment agreed to by the
village is made in the metered water supply to determine wastewater flow which
is documented through the use of sub-meters and/or production records. In the
event that the wastewater flow cannot be substantiated at any regulated
location, the user will be required to install flow monitoring consistent with
§
13-2-35(D).
      (5)   The sampling chamber, flow metering device, sampling equipment and
documentation of the frequency of sampling, sampling methods and analysis of
samples shall be subject, at any reasonable time, to inspection by the village.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-6-8 MONITORING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Applicability. At minimum, all significant industrial users (SIU)
including categorical industrial users (CIU) as well as non-significant
regulated users (NSRU) are required to sample based on the village monitoring
frequency as stated in the wastewater discharge permit. Other users are
required to sample upon the request of the village. The users shall pay the
costs of sampling of its discharge and the costs of analyses of its samples,
whether or not the sampling and analyses are done by the user or by the POTW.
   (B)   Frequency.
      (1)   All significant industrial users (SIU) including categorical
industrial users (CIU) with wastewater discharge permits must sample their
effluent consistent with the permit requirements and report the results to the
POTW at least twice yearly. The village may specify more frequent reporting,
quarterly or monthly, dependent of the frequency for those parameters specified
in the user's permit and the village monitoring frequency defined in the
Village Enforcement Response Plan. The SIU may have the village conduct routine
monitoring using an independent laboratory. Sampling visits of this type will
normally be unannounced.
      (2)   Any non-significant regulated users (NSRU) with an individual or
general wastewater discharge permit shall sample their effluent and report the
results to the POTW consistent with the requirements of the wastewater
discharge permit and the village monitoring frequency.
      (3)   The village shall have the right to perform its own sampling at any
time at any location. village data will be used for all surcharge evaluations.
      (4)   The village may initiate sampling and analyses at a greater
frequency as a result of a violation of any discharge permit limit, including
cases where hot spot maintenance issues or blockage to the sanitary sewer
system has occurred.
      (5)   The Pretreatment Coordinator will define sampling and analyses for
any batch discharges as appropriate.
      (6)   Cost of village sampling and analyses for any monitoring will be
invoiced to the applicable user.
   (C)   Sample collection.
      (1)   Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based
on data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the
period covered by the report, based on data that is representative of
conditions occurring during the entire sampling and reporting period as defined
in the wastewater discharge permit.
      (2)   Except as indicated in divisions (C)(3) and (C)(5) of this section,
the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite
collection techniques.
      (3)   In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the
Pretreatment Coordinator may authorize the use of time proportional sampling at
minimum collecting samples every 15 minutes during a 24-hour workday; or a
minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide
a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. A proportional number
of samples shall be collected for wastewater discharges less than 24 hours.
      (4)   Single grab samples may be required in the event of an infrequent
batch discharge or to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits.
      (5)   Samples for fats, oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide,
hexavalent chromium, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be
obtained using the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure
compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. Multiple
grab samples that are individually preserved as specified in 40 CFR 136 and
appropriate USEPA guidance that are collected during a 24-hour period may be
composited prior to the analysis, as follows:
         (a)   For cyanide, hexavalent chromium, phenols, and sulfides:
multiple grab samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field;
         (b)   For volatile organics and oil and grease: multiple grab samples
may only be composited in the laboratory.
      (6)   Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the
compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be
authorized by the village, as appropriate.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-6-9 ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS.
   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as
part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed
in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless
otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40
CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the
pollutant in question, or where the USEPA determines that the Part 136 sampling
and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question,
sampling and analyses shall be performed using validated analytical methods or
any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures
suggested by the Pretreatment Coordinator or other parties approved by USEPA.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-6-10 PROTECTION OF VILLAGE SAMPLING AND FLOW METERING EQUIPMENT FROM
DAMAGE.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently
break, damage, destroy, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment which is owned or contracted by the village. Any person violating
this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly
conduct and shall be responsible for reimbursing the village for any damages
and expenses incurred as a result thereof.
   (B)   The Director of Engineering Services and the Director of Public Works
and other duly authorized employees of the village, USEPA and/or IEPA shall be
permitted to enter all village easements for the purpose of, but not limited
to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of
any portion of the sanitary sewer system lying within such easement.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
ARTICLE 7: GENERAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE COMPLIANCE
Section
   
13-7-1   Applicability
   
13-7-2   Pretreatment facilities
   
13-7-3   Additional pretreatment measures
   
13-7-4   Spill Prevention Containment and Countermeasures/Slug Control Plan
   
13-7-5   Closure Plan
§ 13-7-1 APPLICABILITY.
   Each user that discharges non-residential source waste shall provide
wastewater treatment and best management practices as necessary to comply with
this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in Article 6 of this
chapter within the time limitations specified by USEPA, the state, or the
Pretreatment Coordinator, whichever is more stringent.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-7-2 PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.
   (A)   Any pretreatment facilities necessary for compliance shall be
provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans
describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the
Pretreatment Coordinator for review, and must be approved by the Pretreatment
Coordinator before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans
and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the
responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge
acceptable to the village under the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   All users are required to comply with IEPA permitting requirements.
Users shall obtain all necessary construction-operating permits from the IEPA
prior to the village connection and/or discharge permit(s) being issued. IEPA
will make the determination of actual permitting requirements based on changes
in the wastewater volume or characteristics generated at the user site. The
village will track and parallel this IEPA permitting process. No sources of
non-residential wastewater will be allowed to discharge to village POTW until
all permitting requirements have been satisfied. Such pretreatment facilities
shall be under the control and direction of an IEPA-certified wastewater
operator.    
   (C)   Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of
operation shall be reported and must be approved by the village and IEPA prior
to the user's initiation of the changes. Users shall obtain all additional
construction-operating permits from IEPA and the village for the changes prior
to discharge.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-7-3 ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES.
   At minimum, the village may require the additional pretreatment measures
defined below. The village reserves the right to make unannounced inspections
of any additional pretreatment measures during normal business hours whether
the user has been issued an individual or general wastewater discharge permit
or not.
   (A)   Whenever deemed necessary, the Pretreatment Coordinator may require
users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that
certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or
consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial
waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the
POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may require any person or user
discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at
their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure
equalization of flow. The village may issue an individual or general wastewater
discharge permit solely for flow equalization.
   (C)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-7-4 SPILL PREVENTION CONTAINMENT AND COUNTERMEASURES/ SLUG CONTROL PLAN.
   (A)   All permitted non-residential users are required to develop, implement
and maintain best management practices in the form of a Spill Prevention
Containment and Countermeasures/Slug Control Plan hereafter referred to as
Spill Plan. The village may require other non-residential users to develop a
Spill Plan, should that user have:
      (1)   Chemicals (raw materials, chemical intermediates, wastes to be
recycled, final products, or utility chemicals) that total or exceed 250
gallons at or on its site;   
      (2)   Prohibited discharge materials as defined in §
13-6-2 at or on its site;
      (3)   Hazardous waste as defined in §
13-10-9 at or on its site; or
      (4)   Been defined by the Pretreatment Coordinator to have a need to
control slug discharges.
      (5)   All non-residential users that meet the above criteria are required
to develop and implement a Spill Plan regardless whether that user is regulated
by a wastewater discharge permit or not.
   (B)   The Spill Plan which is required to be submitted to the village if the
user's discharge is regulated shall address, at a minimum, the following:
      (1)   Specifics of Spill Plan:
         (a)   Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges;
         (b)   Description of stored chemicals, including quantity of chemicals
and type and number of storage containers;
         (c)   Site diagram showing location of all tanks holding greater than
or equal to 250 gallons or areas containing eight drums or more of raw
materials, prohibited wastes, wastes to be recycled, hazardous wastes or final
product. Identification and location of all liquid materials is mandatory;
         (d)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response. Building containment structures or production equipment changes are
considered procedures to prevent adverse spills. If containment structures are
connected to the sanitary sewer, a valve normally left in a closed position is
required;
         (e)   Location of notice/signs posted in conspicuous places advising
employees in English and the language of common use whom to call in the event
of a spill, accidental discharge of prohibited materials, slug discharge or a
bypass of any part of a pretreatment system; and
         (f)   Emergency telephone number (24-hour) off-site and backup
telephone number. If the Spill Plan has been submitted, any change in the
telephone numbers should be submitted within five working days when revised.
      (2)   Notification procedure. The Spill Prevention Containment and
Countermeasures/Slug Control Plan shall contain procedures for immediately
notifying the Pretreatment Coordinator of any accidental or slug discharge, as
required by §
13-10-7;
      (3)   Documentation. The Spill Prevention Containment and
Countermeasures/Slug Control Plan shall contain a sample of the documentation
maintained at the site that:
         (a)   Ensures that all employees who are in a position to cause,
discover, or observe such discharge are advised of the emergency notification
procedures; and
         (b)   Such logs to verify inspection and maintenance procedures to
prevent adverse impacts and confirm that said procedures are being performed on
a regular basis. At minimum, logs are required to verify valves in containment
structures, if present, are closed.
   (C)   Review of such plans and operating procedures by the village shall not
relieve the user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility or Spill
Plan as necessary to meet all requirements of this chapter. Review by the
village does not constitute an approval of a spill plan and the village and its
designee(s) are not to be construed as responsible for the actions of the user
and any impacts the user may cause as a result of a spill or slug load.
   (D)   At least once every two years the Pretreatment Coordinator shall
evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs a revision to its Spill
Plan. The Pretreatment Coordinator may require any user to submit at a
frequency less than two years such Spill Plan or require modification of an
existing Spill Plan based on changes that have occurred at the site or in
response to an incident that had the potential to impact the POTW. In alternate
years, the Pretreatment Coordinator shall evaluate whether each non-significant
regulated user is required to file a revision to its Spill Plan based on
changes that have occurred at the site or in response to an incident that had
the potential to impact the POTW.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-7-5 CLOSURE PLAN.
   (A)   Any non-residential user meeting the requirements of §
13-7-4(A) including but not limited to those with wastewater discharge permits
that determines it will cease operations permanently, or if some of the
processes that classify the user as significant are closed, the user shall file
a written closure plan with the Pretreatment Coordinator. The closure plan
shall be submitted for approval ten working days prior to the initiation of the
plan. The closure plan must be accepted by the village prior to starting the
closure process. The closure plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
      (1)   A description of each wastewater generating process that will be
closed;
      (2)   A description of how the facility will be closed and the extent of
operations during the closure period;
      (3)   An inventory and estimate of the volume of all process wastewater,
chemicals, and hazardous waste on site. A description of the methods for
disposal, including procedures for removing, transporting, treating, storing,
or disposing of all waste and identifying all off-site waste management
facilities to be used;
      (4)   A schedule of the closure activities indicating the time required
to complete each closure step; and
      (5)   Additional monitoring scheduled that will identify compliance with
pretreatment standards during the closure operations.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
ARTICLE 8: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND APPLICATION
Section
   
13-8-1   Wastewater information and analysis
   
13-8-2   Wastewater discharge permit authority and requirements
   
13-8-3   Individual and general wastewater discharge permitting: existing
customers
   
13-8-4   Individual and general wastewater discharge permitting: new
connections
   
13-8-5   Individual and general wastewater discharge permit application
contents
   
13-8-6   Individual and general application signatories and certification
   
13-8-7   Individual and general wastewater discharge permit decisions
§ 13-8-1 WASTEWATER INFORMATION AND ANALYSIS.
   When requested by the Pretreatment Coordinator, a user must submit
information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 30
calendar days of the request. The Pretreatment Coordinator is authorized to
prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update
this information. The Pretreatment Coordinator may also prepare specialized
forms for various business types and functions. Information that may be
required will be consistent with that identified in Article 4 and §
13-8-5.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-8-2 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT AUTHORITY AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Individual wastewater discharge permit issued to significant
industrial users (SIUs) which includes categorical industrial users (CIUs). No
SIU, including any CIU, shall discharge wastewater to the POTW without first
obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit from the Pretreatment
Coordinator except that a SIU, including any CIU, that has filed a timely
application pursuant to this chapter may continue to discharge for the time
period specified therein.    
   (B)   General wastewater discharge permit issued to SIU and CIU. At the
discretion of the Pretreatment Coordinator, the village may use general
wastewater discharge permits to control SIU or CIU discharges to the POTW if
the following conditions are met:    
      (1)   Involve the same or substantially similar types of operations;
      (2)   Discharge the same types of waste;
      (3)   Require the same effluent limitations or best management practices;
      (4)   Require the same or similar monitoring and/or reporting
requirements; and
      (5)   In the opinion of the Pretreatment Coordinator, are more
appropriately controlled under a general permit than under individual
wastewater discharge permits.
   (C)   Other wastewater discharge permits. The Pretreatment Coordinator may
require other non-residential users to obtain either individual or general
wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this
chapter. The wastewater discharge permit will define that holders of permits
issued under this section shall not be classified as significant industrial
users. Non-residential users with wastewater discharge permits in this class
may include but are not limited to:
      (1)   Any user that has been determined to be a non-significant
categorical industrial user as defined in §
13-5-6;
      (2)   Any user that has been determined not to be a significant
industrial user as defined in §
13-5-6 that the Pretreatment Coordinator requires to be regulated by wastewater
discharge permit;   
      (3)   Any user subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
that opts not to discharge pollutants shall obtain a zero process wastewater
discharge permit;
      (4)   Any user that is a non-categorical zero process wastewater
discharger that the Pretreatment Coordinator determines shall be permitted;
      (5)   Non-significant regulated users (NSRU) as defined below:
         (a)   NSRU that discharge a process wastewater flow greater than or
equal to 0.5% of the POTW's design dry-weather hydraulic capacity, or 5,000
gallons per day, whichever is smaller;
         (b)   NSRU that discharge more than or equal to 0.5% of the design
dry-weather organic treatment capacity of the POTW;
         (c)   NSRU that discharge 0.5% of the maximum allowable headworks
loading for any pollutant regulated by a local limit developed in accordance
with §
13-6-2; or
         (d)   NSRU that intermittently discharge any individual batch or
batches that would meet the criteria in divisions (C)(5)(a), (b), or (c) of
this section when discharged or otherwise has the potential to discharge a slug
load to the POTW;
      (6)   Non-residential users that have devices installed to remove oils,
grease and sand;
      (7)   Non-residential users required to eliminate or control specified
pollutants from their wastestream through the development and implementation of
a Best Management Practice (BMP) Plan.
   (D)   Any violation of the terms and conditions of an individual or general
wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and
subject the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in Articles
14 through 16 of this chapter. Obtaining an individual or general wastewater
discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with
all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other
requirements of federal, state, and local law.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-8-3 INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING: EXISTING
CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Any SIU or CIU required to obtain an individual or general wastewater
discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the
effective date of this chapter and who wishes to continue such discharges in
the future, shall, within 90 calendar days after said date, apply to the
Pretreatment Coordinator for the appropriate wastewater discharge permit in
accordance with §
13-8-5, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after
180 calendar days of the effective date of this chapter except in accordance
with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the Pretreatment Coordinator.
   (B)   Any non-SIU or non-CIU that is required to obtain individual or
general wastewater discharge permits shall file an application within the
number of working days required in a notification sent by the Pretreatment
Coordinator.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-8-4 INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITTING: NEW
CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Any CIU who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW
must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such
discharge. An application for this individual or general wastewater discharge
permit, in accordance with §
13-8-5, must be filed at least 90 calendar days prior to the date upon which
any discharge will begin or recommence pending review by the Pretreatment
Coordinator.   
   (B)   Any non-CIU who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the
POTW that is required to obtain an individual or general wastewater discharge
permit must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such
discharge or operations in the case of a zero process discharger, in accordance
with §
13-8-5. An application for this individual or general wastewater discharge
permit must be filed at least 30 calendar days prior to the date upon which any
discharge or operations will begin or recommence pending review by the
Pretreatment Coordinator.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-8-5 INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION
CONTENTS.
   (A)   Individual application requirement. All users required to obtain an
individual wastewater discharge permit or zero process wastewater discharge
permit must submit a permit application to the Pretreatment Coordinator.
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be
returned to the user for revision.
   (B)   Individual application contents. The Pretreatment Coordinator may
require all users to submit as part of an application all or some of the
following information:
      (1)   All information required by §§
13-4-1,
13-4-3 and
13-4-4 of this chapter;
      (2)   Identifying information for the site including name of the operator
and owner and authorized representative.
      (3)   Description of operations.
         (a)   A brief description of the nature of the activities, services,
production, and plant processes on the premises. Include each product produced
by type, amount, process or processes, and a general rate of production.
         (b)   Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed
or actual hours of operation;
         (c)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum
per day) including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at
the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged
to the POTW;
      (4)   Time and duration of discharges with an estimate of the average
daily and maximum flow;
      (5)   Waste characteristics. Information showing the nature and
concentration of the discharge in relation to applicable pretreatment standards
and local limits;
      (6)   Requests for a monitoring waiver for a pollutant regulated as a
categorical pretreatment neither present nor expected to be present in the
discharge based on 40 CFR 403.12(e)(2). Representative sampling and analysis
will be required to substantiate the request;
      (7)   Plans and diagrams.
         (a)   Site plans/floor plans that show the footprint of the building
with an outline of major equipment similar to an emergency exit plan;
         (b)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and
details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location
and elevation, and all points of discharge;
         (c)   A diagram showing the location for monitoring the discharge of
all wastes covered by the permit; and
      (8)   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the
Pretreatment Coordinator to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit
application.
   (C)   General application requirement. The Pretreatment Coordinator may
require all users that are required to obtain a general wastewater discharge
permit to submit an application on a form provided by the village which is
specific to the category regulated by the general wastewater discharge permit.
The form may require but is not limited to contact information, production
processes, the types of wastes generated, and the location for monitoring all
wastes if regulated by the general permit. Where the standard will require
compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall
submit documentation as required by the Pretreatment Coordinator.   
   (D)   Categorical monitoring waivers.
      (1)   Authority. Pursuant to 40 CFR Part 403.12(e)(2)(v) and (vi), the
village may authorize an industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment
standard to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated by a categorical
pretreatment standard if the user has demonstrated through sampling and other
technical factors that the pollutant is neither present nor expected to be
present in the discharge, or is present only at background levels from intake
water and without any increase in the pollutant due to activities of the user.
This waiver is not available to users whose concentration standards are derived
from mass standards or production based standards. This authorization is
subject to the following conditions:
         (a)   The waiver may be authorized where a pollutant is determined to
be present solely due to sanitary wastewater discharged from the facility
provided that the sanitary wastewater is not regulated by an applicable
categorical pretreatment standard and otherwise includes no process wastewater.
         (b)   The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of the
effective period of the individual wastewater discharge permit, but in no case
longer than five years. The user must submit a new request for the waiver
before the waiver can be granted for each subsequent individual wastewater
discharge permit.
         (c)   This provision does not supersede certification processes and
requirements established in categorical pretreatment standards, except as
otherwise specified in the categorical pretreatment standard.
      (2)   Application requirements.
         (a)   In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the
user must provide data from at least one sampling of the facility's process
wastewater prior to any treatment present at the facility that is
representative of all wastewater from all processes.
         (b)   The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed in accordance
with §
13-8-6, and include the certification statement in §
13-8-6.
         (c)   Non-detectable sample results may be used only as a
demonstration that a pollutant is not present if the EPA approved method from
40 CFR Part 136 with the lowest minimum detection level for that pollutant was
used in the analysis.
      (3)   Documentation and record retention for CIU monitoring waivers. Any
grant of the monitoring waiver by the Pretreatment Coordinator must be included
as a condition in the user's permit. The reasons supporting the waiver and any
information submitted by the user in its request for the waiver must be
maintained by the Pretreatment Coordinator for three years after expiration of
the waiver.
   (E)   Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will
be returned to the user for revision.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-8-6 INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL APPLICATION SIGNATORIES AND CERTIFICATION.
   (A)   All wastewater discharge permit applications, user reports and
certification statements must be signed by an authorized representative of the
user and contain the following certification statement:
   "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified Personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the Person or Persons who manage the system,
or those Persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true,
accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations".
   (B)   If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer
accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, a new written authorization satisfying the
requirements of this section must be submitted to the Pretreatment Coordinator
together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-8-7 INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DECISIONS.
   The Pretreatment Coordinator will evaluate the data furnished by the user
and may require additional information. Within 30 calendar days of receipt of a
complete wastewater discharge permit application, the Pretreatment Coordinator
will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The
Pretreatment Coordinator may deny any application for a wastewater discharge
permit. If the Pretreatment Coordinator fails to act within 90 calendar days, a
request for permit application shall be deemed to be denied.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
ARTICLE 9: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS
Section
   
13-9-1   Individual and general wastewater discharge permit duration
   
13-9-2   Wastewater discharge permit contents
   
13-9-3   Individual and general wastewater discharge permit appeals
   
13-9-4   Individual and general wastewater discharge permit modification
   
13-9-5   Individual and general wastewater discharge permit transfer
   
13-9-6   Individual and general wastewater discharge permit revocation
   
13-9-7   Individual and general wastewater discharge permit re-issuance
   
13-9-8   Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions
§ 13-9-1 INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DURATION.
   (A)   An individual wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a
specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the
permit. An individual wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period
less than five years, at the discretion of the Pretreatment Coordinator. Each
individual wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which
it will expire.
   (B)   A general wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specific
time period not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. The
village will identify in the individual or general wastewater discharge permit
whether or not the permittee is defined as a significant industrial user.
   (C)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may extend a permit issued under division
(A) or (B) of this section with a duration of less than five years to a maximum
duration of five years upon written notification.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-9-2 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT CONTENTS.
   A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed
reasonably necessary by the Pretreatment Coordinator to prevent pass through or
interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment
work's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate bio-solids
management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW.
   (A)   Individual and general wastewater discharge permits must contain:
      (1)   A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit issuance
date, expiration date and effective date;
      (2)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable
without prior notification to the village in accordance with §
13-9-5, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of
the existing wastewater discharge permit;   
      (3)   Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on
applicable pretreatment standards;    
      (4)   Requirements to control slug discharge, in addition to spill
control, if determined by the Pretreatment Coordinator to be necessary;    
      (5)   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-
keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of
pollutants or BMPs to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and
sample type based on federal, state, and local law; and
      (6)   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable
compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance
beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law.
   (B)   An individual wastewater discharge permit may contain the process for
seeking a waiver from monitoring for a pollutant neither present nor expected
to be present in the discharge in accordance with §
13-8-5(D). Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the Pretreatment Coordinator
shall be included as a condition of the user's permit.
   (C)   Individual and general wastewater discharge permits may contain, but
need not be limited to, the following conditions:
      (1)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
      (2)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed
to equalize, reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into
the treatment works;
      (3)   Requirements that allow the use of bypass of the pretreatment
system conditions consistent with 40 CFR 403.17 and §
13-17-2;
      (4)   Requirements for the development and implementation of Spill
Prevention Containment and Countermeasures/Slug Control Plan or other special
conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent
accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges;
      (5)   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
      (6)   Development and implementation of best management practices plans
to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW if the categorical
standards do not already require the implementation of a best management
practices plan;
      (7)   The unit charge and/or schedule of surcharge fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
      (8)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment;
      (9)   Requirements for the zero discharge of process waste regulated by a
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard or local standard;
      (10)   Documentation of any monitoring waiver approved by the
Pretreatment Coordinator for categorically regulated pollutants found to be not
present and requirements to re-institute monitoring in the event that a waived
pollutant is found to be present or is expected to be present because of
changes that occur in the user's operation;
      (11)   A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all
applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which
become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and
      (12)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Pretreatment
Coordinator to ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and federal laws,
rules, and regulations.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-9-3 INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPEALS.
   The Pretreatment Coordinator shall provide public notice of the issuance of
an individual or general wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the
user, may petition the Pretreatment Coordinator to reconsider the terms of a
wastewater discharge permit within 30 calendar days of notice of its issuance.
The following conditions apply to wastewater discharge permit appeals:
   (A)   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a
waiver of the administrative appeal.
   (B)   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and
the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater
discharge permit.   
   (C)   The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be
stayed pending the appeal.
   (D)   If the Pretreatment Coordinator fails to act within 30 calendar days,
a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to
reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge
permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered
final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review.
   (E)   Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the
Circuit Court for DuPage County within 60 calendar days.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-9-4 INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT MODIFICATION.
   (A)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may modify an individual wastewater
discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following
reasons:
      (1)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
      (2)   To address substantial alterations or additions to the user's
operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of
wastewater discharge permit issuance;
      (3)   To address introduction of a pollutant for which a monitoring
waiver had been obtained;
      (4)   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
      (5)   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat
to the village's POTW, village personnel, or the receiving waters;
      (6)   Violation of any terms or condition of the wastewater discharge
permit;
      (7)   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
      (8)   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
      (9)   To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater
discharge permit;
      (10)   To reflect a transfer of either the facility ownership or
operation to either a new owner or operator as provided by §
13-9-5; or
      (11)   To reflect the issuance of a monitoring waiver.   
   (B)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may modify a general wastewater discharge
permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
      (1)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
      (2)   A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
      (3)   To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater
discharge permit; or
      (4)   To reflect a transfer of either the facility ownership or operation
to either a new owner or operator as provided by §
13-9-5.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-9-5 INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT TRANSFER.
   (A)   Wastewater discharge permits shall not be transferred, assigned, or
sold to a new owner or new user in different premises or to a new or different
operation in the same or different premises without the expressed written
approval of the village. If the premises sold or otherwise transferred by the
permittee to a new owner who will maintain the operation in the same premises,
whether or not the seller will continue to operate the equipment or the
equipment is leased to another entity for its operation at the site of the
original permittee, then the permit held by the seller and/or owner shall be
reissued by the village to the new owner and/or operator as a temporary permit;
provided:
      (1)   The new owner and/or operator notified the village 30 calendar days
in advance of the business transaction, (i.e. the transfer, sale, execution of
an operating agreement, or purported assignment), and   
      (2)   The new owner and/or operator confirmed to the village, within five
working days of the transaction, of completion of the date of sale or execution
of an operating contract, and   
      (3)   The new owner and/or operator shall apply for a new permit within
90 calendar days of the sale and/or transfer date.
   (B)   Failure to provide the notification required in division (A)(1) and
(A)(2) of this section, renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of said
sale and/or transfer date. It is further provided that the temporary permit
shall only be effective for 180 calendar days after the date of sale or
transfer. The village shall have the same remedies for violation of temporary
permits as it has for violation of other wastewater discharge permits.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-9-6 INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may revoke an individual or general
wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the
following reasons:
      (1)   Failure to notify the Pretreatment Coordinator of substantial
changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
      (2)   Failure to provide prior notification to the Pretreatment
Coordinator of changed conditions pursuant to §§
13-10-5 and
13-10-6;
      (3)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application;
      (4)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports and certification statements;
      (5)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
      (6)   Refusing to allow the Pretreatment Coordinator and designee(s)
timely access to the facility premises and records;
      (7)   Failure to meet effluent limitations outlined in §
13-6-5;
      (8)   Failure to pay fines;
      (9)   Failure to pay sewer charges;
      (10)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
      (11)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application;
      (12)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business or
operation ownership of a permitted facility;
      (13)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter;
      (14)   Failure to report an accidental discharge of a pollutant; or
      (15)   Failure to report an upset to the industrial user's treatment
facilities.
   (B)   Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of
operations or transfer of business or operation ownership. All wastewater
discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a
new wastewater discharge permit to that user.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-9-7 INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT RE-ISSUANCE.
   A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for
wastewater discharge permit re-issuance by submitting a complete wastewater
discharge permit application, in accordance with §
13-8-5, a minimum of 90 calendar days prior to the expiration of the user's
existing wastewater discharge permit.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-9-8 REGULATION OF WASTE RECEIVED FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS.
   (A)   If another municipality, or user located within another municipality,
contributes wastewater to the POTW, the village shall enter into an
intergovernmental agreement with the contributing municipality.
   (B)   The village shall request the following information from the
contributing municipality at a frequency determined by the village:
      (1)   A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharge to
the POTW by the contributing municipality;
      (2)   An inventory of all users located within the contributing
municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and
      (3)   Such other information as the Pretreatment Coordinator may deem
necessary.
   (C)   An intergovernmental agreement, as required by division (A) of this
section, shall contain the following conditions:
      (1)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer
use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this chapter and local limits
which are at least as stringent as those set out in §§
13-6-2 and
13-6-5 for the area to be served by the village. The requirement shall specify
that such ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes
made to the village's ordinance and local limits;
      (2)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised
non-residential user inventory at a frequency determined by the village but
likely on an annual basis;
      (3)   A provision specifying that pretreatment implementation activities,
including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and
enforcement, will be conducted by the Pretreatment Coordinator;
      (4)   A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the
Pretreatment Coordinator with access to all information that the contributing
municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;
      (5)   Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing
municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW;
      (6)   Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's
discharge;
      (7)   A provision ensuring the Pretreatment Coordinator access to the
facilities of users located within the contributing municipality's
jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any
other duties deemed necessary by the Pretreatment Coordinator; and
      (8)   A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms
of the inter-municipal agreement.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
ARTICLE 10: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
Section
   
13-10-1   Pretreatment requirements for non-residential users
   
13-10-2   Additional pretreatment requirements for categorical industrial users
   
13-10-3   Periodic compliance reports/self-monitoring reports
   
13-10-4   Reports from non- permitted users
   
13-10-5   Authorized representative change notification
   
13-10-6   Reports of changed conditions
   
13-10-7   Reports of potential problems
   
13-10-8   Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting
   
13-10-9   Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste
   
13-10-10   Report submittal due dates
   Each user of the treatment works and facilities of the village shall provide
reports as necessary to comply with this chapter and any wastewater discharge
permit. Reporting requirements may apply to users that are not required to
obtain a wastewater discharge permit.
§ 13-10-1 PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR NON-RESIDENTIAL USERS.
   Should the village find that a non-residential user does not meet
pretreatment standards and requirements applicable to its discharge, causes or
contributes to potential problems at the POTW, or when analysis of waste or
observation of the effect of such wastes on the POTW indicate that said wastes
cannot be treated satisfactorily at such works, or that said wastes are
injurious to the POTW, or to the treatment processes, or pollute the natural
waters within the village, its service areas or the Waters of the State of
Illinois additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required by the village to
meet pretreatment standards and requirements. Such facilities as the village
may deem necessary for pretreatment of the wastes shall be furnished by and at
the expense of the user as a condition of the discharge of said wastes into the
POTW or to any natural water within the village service area.
   (A)   Pretreatment review. The Pretreatment Coordinator will require the
user to initiate a pretreatment review through a telephone call, letter or
certified letter to the authorized representative of the user.
   (B)   Pretreatment initiation meeting. A pretreatment initiation meeting
will be held between the Pretreatment Coordinator and the user to discuss the
problem and the solution to said problem. If it is determined that changes in
operation and maintenance, plant modifications, and/or the installation of
pretreatment equipment must occur in order to resolve noncompliance, a schedule
shall be established with events and completion deadlines agreeable to both
parties to resolve the noncompliance. If appropriate, a compliance agreement
defining the agreed upon schedule will be sent from the village to the user
shortly after the meeting. If a schedule for compliance acceptable to the
Pretreatment Coordinator cannot be established, the matter will be referred for
further enforcement action consistent with the provisions of Article 14 as
appropriate.
   (C)   Progress reports. Progress reports will be filed by the user on a
schedule agreed to by the Pretreatment Coordinator concerning the completion of
major events leading to the construction and operation of additional
pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment
standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer,
completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major
components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and
conducting routine operation). The user shall identify whether or not it
complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if
appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established
schedule.
   (D)   Final report. A final report will be filed with the Pretreatment
Coordinator by the user normally required within 90 calendar days from the end
of the schedule deadline to verify the success or failure or the schedule
objective chosen by the user. The final report will if appropriate identify the
steps being taken by the user to resolve noncompliance.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-10-2 ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL
USERS.
   In the event that either the village, EPA or a user determines that the user
is regulated as a categorical industrial user by standards and requirements
promulgated by the USEPA in accordance with Section 307 (b) and (c) of the Act,
the following reports are required to be filed by the user with both the
village and USEPA.
   (A)   Baseline monitoring reports. Within either 180 calendar days after the
effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final
administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4),
whichever is later, existing categorical industrial users currently discharging
to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the Pretreatment
Coordinator a report which contains the information listed below. At least 90
calendar days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and
sources that become categorical industrial users subsequent to the promulgation
of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the Pretreatment
Coordinator a report which contains the information listed below. A new source
shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable
categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its
anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. Users described
above shall submit the information set forth below.
      (1)   Identifying information. The name and address of the facility,
including the name of the operator and owner.
      (2)   Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility.
      (3)   Description of operations. A brief description of the nature,
average rate of production, (including each product produced by type, amount,
processes, and rate of production), and standard industrial classifications of
the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a
schematic process diagram, which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from
the regulated processes.
      (4)   Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily
and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the Combined Waste
Stream Formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
      (5)   Measurements of pollutants.
         (a)   The user shall identify the categorical pretreatment standards
applicable to each regulated process and any new categorically regulated
processes for existing sources;
         (b)   The user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis
identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the
standard or by the Pretreatment Coordinator, of regulated pollutants in the
discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum and long-
term average concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The
sample shall be representative of daily operations. In cases where the standard
requires a best management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the
user shall submit documentation as required by the Pretreatment Coordinator or
the applicable standards to determine compliance with the standard;
         (c)   The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to
compile the data necessary to comply with the requirements of this paragraph. A
minimum of four grab samples are required for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil
and grease, sulfide, and volatile organic compounds;
         (d)   Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment
facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process
if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated
wastewater prior to pretreatment the user should measure the flows and
concentrations necessary to allow the use of the Combined Wastestream Formula
of 40 CFR 403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with pretreatment standards.
Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e) this adjusted limit along with supporting data
shall be submitted to the control authority;
         (e)   Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out
in §
13-6-8 and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in §
13-6-9;
         (f)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may allow the submission of a
baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data
provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial
pretreatment measures; and
         (g)   The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place, of
sampling, and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and
analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant
discharges to the village.
      (6)   Compliance certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's
authorized representative of the user (as defined in §
13-5-6), and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required for the user to meet the pretreatment standards and
requirements.
      (7)   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the
user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M must be provided. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule
pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in division (B) of
this section.
      (8)   Signature and report certification. All baseline monitoring reports
must be signed and certified in accordance with §
13-8-6.
   (B)   Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall
apply to the compliance schedule required by division (A)(7) of this section.
      (1)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction
and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to,
hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts
for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and
conducting routine operation);
      (2)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine calendar months;
      (3)   The user shall submit a progress report to the Pretreatment
Coordinator no later than 14 calendar days following each date in the schedule
and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it
complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if
appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established
schedule;
      (4)   In no event shall more than nine calendar months elapse between
such progress reports to the Pretreatment Coordinator; and
      (5)   All compliance schedule progress reports must be signed and
certified in accordance with §
13-8-6.   
   (C)   Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline.
Within 90 calendar days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject
to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the
Pretreatment Coordinator a report containing the information described in
division (A) of this section. For users subject to equivalent mass or
concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR
403.6(c) and §
13-6-3, this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term
production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the
user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance
reports must be signed and certified in accordance with §
13-8-6.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-10-3 PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS/ SELF-MONITORING REPORTS.
   (A)   Significant non-categorical industrial users.
      (1)   Significant non-categorical industrial users shall, at a frequency
determined by the Pretreatment Coordinator but in no case less than twice per
year (on dates specified by the village) submit a report to the village with a
description of the nature, concentration of pollutants in the discharge which
are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and
maximum daily flows for the reporting period.
      (2)   These reports shall be based on sampling and analysis performed in
the period covered by the report, and performed in accordance with the
techniques described in 40 CFR part 136 and amendments thereto. All wastewater
samples must be representative of the user's discharge and comply with the
requirements of §§
13-6-8 and
13-6-9.
      (3)   All sampling and analysis may be performed by the village in lieu
of significant industrial user. In such cases, the village will issue an
attachment to the wastewater discharge permit that specifies the village will
perform sampling and analysis semi-annually at minimum.
      (4)   In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a
best management practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the user
must submit documentation required by the Pretreatment Coordinator or the
pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user.
      (5)   Where the village itself collects all the information required for
the report, the significant non-categorical industrial user will not be
required to submit the report.
   (B)   Categorical industrial users.
      (1)   All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards
(categorical industrial users) shall, at a frequency determined by the
Pretreatment Coordinator but in no case less than twice per year on dates
specified by the village (normally in July and January), submit a report
indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which
are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and
maximum daily flows for the reporting period. At the discretion of the village
and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays,
budget cycles, etc., the village may agree to alter the months during which the
above reports are to be submitted. All periodic compliance reports must be
signed and certified in accordance with §
13-8-6.
      (2)   These reports shall be based on sampling and analysis performed in
the period covered by the report, and performed in accordance with the
techniques described in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto. All wastewater
samples must be representative of the user's discharge and comply with the
requirements of §§
13-6-8 and
13-6-9.
      (3)   This sampling and analysis may be performed by the village in lieu
of categorical industrial user. In such cases, the village will issue an
attachment to the wastewater discharge permit that specifies the village will
perform sampling and analysis semi-annually at minimum.
      (4)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the Pretreatment
Coordinator, using the procedures prescribed in §§
13-6-8 and
13-6-9, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
      (5)   Where the village has imposed mass limitations on users as provided
for by 40 CFR Part 403.6(c), the report required by division (B)(1) of this
section shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by the pretreatment
standards in the discharge from the industrial user.
      (6)   For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits
established by the village in accordance with the procedures in §
13-6-3(F), the report required by division (B)(1) of this section shall contain
a reasonable measure of the user's long term production rate. For all other
users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed only in terms of
allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of
operation), the report required by division (B)(1) of this section shall
include the user's actual average production rate for the reporting period.
      (7)   In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a
best management practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the user
must submit documentation required by the Pretreatment Coordinator or the
pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user.
      (8)   Upon approval of a monitoring waiver for pollutants found to be not
present and revision of the user's permit by the Pretreatment Coordinator, the
user must certify on each periodic report with the statement in §
13-8-6, that there has been no increase in the pollutant in its wastestream due
to activities of the user with the following statement:
   "Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for
managing compliance with the Pretreatment Standard for 40 CFR _______(specify
applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standard part(s)), I certify that,
to the best of my knowledge and belief, there has been no increase in the level
of the _________(list the categorically regulated pollutant(s)) in the
wastewaters due to the activities at the facility since filing of the last
periodic report."
      (9)   In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or is
expected to be present because of changes that occur in the user's operations,
the user must immediately comply with the monitoring requirements of division
(B)(1) of this section or other more frequent monitoring requirements imposed
by the Pretreatment Coordinator, and notify the Pretreatment Coordinator.
   (C)   Non-significant categorical users.
      (1)   Non-significant categorical industrial users as defined in §
13-5-6 shall, at a frequency determined by the Pretreatment Coordinator but no
less frequently than annually (on dates specified by the village) submit a
report which contains the certification statement contained in division (C)(2)
of this section.
      (2)   Certification statement.
"Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing
compliance with the Categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR ___, I
certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief that during the period
from        ,         to             ,                  (months, days, year):
   a)   The facility described as                         (facility name) met
the definition of a Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User as described by
Section
13-5-6 ;
   b)   The facility complied with all applicable Pretreatment Standards and
Requirements during this reporting period; and
   c)   The facility never discharged more than 100 gallons of total
categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting period.
   This compliance certification is based on the following information:
                                                                                                                                       "
   The report is required to be signed by an authorized representative of the
user.
   (D)   Other non-significant regulated users.
      (1)   Categorical zero process dischargers, non-categorical zero process
dischargers, batch dischargers, food service establishments and any firms
regulated by individual or general permit requirements including but not
limited to best management practices shall, at a frequency determined by the
Pretreatment Coordinator, submit a periodic report at a frequency defined in
their wastewater discharge permit.
      (2)   The reports may require sampling and analyses or some other measure
to determine compliance with permit pretreatment standards and requirements.
The user must submit documentation necessary to determine the compliance status
of user as defined by the Pretreatment Coordinator and identified in the
wastewater discharge permit.    
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-10-4 REPORTS FROM NON-PERMITTED USERS.
   All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide
appropriate reports to the Pretreatment Coordinator as required in this chapter
or by the Pretreatment Coordinator. These reports include but are not limited
to surveys of business activities, water usage, wastes discharged, spill and
slug loading potential, pretreatment equipment, waste hauling and facility
layout.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-10-5 AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE CHANGE NOTIFICATION.
   Any significant industrial user that changes the authorized representative
of its company as defined in §
13-5-6 shall file a change notice with the village within 30 calendar days.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-10-6 REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS.
   Each user must notify the Pretreatment Coordinator of any planned
substantial changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the
nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 30 calendar days before
the change that results in an increase or addition or planned shutdown or
deletion of products. Immediate shutdowns or deletions of products are required
to be noticed within five working days of determination.
   (A)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may require the user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under §
13-8-5.
   (B)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may issue or modify an existing
individual or general wastewater discharge permit under §§
13-9-2 and
13-9-4 in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.    
   (C)   For purposes of this requirement, substantial changes include, but are
not limited to, flow increases of 20% or greater, the addition or deletion of a
shift, the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants including changes
to the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the user has
submitted initial notification under §
13-10-9, introduction of a pollutant for which a monitoring waiver had been
obtained, the addition of a new process regardless of waste discharge or lack
of discharge, shutdown of a process, or addition or deletion of a product.
   (D)   Significant industrial users and categorical industrial users are
required to notify the Pretreatment Coordinator immediately of any changes at
its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-10-7 REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS.
   (A)   Initial notification. In the case of any discharge, including, but not
limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic
nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause
potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone (within
15 minutes), and notify the Pretreatment Coordinator of the incident. If this
notification cannot be made to the POTW staff during routine business hours,
the user shall notify the Village Police Department. This notification shall
include the name of the caller, location of the discharge, physical state of
discharge, chemical composition, concentration and volume, if known, and date
and time of discharge as well as duration of the discharge, and corrective
actions taken by the user. The notification shall include what federal, state
and local entities have also been notified by the user.    
   (B)   The user shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with all applicable regulations upon
reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
includes the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.    
   (C)   Written notification. Within 15 calendar days following such
discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the Pretreatment Coordinator,
submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and
the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences.
   (D)   Such notifications shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss,
damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the
POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall
such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability
which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter.
   (E)   A notice/sign shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board
or other prominent place advising employees in English and the language of
common use whom to call in the event of a discharge described in division (A)
of this section. Employers shall ensure through documentation that all
employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-10-8 NOTICE OF VIOLATION/REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING.
   If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify
the Pretreatment Coordinator within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the
results of the repeat analysis to the Pretreatment Coordinator within 30
calendar days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required
to resample if the Pretreatment Coordinator monitors at the user's facility at
least once a month, or if the Pretreatment Coordinator samples between the
user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this
sampling. If the village performed the sampling and analysis in lieu of the
user, the village will perform the repeat sampling and analysis unless it
notifies the user of the violation and requires the user to perform the repeat
sampling and analysis.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-10-9 NOTIFICATION OF THE DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE.
   (A)   Pursuant to 40 CFR 403.12 (p) any user who commences the discharge of
hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the USEPA Regional Waste Management
Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any
discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would
be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the
name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous
waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the
user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the
POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the
extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an
identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an
estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste
stream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of
constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following
12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 calendar days
after the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph need be
submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications
of changed conditions must be submitted under §
13-10-6. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to
pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards under the self-monitoring requirements of §§
13-10-2(A) and (B), and 13-10-3(B).
   (B)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of division (A) of this
section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15
kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as
specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15
kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity
of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e),
requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user
discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require
additional notification.
   (C)   In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the
Pretreatment Coordinator, the USEPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division
Director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such
substance within 90 calendar days of the effective date of such regulations.
   (D)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the user
shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity
of hazardous wastes generated to the degree that the user will not cause
potential problems or interference at the POTW, and will comply with the
prohibited discharge standards in §
13-6-2 and local limits in §
13-6-5.
   (E)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit issued
thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-10-10 REPORT SUBMITTAL DUE DATES.
   Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern. In order to meet deadlines, reports may be faxed or
emailed on the due date to the Pretreatment Coordinator. The original of the
fax or email is required to be mailed to the village postmarked within one
working day of the transmission.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
ARTICLE 11: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE COMPLIANCE MONITORING
Section
   
13-11-1   Right of entry: inspection and sampling
   
13-11-2   Record keeping
   
13-11-3   Search warrants
§ 13-11-1 RIGHT OF ENTRY: INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.
   The Pretreatment Coordinator and his designee(s), duly authorized agents of
the village, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and the United
States Environmental Protection Agency, hereafter referred to as above named
entities, shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine
whether the user is complying with all requirements of this chapter and any
individual or general wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder.
Users shall allow the above named entities ready access to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
analyses, records examination and copying, and the performance of any
additional duties.
   (A)   Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall
make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation
of suitable identification, the above named entities will be permitted to enter
without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
   (B)   The village shall have the right to set up on the user's property or
require installation of such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/
or metering of the user's operations.
   (C)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may require the user to install
monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure
wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated twice yearly (at six month
intervals) to ensure their accuracy. The user shall submit these calibration
reports semi-annually to the village with the periodic compliance reports
required in §
13-10-3.
   (D)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user
at the written or verbal request of the Pretreatment Coordinator and shall not
be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
   (E)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the Pretreatment Coordinator and his
designee access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-11-2 RECORD KEEPING.
   (A)   Users. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter
shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of
information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this
chapter and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to
monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements,
and documentation associated with best management practices established under §
13-9-2. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of
sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses
were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or
methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain
available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be
automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user
or the village, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer
retention period by the Pretreatment Coordinator.
   (B)   Village. The village will maintain documentation of any monitoring
waiver issued per §
13-8-5(D) for a period of three years after the expiration of the waiver. The
documentation will include the reasons supporting the waiver and any
information submitted by the user in its request for the waiver.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-11-3 SEARCH WARRANTS.
   If the Pretreatment Coordinator has been refused access to a building,
structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate
probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or
that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection
and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any
permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health,
safety and welfare of the community, then the Pretreatment Coordinator may seek
issuance of a search warrant from the Circuit Court of DuPage County.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
ARTICLE 12: CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
Section
   
13-12-1   Access to information
§ 13-12-1 ACCESS TO INFORMATION.
   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater
discharge permit applications, individual or general wastewater discharge
permits, and monitoring programs, and the Pretreatment Coordinator inspection
and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction,
unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Pretreatment Coordinator and Village Attorney, that the
release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law.
Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information
or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that
such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which
might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available
for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon
request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or
pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person
furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other
"effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as
confidential information and will be available to the public without
restriction.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
ARTICLE 13: PUBLICATION OF WASTEWATER SYSTEM USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE
Section
   
13-13-1   Publication of wastewater system users in significant noncompliance
§ 13-13-1 PUBLICATION OF WASTEWATER SYSTEM USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.
   The Pretreatment Coordinator shall publish annually, in a newspaper of
general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the
jurisdiction served by the POTW, a list of the users which, at any time during
the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance
shall be applicable to all significant industrial users and categorical
industrial users (or any other user that violates divisions (C), (D) or (H) of
this section and shall mean:
   (A)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant
parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits as defined
in Article 6
   (B)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter
during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined
by Article 6 multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats,
Oils and Grease, and 1.2 for all other Pollutants except pH);
   (C)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by Article 6 (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or
narrative standard) that the Pretreatment Coordinator has determined caused,
alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through,
including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
   (D)   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the Pretreatment
Coordinator exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a
discharge;
   (E)   Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in an individual or general wastewater discharge
permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction,
or attaining final compliance;
   (F)   Failure to provide within 45 calendar days after the due date, any
required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance
with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
   (G)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
   (H)   Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best
management practices, that the Pretreatment Coordinator determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
ARTICLE 14: ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
Section
   
13-14-1   Notification of violation
   
13-14-2   Compliance agreements
   
13-14-3   Show cause order
   
13-14-4   Compliance orders
   
13-14-5   Cease and desist orders
   
13-14-6   Emergency suspensions
   
13-14-7   Termination of discharge
§ 13-14-1 NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   When the Pretreatment Coordinator finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the Pretreatment Coordinator may serve upon that user a written
notice of violation. Within 20 working days of the receipt of this notice, an
explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and
prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by
the user to the Pretreatment Coordinator. Submission of this plan in no way
relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after
receipt of the notice of violation.
   (B)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may initiate a pretreatment review for
any violation issued under division (A) of this section but most likely for the
first violation of any parameter. Upon the issuance of the pretreatment review,
the village shall schedule a pretreatment review meeting, normally within 30
calendar days of the determination that a meeting is required. As a result of a
pretreatment review meeting, the village may issue a compliance directive
stating that the user is in a "corrective action" status. A plan for correction
and compliance schedule illustrating milestones may be issued by the village to
the user. This plan for correction and compliance schedule may become part of
the user's permit. The user is responsible for meeting the permit limits at all
times. The plan for correction, compliance schedule and revised permit do not
relieve the user of meeting the permit limits and/or ordinance requirements.
The user shall take whatever actions are necessary to meet the permit limits
and permit conditions.
   (C)   As a result of a violation, the village may continue to sample the
user and inspect the user's progress towards meeting milestones as needed to
determine if the user is complying with the conditions of the plan of action,
compliance schedule and/or permit. In the event the village detects and
documents any violation; a NOV will be issued to the user.   
   (D)   Each detected violation of the plan of action, compliance schedule,
and permit, will result in an NOV being issued to the user. Failure to comply
with the NOV requirements may result in the issuance of a citation requiring
the user to appear in DuPage County Circuit Court.
   (E)   When the user has met the conditions of the plan of action, compliance
schedule, and permit, the village will notify the user in writing that the
conditions have been satisfied and they are no longer under a "corrective
action" status if such a status was formally issued.   
   (F)   Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the Pretreatment
Coordinator to take any action, including emergency actions or any other
enforcement action, without first issuing a votice of violation.    
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-14-2 COMPLIANCE AGREEMENTS.
   The Pretreatment Coordinator may enter into compliance agreements, i.e.
consent orders, assurances of compliance, or other similar documents
establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such
documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the
noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents
shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued
pursuant to §§
13-14-4 and
13-14-5 and shall be judicially enforceable.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-14-3 SHOW CAUSE ORDER.
   The Pretreatment Coordinator may order a user which has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, to appear before the representatives of the village and show cause
why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served
on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed
enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user
show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice
of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail
(return receipt requested) at least ten working days prior to the hearing. Such
notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause
hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other
action against the user.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-14-4 COMPLIANCE ORDERS.
   When the Pretreatment Coordinator finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the Pretreatment Coordinator may issue an order to the user
responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance
within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the
time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment
facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly
operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the
noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices
designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A
compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a
pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the
user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation.
Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite
for, taking any other action against the user.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-14-5 CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS.
   (A)   When the Pretreatment Coordinator finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the
Pretreatment Coordinator may issue an order to the user directing it to cease
and desist all such violations and directing the user to:
      (1)   Immediately comply with all requirements; and   
      (2)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
   (B)   Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-14-6 EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS.
   (A)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may immediately suspend a user's
discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is
necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to
present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or
welfare of persons. The Pretreatment Coordinator may also immediately suspend a
user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to
interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an
endangerment to the environment.
      (1)   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
Pretreatment Coordinator may take such steps as deemed necessary, including
immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to
the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The
Pretreatment Coordinator may allow the user to recommence its discharge when
the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Pretreatment Coordinator
that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings
in §
13-14-7 are initiated against the user.    
      (2)   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement,
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence, to the Pretreatment Coordinator prior to the
date of any show cause or termination hearing under §§
13-14-3 or
13-14-7.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing
prior to any emergency suspension under this section.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-14-7 TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE.
   (A)   In addition to the provisions in §
13-9-6, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge
termination:
      (1)   Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
      (2)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
      (3)   Failure to report substantial changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
      (4)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose
of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
      (5)   Violation of the pretreatment standards in Article 6 of this
chapter.
   (B)   Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its
discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under §
13-14-3 why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by
the Village Board shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the user.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
ARTICLE 15: PENALTIES AND JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
Section
   
13-15-1   Recovery of costs incurred
   
13-15-2   Injunctive relief
   
13-15-3   Penalties
   
13-15-4   Remedies nonexclusive
§ 13-15-1 RECOVERY OF COSTS INCURRED.
   Any entity or user violating any of the provisions of this chapter, or who
causes damage to or impairs the village's POTW shall be liable to the village
for any expense, loss or damage caused by such violation or discharge. The
village shall invoice the costs, including but not limited to, sampling and
analyses associated with the investigation, costs of mitigating impact to the
POTW, costs of preparing the administrative enforcement actions such as notices
and orders, attorney's and engineering fees and expenses, investigative and/or
correction actions, and review of response(s) from the user. In the event of
damage, losses or impairments, the village shall bill the user for the costs
incurred by the village for any cleaning, repair, replacement or other
investigative and/or corrective action(s) as a response to the violation or
discharge. Refusal to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a violation of
this chapter enforceable under the provisions of Article 14.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-15-2 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   When a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
chapter, a general or individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the village may
petition the Circuit Court of DuPage County for the issuance of a temporary or
permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific
performance of the general or individual wastewater discharge permit, order, or
other requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the user. The
village may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or
equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental
remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-15-3 PENALTIES.
   When the Pretreatment Coordinator finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual or general
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Pretreatment Coordinator, under the
direction of the Director of Public Works, may petition the Circuit Court of
DuPage County through the Village Attorney for civil penalties as follows:
   (A)   Any user shall be fined in the amount of not less than $1,000 or more
than $1,500 for each violation. Each day a violation exists or continues to
exist shall constitute a separate violation. In the case of a monthly or other
long-term average discharge limit, each day a violation exists or continues
shall constitute a separate violation.
   (B)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may recover costs, including but not
limited to, filing fees, witness fees, attorneys' fees, court costs, and other
fees and expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling
and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the
village.   
   (C)   In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take
into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the
violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective
actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor
as justice requires.
   (D)   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-15-4 REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The
Pretreatment Coordinator may take any, all, or any combination of these actions
against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will
generally be in accordance with the village's enforcement response plan.
However, the Pretreatment Coordinator may take other action against any user
when the circumstances warrant. Further, the Pretreatment Coordinator is
empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant
user.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
ARTICLE 16: SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION
Section
   
13-16-1   Failure to report or notify
   
13-16-2   Liability insurance
   
13-16-3   Payment for outstanding fees and permits
   
13-16-4   Discontinuance of water supply
   
13-16-5   Public nuisances
§ 13-16-1 FAILURE TO REPORT OR NOTIFY.
   (A)   Sewer permits. Any entity who fails to file for and obtain a sewer
connection and/or discharge permit prior to commencing construction of said
connection required by this chapter may be subject to the following late filing
fees in addition to connection or annexation fees:
      (1)   First notice: issuance of warning.
      (2)   Second notice: $250.00.
   (B)   Village reports or notifications. Any entity who fails to file any
report or notification so required by this chapter may be subject to the
following late filing fees:
      (1)   Less than 30 calendar days past due: issuance of warning.
      (2)   Recurring reporting violations or 30 or more calendar days past
due: $100.00.
      (3)   Substantial change notification. No written notification of
substantial changes whether discharged or not:
         (a)   At start-up or shutdown: $500.00.
         (b)   In excess of 30 calendar days: $100.00.
   (C)   Reports or notifications required by significant or categorical
industrial users. Any entity who fails to file any periodic pretreatment report
(semi-annual), baseline monitoring report, or 90-day final compliance report so
required by this chapter may be subject to the following late filing fees:
      (1)   Less than 30 calendar days past due: issuance of warning.
      (2)   Thirty or more calendar days past due: $250.00.
      (3)   Substantial changes. No written notification of substantial changes
whether discharged or not:
      (a)   At start-up or shutdown: $1,000.00.
      (b)   In excess of 30 calendar days: $200.00.
   (D)   Ownership notification specific to entities with wastewater discharge
permits.
      (1)   No written notification of change in ownership and/or operation of
facility, or any portion thereof with an individual permit: $1,000.00.
      (2)   No written notification of change in ownership and/or operation of
facility, or any portion thereof with a general permit: $500.00.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-16-2 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   The Pretreatment Coordinator may decline to issue or reissue an individual
or general wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply
with any provision of this chapter, a previous individual or general wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained
financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused
by its discharge.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-16-3 PAYMENT FOR OUTSTANDING FEES AND PENALTIES.
   The Pretreatment Coordinator may decline to issue or reissue an individual
or general wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to pay any
outstanding fees, fines or penalties incurred as a result of any provision of
this chapter, a previous individual or general wastewater discharge permit or
order issued hereunder.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-16-4 DISCONTINUANCE OF WATER SUPPLY.
   Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this
chapter, an individual or general wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the
user may be discontinued. Service shall not be discontinued until a minimum of
five days notice has been given to the user. Such notice shall advise that upon
written request received prior to the expiration of the five days period, the
user will be given an opportunity to be heard as to why service should not be
discontinued. If service is discontinued, service will recommence at the user's
expense, only after the user has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to
comply and paid outstanding costs, fees, and penalties.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-16-5 PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   A violation of any provision of this chapter, an individual or general
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and
shall be corrected or abated as directed by the Pretreatment Coordinator. Any
person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions
governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the village for any costs
incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
ARTICLE 17: AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO WASTEWATER DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS
Section
   
13-17-1   Upset
   
13-17-2   Bypass
§ 13-17-1 UPSET.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, UPSET means an exceptional incident
in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical
pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the
user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by
operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper
operation.
   (B)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought
for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements
of division (C) of this section are met.
   (C)   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other
relevant evidence that:    
      (1)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;    
      (2)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and    
      (3)   The user has submitted the following information to the
Pretreatment Coordinator within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if
this information is provided orally, a written report must be provided within
five working days):    
         (a)   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
         (b)   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or,
if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
         (c)   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
   (D)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.    
   (E)   Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards.   
   (F)   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-17-2 BYPASS.
   (A).   For the purposes of this section:
      (1)   BYPASS means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any
portion of a user's treatment or pretreatment facility.
      (2)   SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE means substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become
inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can
reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property
damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
   (B)   A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment
standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential
maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to
the provision of divisions (C) and (D) of this section.
   (C)   Bypass notifications.
      (1)   Anticipated: If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass,
it shall submit prior notice to the Pretreatment Coordinator, at least ten
working days before the date of the bypass, if possible.
      (2)   Unanticipated: A user shall submit oral notice to the Pretreatment
Coordinator of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment
standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A
written submission shall also be provided within five working days of the time
the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a
description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including
exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the
anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to
reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The Pretreatment
Coordinator may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral
report has been received within 24 hours.
   (D)   POTW actions.
      (1)   Bypass is prohibited, and the Pretreatment Coordinator may take an
enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:
         (a)   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury,
or severe property damage;
         (b)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
         (c)   The user submitted notices as required under division (C) of
this section.
      (2)   The Pretreatment Coordinator may approve an anticipated bypass,
after considering its adverse effects, if the Pretreatment Coordinator
determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in division (D)(1) of
this section.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
ARTICLE 18: MISCELLANEOUS FEES
Section
   
13-18-1   Pretreatment charges and fees
   
13-18-2   Additional remedies
§ 13-18-1 PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES.
   The village may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting
up and operating the village's pretreatment program unique to a specific user
which may include:
   (A)   Categorical pretreatment standard determination, establishment and
documentation for wastewater discharge permit;
   (B)   Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including
the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing
monitoring reports submitted by users;    
   (C)   Fees for reviewing plans or construction relating to Spill Prevention
Containment and Countermeasures/Slug Load Plans as defined in §
13-7-4;   
   (D)   Fees for responding to report of potential problems as defined in §
13-10-7.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-18-2 ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.
   (A)   In addition to remedies available to the village set forth elsewhere
in this chapter, if the POTW is fined by the state or USEPA for violation of
the POTW NPDES permit or violation of water quality standards as the result of
discharge of pollutants by a user or group of users, then the fine, including
all legal, sampling, analytical testing costs and any other related costs
incurred by the village shall be charges to the responsible user or group of
users. Such charges shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other
remedies the village may have under this chapter, statutes, regulations, at law
or in equity.
   (B)   If the discharge from any non-residential user causes a deposit,
obstruction or damage to any portion of the POTW, the POTW shall cause the
deposit or obstruction to be promptly removed or cause the damage to be
promptly repaired. The cost for such work, including materials, labor and
supervision, shall be borne by the person or non-residential user causing such
deposit, obstruction, or damage.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
ARTICLE 19: USER & SURCHARGE INDUSTRIAL WASTE COST RECOVERY
Section
   
13-19-1   User and surcharge rates
   
13-19-2   Measurement of flow
   
13-19-3   Flow measuring and sampling devices
   
13-19-4   Rate calculations
   
13-19-5   Bills generally
   
13-19-6   Delinquent bills
   
13-19-7   Lien - notice of delinquency
   
13-19-8   Foreclosure of lien
   
13-19-9   Revenues
   
13-19-10   Accounts
   
13-19-11   Access to records
§ 13-19-1 USER AND SURCHARGE RATES.
   (A)   Basis for wastewater service charges. The wastewater service charge
for the use of a service supplied by the wastewater facilities of the village
shall consist of a basic user charge for operation and maintenance plus
replacement, and a surcharge, if applicable.
   (B)   Basic user charge. The basic user charge shall be based on water usage
as recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters for wastes not exceeding the
following normal concentrations:
      (1)   A five-day, 20°C biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) of 200 mg/l;
      (2)   A suspended solids (SS) content of 250 mg/l; and
      (3)   Fats, oil and grease (FOG) content of 100 mg/l.
   (C)   A treatment service surcharge shall be levied to all users whose
wastewater exceeds the normal concentrations listed in division (B) of this
section as determined by wastewater sampling. A basic surcharge will be
computer based upon normal operating cost of the POTW as proportioned to the
above constituents, based upon the design criteria of the POTW. Sewer users
whose wastewater exceeds 250% of the limit of pollutants indicated in division
(B) of this section shall be subject to a 100% increase in the surcharge for
that pollutant. Sewer users whose wastewater exceeds 500% of the limit of any
pollutants indicated in division (B) of this section shall be subject to a 200%
increase in the surcharge for that pollutant.   
   (D)   A surcharge will be levied to all users whose waters exceed the normal
concentrations for BOD (200 mg/l) and SS (250 mg/l). The surcharge will be
based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters for all
wastes which exceed the 200 mg/l and 250 mg/l concentration for BOD and SS,
respectively.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-19-2 MEASUREMENT OF FLOW.
   (A)   The flow used for computing basic user charges and surcharges shall be
the metered water consumption read to the lowest even increment of 1,000
gallons.   
   (B)   If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any
part, or all, of his or her water from sources other than the public waterworks
system, all or a part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the person
shall install and maintain, at his or her expense, water meters of a type
approved by the village for the purpose of determining the volume of water
obtained from these other sources.   
   (C)   Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required
by the village if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined from the metered
water consumption records.
   (D)   Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be
installed and owned by the owner. The village shall maintain the metering
device. Following approval and installation, such meters may not be removed,
unless service is canceled, without the consent of the village.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-19-3 FLOW MEASURING AND SAMPLING DEVICES.
   Wastewater flow measuring and recording devices and wastewater sampling
devices may be required by the village in order to accurately determine the
volume and strength of industrial wastes. The devices, if required, shall be
enclosed in suitable housing that will provide heat, light and power inside the
structure with sufficient room for the flow measuring and sampling equipment.
The village shall have access to the equipment at all times and shall be
responsible for the daily maintenance of the flow measuring and recording data
and sampling of the industrial effluent. The industrial user shall have access
to all records obtained from the measuring and sampling devices.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-19-4 RATE CALCULATIONS.
   The village shall determine annually the cost of the wastewater service
charges in accordance with §
13-3-16 for each 1,000 gallons of volume, five-day BOD, and suspended solids
for normal concentrations of domestic wastes. The calculations shall be made
available to any interested person.
   (A)   The rates or charges for service under this chapter shall be payable
quarterly. The user of the service shall be liable to pay for the service to
such premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by the village only
upon the condition that the user of the service is liable therefore to the
village. Bills for sewer service shall be sent out by the Village Treasurer on
the first day of the quarter succeeding the period for which the service is
billed.
   (B)   All sewer bills are due and payable 30 calendar days after issuance.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-19-5 BILLS GENERALLY.
   (A)   Rates or charges for service shall be payable monthly depending on the
classification of service for which bills are rendered.
   (B)   The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the
service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service to such
premises and the service is furnished to the premises by the village only upon
the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the services
are jointly and severally liable therefore to the village.
   (C)   Bills for sewer service shall be sent out by the Village Treasurer
monthly succeeding the period for which the service is billed.   
   (D)   All sewer bills are due and payable 15 days after being sent out. A
penalty of 10% shall be added to all bills not paid by the fifteenth day after
they have been rendered.   
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-19-6 DELINQUENT BILLS.
   If the charges for such services are not paid within 30 days or 30 days
hereinabove mentioned after the rendition of the bill for such services, such
services may be discontinued by order of the Board of Trustees following a
notice and hearing to be provided in substantially the same manner as set forth
herein.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-19-7 LIEN - NOTICE OF DELINQUENCY.
   (A)   Whenever a bill for sewer service remains unpaid for 45 days for
monthly service, the Village Treasurer shall file with the County Recorder of
Deeds a statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain the legal
description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice
that the village claims a lien for this amount.   
   (B)   If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises and
the Village Treasurer has notice of this, notice shall be mailed to the owner
of the premises if his or her address be known to the Treasurer, whenever such
bill remains unpaid for the period of 45 days for a monthly bill.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-19-8 FORECLOSURE OF LIEN.
   The Village Attorney is hereby authorized to institute proceedings to
foreclose the lien for unpaid charges in any court having jurisdiction over
such matters against any property for which the bill has remained unpaid 45
days.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-19-9 REVENUES.
   All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the wastewater system
shall be deposited in the Wastewater Account of the Wastewater Fund. The
Village Treasurer shall administer such fund as provided by law.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-19-10 ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   The Village Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and
shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the wastewater system
and, at regular annual intervals, he or she shall cause to be made an audit by
an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the wastewater system.
   (B)   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit
report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the wastewater
facilities, including a replacement cost, to indicate that sewer service
charges under the waste recovery system do in fact meet these regulations. In
this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit report shall
include the following:
      (1)   Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant
for the current fiscal year;
      (2)   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed;
      (3)   Number of users connected to the system;
      (4)   Number of non-metered users; and
      (5)   A list of users discharging non-domestic wastes (industrial users)
and volume of waste discharges.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-19-11 ACCESS TO RECORDS.
   The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or its authorized
representative shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of
the village which are applicable to the village system of user charges or
industrial cost recovery, for the purpose of making audit, examination,
excerpts and transcriptions thereof to insure compliance with the terms of the
special and general conditions to any state grant or loan.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
ARTICLE 20: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section
   
13-20-1   Severability
   
13-20-2   Conflict
   
13-20-3   Offenses under previous ordinances
§ 13-20-1 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent
jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected and shall continue
in full force and effect.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-20-2 CONFLICT.
   All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or
conflicting with any part of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of
such inconsistency or conflict.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
§ 13-20-3 OFFENSES UNDER PREVIOUS ORDINANCES.
   This chapter shall not be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance,
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect such offense or
act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that proceedings thereafter shall conform to the ordinance in
force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. Nothing contained
in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending.
(Ord. 2020-06-18, passed 6-15-2020)
ARTICLE 21: STORM DRAINAGE; ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND ELIMINATION
Section
   
13-21-1   Statutory authority
   
13-21-2   Purpose
   
13-21-3   Interpretation of terms and words
   
13-21-4   Definitions
   
13-21-5   Applicability
   
13-21-6   Interpretation
   
13-21-7   Participating communities
   
13-21-8   Responsibility for administration
   
13-21-9   Duties of Director
   
13-21-10   Representative capacity
   
13-21-11   Prohibition of illicit discharges
   
13-21-12   Prohibition of illicit connections
   
13-21-13   Submission of notice of intent (NOI) to the Department
   
13-21-14   Notification of spills
   
13-21-15   Enforcement; violations
   
13-21-16   Notice to correct violations; Director may take action
   
13-21-17   Emergency cease and desist orders
   
13-21-18   Violations deemed a public nuisance
   
13-21-19   Nuisance abatement
   
13-21-20   Fines
   
13-21-21   Remedies not exclusive
   
13-21-22   Suspension of MS4 access due to detection of illicit discharges
   
13-21-23   Right to appeal
   
13-21-24   Enforcement measures after appeal
   
13-21-25   Severability
   
13-21-26   Most restrictive provisions apply
   
13-21-27   Ultimate responsibility
§ 13-21-1 STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
   (A)   This article shall be known, and may be cited, as the “Village of
Carol Stream Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination Ordinance”.
   (B)   The Village Board promulgates this article pursuant to its authority
to adopt ordinances regulating the quality of all storm water runoff channels,
streams and basins in the village.
   (C)   As applicable, the village may promulgate and enforce this article
pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 65 ILCS 5/11-12-12, 65 ILCS 5/11-30-2, 65 ILCS 5/
11-30-8, and 65 ILCS 5/11-31-2 and such other authority as applicable to the
village and its home rule powers.
(Ord. 2020-11-41, passed 11-16-2020)
§ 13-21-2 PURPOSES.
   (A)   The purpose of this article is to ensure the health, safety and
general welfare of the citizens of the village, and protect and enhance water
quality in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.) through the regulation of non-storm
water discharges to the storm drainage system. This article establishes methods
for controlling the introduction of discharges other than those occurring as a
direct result of precipitation and/or snow melt into the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) and the storm drainage system in order to comply with
requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
Phase II permit process. Other purposes of this article include:
      (1)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 and the storm
drainage system by non-storm water discharges; and
      (2)   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4 and the
storm drainage system.
   (B)   The purposes of this article shall be implemented by its provisions.
(Ord. 2020-11-41, passed 11-16-2020)
§ 13-21-3 INTERPRETATION OF TERMS AND WORDS.
   For the purposes of this article, the terms and words used herein shall be
interpreted as follows.
   (A)   Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
   (B)   Words used in the singular number include the plural number and words
used in the plural number include the singular number.
   (C)   The words “shall”, “will” and “must” are mandatory, not permissive.
   (D)   The phrase “Director” refers to the Director of Public Works who is
the individual responsible for the enforcement.
(Ord. 2020-11-41, passed 11-16-2020)
§ 13-21-4 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this article, the following words and terms shall have
the meanings set forth except where otherwise specifically indicated. Words and
terms not defined shall have the meanings indicated by common dictionary
definition.
   BUILDING. A structure that is constructed or erected partially or wholly
above ground and is enclosed by walls and a roof. The term BUILDING includes
manufactured homes and includes both the above-ground and the below-ground
portions of the structure.
   CLEAN WATER ACT (CWA). The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. §§
1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
   COMMITTEE. The Storm Water Management Committee of the DuPage County Board,
authorized by 55 ILCS 5/5-1062.
   COMMUNITY. Any municipality, or the unincorporated county, within DuPage
County acting as a unit of local government.
   COUNTY. The County of DuPage, Illinois.
   DEPARTMENT. The Village of Carol Stream Department of Public Works or
successor agency.
   DIRECTOR. The Village of Carol Stream Director of Public Works or successor
position or his or her designee.
   DIVISION. The DuPage County Storm Water Management Division or successor
agency.
   DRAIN. Piping and appurtenances for conveying a fluid.
   FACILITY. Something that is built, installed or established to serve a
particular purpose.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material which may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial hazard to human health, safety, property or the
environment.
   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS. An illicit connection is defined as either of the
following:
      (1)   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface that
allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drainage system including, but
not limited to, any conveyances that allow any non-storm water discharge
including sewage, process wastewater and wash water to enter the storm drainage
system and any connections to the storm drainage system from indoor drains and
sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously
allowed, permitted or approved by the community; or
      (2)   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the storm drainage system that has not been documented in plans,
maps, or equivalent records and approved by the community.
   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the
storm drainage system, except as exempted in §
13-21-11.
   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Activities subject to an industrial NPDES storm water
permit, as defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(14).
   LINE. A hollow conduit through which fluids are transported between two or
more points.
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including, but not limited to, sidewalks, roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, human-made
channels and storm sewers) owned or operated by a governmental entity and
designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water, and that is not used
for collecting or conveying sewage.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT. A permit
issued by Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA) that authorizes the
discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is
applicable on an individual, group or general area-wide basis.
   NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the storm drainage system that
is not the direct result of precipitation and/or snow melt in the tributary
drainage basin.
   NOTICE OF INTENT (NOI). Illinois Environmental Protection Agency notice of
intent to participate in coverage under the general permit to discharge storm
water associated with industrial activity.
   OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE. A committee appointed by the village by Ord. 2003-04-16
to oversee the implementation and enforcement of the village’s storm water
ordinance.
   PARCEL. Contiguous land under single ownership or control.
   PERSON. Any individual, association, partnership, public or private
corporation, municipality, political subdivision, government agency or any
other legal entity, including heirs, successors, agents, officers and assigns
of such entity.
   pH NEUTRAL. pH value between 6.5 and 9.0 standard units.
   PLAN. The DuPage County Storm Water Management Plan, adopted by the DuPage
County Board in September 1989, as amended from time to time.
   POLLUTANT. Anything that causes or contributes to pollution. POLLUTANTS may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects, and
accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables;
pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes;
sewage, wastewater, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate
metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a
building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
   PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel of land or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
   RUNOFF. The waters derived from precipitation and/or melting snow within a
tributary drainage basin that exceeds the infiltration capacity of that basin.
   SEWAGE. Polluted storm water, wastewater or other refuse liquids usually
conveyed by sewers.
   SEWER. An artificial conduit to carry off sewage and/or surface water (as
from rainfall), including sanitation, storm water and/or combined sewers.
   SEWERAGE. A system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation, pumping and treatment of sewage.
   STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM. A facility by which storm water is collected and/or
conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems,
municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping
facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered
drainage channels, reservoirs and other drainage structures.
   STORM WATER. Any surface flow, runoff and drainage from any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
   STRUCTURE. Anything that is erected or constructed. The term STRUCTURE
includes, without limitation: buildings, manufactured homes, tanks, dams,
sewers, constructed channels, outfalls, parking lots, driveways, roads,
sidewalks and concrete patios.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Carol Stream, Illinois.
   WASTEWATER. Water that has been used and is not for reuse unless treated by
a wastewater treatment facility.
   WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES. As defined in the CWA, WATERS OF THE UNITED
STATES applies only to surface waters, rivers, lakes, estuaries, coastal waters
and wetlands. Not all surface waters are legally WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES.
Generally, those waters include the following:
      (1)   All interstate waters;
      (2)   Intrastate waters used in interstate and/or foreign commerce;
      (3)   Tributaries of the above;
      (4)   Territorial seas at the cyclical high tide mark; and
      (5)   Wetlands adjacent to all the above.
(Ord. 2020-11-41, passed 11-16-2020)
§ 13-21-5 APPLICABILITY.
   This article shall apply to all water entering the storm drainage system
from any developed or undeveloped lands within the jurisdiction of the
Department, unless explicitly exempted by §
13-21-11, including any amendments or revisions thereto.
(Ord. 2020-11-41, passed 11-16-2020)
§ 13-21-6 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   The provisions of this article shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience, prosperity and general welfare and the environment of the
residents of the village, and to effectuate the purposes of this article and
enabling legislation.
   (B)   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this article are
either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed
by any other applicable statute, law, ordinance, regulation or rule, the
provision that is most restrictive or imposes the higher standards or
requirements shall apply.
   (C)   The provisions of this article shall be interpreted to be cumulative
of, and to impose limitations in addition to, all other ordinances, laws, codes
and regulations, in existence or which may be passed governing any subject
matter of this chapter. To the greatest extent possible, the provisions of this
article shall be construed to be consistent with, and not in conflict with, the
provisions of such other ordinances, laws, codes and regulations, and with each
other, to the end that all such provisions may be given their fullest
application.
(Ord. 2020-11-41, passed 11-16-2020)
§ 13-21-7 PARTICIPATING COMMUNITIES.
   (A)   The village shall promulgate and enforce this article in accordance
with the following participation levels. Participation levels shall be
established through the adoption of intergovernmental agreements.
   (B)   Duties of a full participant community include:
      (1)   Completion of an inter-governmental agreement for full
participation in the illicit discharge detection and elimination program;
      (2)   Provide the Division with a current storm sewer atlas. An updated
storm sewer atlas shall be provided to the Division annually;
      (3)   Provide assistance to the Division in acquiring access to the storm
drainage system as mutually deemed necessary;
      (4)   Provide timely prosecution of persons found to be in violation of
this article when necessary per §§
13-21-15 through
13-21-21; and
      (5)   Provide the Division with documentation of any enforcement action
or prosecution from the previous one year for inclusion in the IEPA annual
facility inspection report.
   (C)   Duties of a partial participant community include:
      (1)   Completion of an inter-governmental agreement for partial
participation in the illicit discharge detection and elimination program;
      (2)   Provide the Division with a current storm sewer atlas. An updated
storm sewer atlas shall be provided to the Division annually;
      (3)   Tracing discharges to their source when the Division determines
that an illicit discharge has been located within the jurisdiction of the
community;
      (4)   Provide timely prosecution of persons found to be in violation of
this article when necessary per §§
13-21-15 through
13-21-21; and
      (5)   Provide the Division with documentation of any enforcement action
or prosecution from the previous one year for inclusion in the IEPA annual
facility inspection report.
   (D)   Duties of a non-participant community include:
      (1)   Responsible for developing and implementing an illicit discharge
detection and elimination program to ensure compliance with the IEPA NPDES
regulations within municipal limits on its own behalf; and
      (2)   If an inter-governmental agreement is not submitted to the county
for partial or full participation, the community will be designated as a non-
participant.
(Ord. 2020-11-41, passed 11-16-2020)
§ 13-21-8 RESPONSIBILITIES FOR ADMINISTRATION.
   The Department shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of
this article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the Department may be
delegated in writing by the Director to persons or entities acting in the
beneficial interest, or in the employ of, the Department as representatives,
contractors, designees and/or assigns.
(Ord. 2020-11-41, passed 11-16-2020)
§ 13-21-9 DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.
   The duties and functions of the Director shall include:
   (A)   Determining policy related to and directing the enforcement of this
article, as applicable;
   (B)   Supervising the execution of this article; and
   (C)   Notifying the Division, and the IEPA, of any amendments to this
article.
(Ord. 2020-11-41, passed 11-16-2020)
§ 13-21-10 REPRESENTATIVE CAPACITY.
   In all cases when any action is taken by the Director, or his or her duly
appointed designee, to enforce the provisions of this article, such action
shall be taken in the name of and on behalf of the village, and neither the
Director, nor his or her designee, in so acting for the village shall be
rendered personally liable.
(Ord. 2020-11-41, passed 11-16-2020)
§ 13-21-11 PROHIBITION OF ILLICIT DISCHARGES.
   (A)   No person shall place, drain or otherwise discharge, cause or allow
others under their control to place, drain or otherwise discharge into the
storm drainage system or MS4 any pollutants or waters containing any
pollutants, other than normal storm water unless specifically exempted in
division (C) below.
   (B)   The following discharges into the MS4 or the storm drainage system
shall be prohibited:
      (1)   Discharges that are not a direct result of precipitation and/or
snow melt within the drainage area of the MS4; and
      (2)   Discharges from an illicit connection.
   (C)   The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established herein provided they do not cause an adverse effect on water
quality as determined by the Director:
      (1)   Discharges caused by governmental public works and storm water
management units as part of their standard operations in compliance with all
applicable regulations;
      (2)   Discharges required by law or authorized by permit, including any
non-storm water discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver or waste
discharge order issued to the discharger and administered by the USEPA and/or
IEPA;
      (3)   Water line and fire hydrant flushing;
      (4)   Landscape irrigation water;
      (5)   Rising ground waters;
      (6)   Ground water infiltration;
      (7)   Pumped ground water;
      (8)   Discharges from potable water sources;
      (9)   Foundation drains;
      (10)   Air conditioning condensate;
      (11)   Irrigation water (except for wastewater irrigation);
      (12)   Springs;
      (13)   Water from crawl space pumps;
      (14)   Footing drains;
      (15)   Storm sewer cleaning water;
      (16)   Water from any outdoor residential, charitable or automobile
dealership premise car wash;
      (17)   Routine external building washdown which does not use detergents;
      (18)   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
      (19)   Dechlorinated pH neutral swimming pool discharges;
      (20)   Residual street wash water;
      (21)   Discharges or flows from firefighting activities;
      (22)   Dechlorinated water reservoir discharges;
      (23)   Pavement washwaters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spilled material has been removed);
      (24)   Discharges associated with dye testing of water line, sanitary
sewers, storm sewers, private drains or septic systems; however, this activity
shall not take place until the discharger, or tester, has provided notification
to the Department at least two full business days prior to the test date,
unless an emergency situation does not allow time for such notification; and
      (25)   Other discharges approved by the Department as being substantially
like any of the discharge types enumerated in this division (C).
(Ord. 2020-11-41, passed 11-16-2020)
§ 13-21-12 PROHIBITION OF ILLICIT CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drainage system or MS4 is prohibited.
   (B)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
   (C)   A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the
person connects a line conveying sewage to the storm drainage system or MS4, or
allows such a connection to continue.
   (D)   Connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and
redirected, if necessary, to an approved wastewater management system or the
sanitary sewer system upon approval of the Department and the appropriate
sanitary treatment facility.
   (E)   Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or
equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system or MS4, shall
be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written
notice of violation from the Department requiring that such locating be
completed. Such notice shall specify a reasonable time period within which the
location of the drain or conveyance is to be determined, that the drain or
conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the
outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, MS4,
sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these
investigations are to be documented and provided to the Department.
(Ord. 2020-11-41, passed 11-16-2020)
§ 13-21-13 SUBMISSION OF NOI TO THE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Any person operating a facility subject to the IEPA’s general permit
to discharge storm water associated with industrial activity shall submit a
copy of the notice of intent (NOI) to the Department at the same time the
operator submits the original notice of intent to the IEPA as applicable.
   (B)   The copy of the notice of intent may be delivered to the Department
either in person or by mailing it to:
      Notice of Intent to Discharge
      Storm Water Department of Public Works
      124 Gerzevske Lane
      Carol Stream, IL 60188
   (C)   A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility that is
discharging storm water associated with industrial activity without having
submitted a copy of the notice of intent to do so to the Department.
(Ord. 2020-11-41, passed 11-16-2020)
§ 13-21-14 NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person
owning, leasing or exercising control over a property, or responsible for
emergency response for a property, has information of any known or suspected
spill of materials which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or
pollutants discharging into the MS4 or the storm drainage system, said person
shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment and cleanup
of such spill.
      (1)   In the event of such a spill, said person shall immediately notify
local emergency dispatch services and act in accordance with Illinois Emergency
Management Agency (IEMA) and IEPA regulations.
      (2)   Said person shall notify the Department of the spill in person or
by phone, facsimile or email no later than the next business day. Notifications
in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed
to the Department within three business days of the phone notice.
      (3)   If the spill emanates from a commercial or industrial
establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an
on-site written record of the spill and the actions taken to prevent its
recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least five years.
   (B)   Proper notice, including containment and cleanup as outlined in
division (A) above, shall exempt the notifying parties from applicable fines
set forth in §
13-21-20.
   (C)   Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a
violation of this article.
   (D)   Notwithstanding the language of division (B) above, a party causing a
spill that contaminates or harms a storm sewer system shall not be relieved of
liability for damages resulting from such act.
(Ord. 2020-11-41, passed 11-16-2020)
§ 13-21-15 ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The Director shall have primary responsibility for the enforcement of
the provisions of this article. The village may enter into agreements with
other governmental units for the purpose of implementing this article.
   (B)   A person violates this article when that person:
      (1)   Performs any act expressly prohibited by any provision of this
article;
      (2)   Disobeys, neglects or fails to carry out or comply with any
provision of this article or of any order or notice issued by the Director;
      (3)   Allows any condition or act that violates any provision of this
article to continue unabated on property owned, leased, managed or under the
control of such person; or
      (4)   Directs, orders, permits or allows a second person to do any act
expressly prohibited by any provision of this article, or to maintain or
continue unabated any condition or act that violates any provision of this
article on property owned, leased, managed or under the control of the first
person.
(Ord. 2020-11-41, passed 11-16-2020)
§ 13-21-16 NOTICE TO CORRECT VIOLATIONS; DIRECTOR MAY TAKE ACTION.
   (A)   The Director may issue a notice of violation ordering a person to take
action to achieve compliance with the provisions of this article and/or to
cease and desist from any action conducted in violation of this article.
Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of a notice of violation and/or
order to cease and desist shall constitute a violation of this article.
      (1)   The Director shall set forth the form and content of any notices
issued under this article.
      (2)   The Director may issue a warning of violation ordering a person to
take action to achieve compliance with the provisions of this article. If a
person fails to comply with the terms and conditions of a warning, the Director
may, thereafter, issue a notice of violation.
      (3)   The Director may issue a warning of violation and disburse
educational materials outlining appropriate measures to minimize the discharge
of pollutants.
   (B)   If a person fails to comply with an order issued under this section,
the Director may direct the appropriate legal counsel to commence any legal
proceeding authorized by this article, under the law or equity, necessary to
enforce any provision of this article and/or to protect public health and
safety. Any legal action brought under this article shall be in the name of the
village.
(Ord. 2020-11-41, passed 11-16-2020)
§ 13-21-17 EMERGENCY CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS.
   (A)   The Department may issue an emergency order in the event of the
following:
      (1)   Any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of
this article or any order issued hereunder, or that the person’s past
violations are likely to recur; and
      (2)   The person’s violation has caused or contributed to an actual or
threatened discharge to the MS4 or storm drainage system and an imminent threat
of violation is present.
   (B)   The Department may issue the emergency order to the violator directing
that the violator:
      (1)   Immediately cease and desist all such violations;
      (2)   Immediately comply with all ordinance requirements; and
      (3)   Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to
properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including immediately
halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
   (C)   Any person notified of an emergency order under this division (C)
shall immediately comply and stop or eliminate its endangering discharge. In
the event of a discharger’s failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the
emergency order, the Department may take such steps as deemed necessary to
prevent or minimize harm to the MS4, storm drainage system or waters of the
United States and/or endangerment to persons or to the environment, including
immediate termination of a facility’s water supply, sewer connection or other
municipal utility services. The Department may allow the person to recommence
its discharge when it has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Department
that the period of endangerment has passed, unless further termination
proceedings are initiated against the discharger under this article. A person
that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent
endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes
of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence, to the Department within 15 days of receipt of the emergency order.
Issuance of an emergency cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or
a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator.
   (D)   The Department may also seek any appropriate judicial orders to
enforce its emergency orders.
(Ord. 2020-11-41, passed 11-16-2020)
§ 13-21-18 VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of
this article shall constitute a threat to public health and safety and is
declared and deemed a public nuisance.
(Ord. 2020-11-41, passed 11-16-2020)
§ 13-21-19 NUISANCE ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Whenever a nuisance shall be found to exist on any premise, the
Director may order such nuisance to be abated upon determination that the
nuisance constitutes a threat to public health or safety.
   (B)   In the event of an emergency situation, as determined by the Director,
involving an immediate threat to public health and safety, the Director may
direct legal counsel to immediately commence any legal or equitable proceeding
necessary to restrain, abate and/or remedy said situation. The Director may
take such action without having to first issue a notice of violation to the
person(s) having control of, or acting as agent for, such premise where the
nuisance is located, or, waiting for such person(s) to abate or remove such
nuisance as previously ordered by the Director.
   (C)   In all other cases, the Director may notify, in writing, the person(s)
having control of, or acting as agent for, such premises where the nuisance is
located and directing such person(s) to abate or remove such nuisance within
such time as is stated on the notice. Upon the failure or refusal of such
person(s) to comply with the notice, the Director may direct that appropriate
proceeding commence to compel the abatement, or removal, of such a nuisance in
any manner allowed by law, equity or this article and/or authorizing the
Department to act to abate, or remove, such nuisance. The person(s) having
control of such premises, in addition to the other remedies provided by this
article, shall be liable to the Department for any costs incurred by the
Department to effect such abatement, or removal, including reasonable
attorney’s fees and other costs of enforcement, to be recovered by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2020-11-41, passed 11-16-2020)
§ 13-21-20 FINES.
   Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon a finding
that a violation has occurred, be fined not more than $750 each day, or any
portion of a day, during which such violation is committed, continued or
permitted shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
(Ord. 2020-11-41, passed 11-16-2020)
§ 13-21-21 REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedy
available under this article or under any applicable federal, state or local
law and do not supersede or limit, any and all other penalties provided by law.
The Director may seek, at his or her discretion, cumulative remedies.
(Ord. 2020-11-41, passed 11-16-2020)
§ 13-21-22 SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS DUE TO DETECTION OF ILLICIT DISCHARGES.
   (A)   Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may
have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an
illicit discharge. The Department shall notify a violator of the proposed
termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the Department for a
reconsideration and hearing. A person commits an offense if the person
reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without
the prior approval of the Department.
   (B)   In emergency situations, the Department may, without prior notice,
suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to
stop an actual or threatened discharge, which presents or may present imminent
and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of
persons, or to the MS4, storm drainage system or waters of the United States.
If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency,
the Department may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize
damage to the MS4, storm drainage system or waters of the United States, or to
minimize danger to public health and safety. The Department shall obtain an
emergency court order authorizing such termination.
(Ord. 2020-11-41, passed 11-16-2020)
§ 13-21-23 RIGHT TO APPEAL.
   (A)   Every request for an appeal shall be made, in writing, to the
Director. The Director may delegate the hearing of appeals to the Oversight
Committee in the manner provided for below.
   (B)   Any person aggrieved by any decision, ruling or determination by the
Director, or by any interpretation or application of any provision of this
article, may appeal such matter. An appeal of any decision made by the Director
shall be made within seven days of the decision contested, excepting an appeal
involving the assessment charge or calculation of any fine or penalty in which
cases which an appeal shall be brought before said amount becomes 30 days past
due.
      (1)   The appeal procedure shall commence when the person aggrieved
notifies the Director, in writing, of the intent to appeal the decision of the
Director. Such notice shall contain a short, clear statement stating the
following:
         (a)   Identifying the decision of the Director which such person is
appealing and how this article has been misread, misinterpreted or misapplied
in this instance and/or any mistakes of fact the aggrieved believes the
Director to have relied upon; and
         (b)   The name and both a mailing address and a telephone number of
the person making the request, which contact information shall be used
for giving notices related to the appeal. The person making the request shall
attach all written materials on which he or she intends to rely upon in support
of the request.
      (2)   The Director may, without conducting a hearing, grant relief sought
by the appeal, or may set the matter over for a hearing in the manner provided
in division (B)(3) below.
      (3)   Upon receipt of such notice of appeal, if relief is not granted by
the Director in accordance with division (B)(2) above, the Director shall set a
date for a hearing. Such hearing shall take place no fewer than 14 days, nor
more than 30 days, from the date that the Director receives such notice of
appeal unless the Director and party requesting the hearing agree to a
different schedule. The Director shall notify the person making the appeal of
the date of such hearing.
      (4)   At the hearing, the person making the appeal may appear in person
or represented by counsel, or submit his case in writing. The decision
concerning the appeal shall be in writing, shall be communicated to the person
making the appeal and shall state a finding upon which the decision is based.
   (C)   The Oversight Committee shall have the authority to reverse, modify or
affirm any decision, ruling or determination by the Director made pursuant to
this article upon appeal. The Oversight Committee shall not act in a manner
that would violate or in any way conflict with any federal or state standard or
requirement. The Village Board may adopt such additional rules and procedures,
as it deems appropriate for performing such matters.
   (D)   The decision of the Oversight Committee may be appealed to the Village
Board in accord with the Village Board rules. The Village Board may determine
that it wishes to advance a particular appeal directly to the Village Board and
to by-pass the process before the Oversight Committee. In making such a
determination, the Village Board shall establish the timing and process for the
direct appeal.
(Ord. 2020-11-41, passed 11-16-2020)
§ 13-21-24 ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL.
   If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation or, in the event of an appeal, within seven
days of the decision of the Director, Oversight Committee or the Village Board,
in the case of a direct appeal, upholding the decision of the Department, then
representatives of the Department are authorized to take any and all measures
necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. In no case shall
an appeal stay or bar the village from commencing a legal action seeking
emergency relief.
(Ord. 2020-11-41, passed 11-16-2020)
§ 13-21-25 SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this article or the application
thereof to any person, establishment or circumstances shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this
article.
(Ord. 2020-11-41, passed 11-16-2020)
§ 13-21-26 MOST RESTRICTIVE PROVISIONS APPLY.
   (A)   The provisions of this article shall be interpreted to be cumulative
of, and to impose limitations in addition to, all other ordinances, laws, codes
and regulations in existence or which may be passed governing any subject
matter of this article. To the greatest extent possible, the provisions of this
article shall be construed to be consistent with, and not in conflict with, the
provisions of such other ordinances, laws, codes and regulations, and with each
other, to the end that all such provisions may be given their fullest
application.
   (B)   This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance,
rule, regulation or other provision of law. Where any provision of this article
imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule,
regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive
or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment
shall control.
(Ord. 2020-11-41, passed 11-16-2020)
§ 13-21-27 ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY.
   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are
minimum standards; therefore, this article does not intend or imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution or unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
(Ord. 2020-11-41, passed 11-16-2020)
CHAPTER 14: GENERAL OFFENSES
      Article
         
1.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
         
2.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
         
3.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER
         
4.   MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
         
5.   ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
ARTICLE 1: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
   
14-1-1   Definitions
   
14-1-2   Animals; injury to
   
14-1-3   Criminal defacement to property; graffiti
   
14-1-4   Destruction of property
   
14-1-5   Defacing notices
   
14-1-6   Criminal trespass
   
14-1-7   Theft
   
14-1-8   Retail theft prohibited
   
14-1-9   Receiving stolen property
   
14-1-10   Appropriation of lost or misdelivered property
   
14-1-11   Extortion
   
14-1-12   Reckless burning
   
14-1-13   Vehicles; abandonment
   
14-1-14   Vehicles; inoperable
   
14-1-15   Vehicles; unauthorized use of
   
14-1-16   Penalty
   
14-1-17   Liability of parent or legal guardian of minor offender
§ 14-1-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. All vehicles in a state of disrepair rendering the
vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition, or any vehicle that has not
been moved or used for seven consecutive days or more and is apparently
deserted.
   BUILDING. Any structure, vehicle, railway car, aircraft or watercraft used
for lodging, business or industry.
   CREDIT CARD. Any instrument or device, whether incomplete, revoked or
expired, whether known as a credit card, credit plate, charge plate, courtesy
card or by any other name, issued with or without fee for the use of the
cardholder in obtaining money, goods, services or anything else of value,
including satisfaction of a debt or the payment of a check drawn by a
cardholder, either on credit or in consideration of an undertaking or guaranty
by the issuer.
   DAMAGE. An injury or harm to property sufficient to lower its value or
involving significant inconvenience or loss of efficiency.
   DECEPTION.
      (1)   Occurs when a person knowingly:
         (a)   Creates or confirms another’s false impression which the person
previously has created or confirmed;
         (b)   Fails to correct another’s false impression which the person
previously has created or confirmed;
         (c)   Prevents another from acquiring information material to the
disposition of the property involved;
         (d)   Transfers or encumbers property without disclosing a lien,
adverse claim or other legal impediment to the enjoyment of the property,
whether that impediment is or is not valid, or is not a matter of official
record;
         (e)   Promises performance which the person does not intend to perform
or knows will not be performed; or
         (f)   Uses a credit card without authorization or which he or she
knows to be stolen, forged, revoked or canceled.
      (2)   The term DECEPTION does not include falsity as to matters having no
pecuniary significance.
   ENTER OR REMAIN UNLAWFULLY. An unlicenced, uninvited or otherwise
unprivileged entry into or remaining in or upon premises. A person who,
regardless of his or her intent, enters or remains in or upon premises which
are, at the time, open to the public does so with license and privilege unless
he or she defies a lawful order not to enter or remain, personally communicated
to him or her by the owner of the premises or some other authorized person.
Permission to enter or remain in a public building which is only partly open to
the public is not PERMISSION TO ENTER OR REMAIN in that part of the building
which is not open to the public.
   FULL RETAIL VALUE. The merchant’s stated or advertised price of the
merchandise.
   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicles from which, for a period of at
least 30 days, the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed, or on which
the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise
treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor
power. INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE shall not include a motor vehicle which has
been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own power in
order to perform ordinary service or repair operations; nor to any motor
vehicles that are kept within a building when not in use; nor to historic
vehicles over 25 years of age; nor to a motor vehicle on the premises of a
place of business engaged in wrecking or junking of motor vehicles.
   LEGAL GUARDIAN. A person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor by a
Circuit Court of the state, but does not include a person appointed guardian or
given custody of a minor under the Juvenile Court Act, being 705 ILCS 405/1-
1 et seq.
   MERCHANDISE. Any item of tangible personal property.
   MERCHANT. An owner or operator of any retail mercantile establishment or any
agent, employee, lessee, consignee, officer, director, franchisee or
independent contractor of such owner or operator.
   MINOR. A person who is above the age of 11 years, but not yet 19 years of
age.
   OBTAIN.
      (1)   In relation to property, to bring about a transfer or purported
transfer to the obtainer or another of a legally recognized interest in the
property; or
      (2)   In relation to labor or service, to secure performance thereof for
the benefit of the obtainer or another.
   OBTAIN OR EXERTS UNAUTHORIZED CONTROL OVER PROPERTY. Includes, but is not
necessarily limited to, conduct heretofore defined or known as common law theft
by trespassory taking, common law theft by trick, theft by conversion,
embezzlement, extortion or obtaining property by false pretenses.
   OWNER. Any person, other than the person who has possession of or any other
interest in the property involved, and without whose consent the person has no
authority to exert control over the property.
   PEACE OFFICER. Any person who, by virtue of his or her office or public
employment is vested in law with a duty to maintain public order or to make
arrests for an offense whether that duty extends to all offenses or is limited
to specific offenses.
   PERMANENTLY TO DEPRIVE.
      (1)   To withhold property, or cause it to be withheld from a person
permanently or for so extended a period or under such circumstances that the
major portion of its economic value, or of the use and benefit of such
property, is lost to him or her;
      (2)   To dispose of the property so as to make it unlikely that the owner
will recover it;
      (3)   To retain the property with intent to restore it to the owner only
if the owner purchases or leases it back, or pays a reward or other
compensation for its return; or
      (4)   To encumber, sell, give, pledge or otherwise transfer any interest
in the property.
   PREMISES. A building or real property.
   PREMISES OF A RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT. Includes, but is not limited
to, the retail mercantile establishment, any common use areas in shopping
centers and all parking areas set aside by a merchant or on behalf of a
merchant for the parking of vehicles for the convenience of the patrons of such
retail mercantile establishment.
   PROPERTY. Any money, credit card, personal property, real property, thing in
action, evidence of debt or contract, public record or article of value of any
kind.
   RECEIVING. Includes, but is not limited to, acquiring title, possession,
control or a security interest in the property.
   RETAIL MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT. Any place where merchandise is displayed,
held, stored or offered for sale to the public.
   RETAIL THEFT. Limited to knowingly taking possession of merchandise, the
full retail value of which does not exceed $150.
   SERVICE. Includes, but is not limited to, labor, professional service,
transportation service, the supplying of hotel accommodations, restaurant
services, entertainment, the supplying of equipment for use, and the supplying
of commodities of a public utility nature such as gas, electricity, steam and
water.
   SHOPPING CART. Those push carts of the type or types which are commonly
provided by grocery stores, drug stores or other retail mercantile
establishments for the use of the public in trans-porting commodities in stores
and markets and, incidentally, from the stores to a place outside the store.
   STEAL.
      (1)   To knowingly obtain or exert unauthorized control over the property
of another with intent permanently to deprive him or her of such property; or
      (2)   To knowingly obtain by deception control over property of another
with intent permanently to deprive him or her of such property.
   STOLEN. Obtained by theft, robbery, extortion or appropriating lost or
misdelivered property.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
   THREAT. To communicate, directly or indirectly, the intent:
      (1)   To cause bodily injury in the future to another;
      (2)   To cause damage to property of another;
      (3)   To subject another person to physical confinement or restraint;
      (4)   To accuse another person of a crime or cause criminal charges to be
instituted against another person;
      (5)   To expose a secret or publicize an asserted fact, whether true or
false, tending to subject another person to hatred, contempt or ridicule;
      (6)   To reveal significant information sought to be concealed by the
person threatened;
      (7)   To testify or provide information sought to be concealed by the
person threatened;
      (8)   To take wrongful action as an official against anyone or anything,
or wrongfully withhold official action, or cause such action or withholding; or
      (9)   To do any other act which is intended to harm substantially any
person with respect to his or her health, safety, business, financial condition
or personal relationship.
   TO CONCEAL MERCHANDISE. Although there may be some notice of its presence,
that merchandise is not visible through ordinary observation.
   UNDER-RING. To cause the cash register or other sales recording device to
reflect less than the full retail value of the merchandise.
   VEHICLE. A machine propelled by power other than human power designed to
travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and
transport persons of property or pull machinery and shall include, without
limitation, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and wagon.
§ 14-1-2 ANIMALS; INJURY TO.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to kill or wound, or attempt to kill or
wound, by use of a firearm, slingshot, bow and arrow or otherwise, any animal
other than vermin or an animal which is causing imminent danger to the health
of a person or of property.
§ 14-1-3 CRIMINAL DEFACEMENT TO PROPERTY; GRAFFITI.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      GRAFFITI. In addition to its usual and customary meaning of defacing
walls or structures with messages or slogans, GRAFFITI shall also mean any
letter, numeral, figure, emblem, insignia, picture, outline, character,
spectacle, delineation, announcement, word, phrase, diagram, symbol, sketch,
inscription or representation, wherein the contents thereof are visible to any
member of the general public and which contains references to sexual activity,
diagrams relating to sexual activity or sexual organs, references to criminal
activities or groups which promote or are involved in criminal activity,
swearing or fighting words, defamatory materials about any person, references
to relationships or any marking of any kind whatsoever which results in damage
to, defacing of, marring of or discoloring of any sidewalk, street or other
public surface, any vehicle, any equipment, lamp, lamp post or other village
property, or of the exterior surface of a wall, fence, door, building or other
structure, whether publicly or privately owned.
      OWNER. The owner of record of the subject property, whether public or
private, at the time of the placement or discovery of the graffiti or at a
subsequent time, the beneficial owner under a land trust, the contract
purchaser or that person or persons or trust in whose name the general taxes
for the last preceding year were paid; except that, OWNER shall not include the
Village of Carol Stream.
      PROPERTY. Any building, structure, wall, sidewalk, street or other public
or private road, vehicle, equipment, land, lamp post, sign or any other real or
personal property on which graffiti is placed.
   (B)   Conduct prohibited.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person to inscribe, draw or otherwise place
or cause to be placed any graffiti upon the surface of any property that is
publicly or privately owned.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any parent or legal guardian to knowingly
permit any minor child in his or her custody or control to violate division (B)
(1) of this section.
      (3)   The parent or legal guardian of a minor defendant who resides with
such parent or legal guardian at the time of the offense may be held liable for
any fine or condition of restitution or reparation imposed by a court upon a
minor for violation of this section; provided that, such minor has not paid
such fine or made restitution or reparation within the time ordered by the
court; and, further provided that, such parent or legal guardian has been
served with summons or notice to appear whether in the original cause or in any
subsequent proceedings arising therefrom, including sentencing or collection
actions, as provided by law.
   (C)   Removal by owner.
      (1)   Owner’s responsibility. It shall be the duty of the owner of the
private property upon which any graffiti is placed or made to remove, eradicate
or eliminate such inscription or representation within ten days of the
occurrence unless granted additional time by the village. In no event shall the
owner be granted more than 30 days to remove the graffiti. The BOCA National
Existing Structures Code, adopted and amended by the village as provided in
Ch. 6 of this code, shall also govern where applicable, except that in the
event of a conflict between the code and this section, this section shall
prevail.
      (2)   Notice to remove graffiti. The owner or his, her or their
representative shall be notified by certified mail or personal notice that they
have ten days, from the date of the delivery of the notice or personal
notification, in which to remove the graffiti. In no event shall the owner of
the property be granted more than 30 days to remove the graffiti, weather
conditions permitting as reasonably determined by the village. The owner is
responsible for removal within the time allowed in divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2)
of this section. In the event the owner has failed to eliminate such graffiti,
a village ordinance complaint will be issued to the owner of the property
according to the provisions in division (E)(1) of this section. If criminal
charges have been filed against the person believed responsible for placement
of the graffiti, the costs to remove the graffiti shall be presented to the
prosecutor for restitution to the owner of the property in addition to the
penalties as described in division (E)(1) of this section.
      (3)   List of contractors and cleaning materials. The village may make
available a list of contractors in the business of removing graffiti and/or a
list of cleaning materials generally recognized in the industry as effective in
the removal of graffiti. By providing such lists of contractors and cleaning
materials, the village does not guarantee the quality or adequacy of work
performed by anyone selected by owner or the effectiveness or safety of the
materials listed, and the village expressly disclaims responsibility or
liability for the quality or adequacy of such work or materials or any claims
for damage or injury arising therefrom.
   (D)   Removal by village.
      (1)   The village shall have the right, but not the duty, to remove
graffiti from the exterior of private property if the owner informs the village
of an inability to remove it. Prior to the village entering any private
property to remove graffiti, the owner must sign a statement authorizing
removal by the village and agreeing to pay the reasonable costs of such removal
and to allow the recording of a lien against the real estate upon which the
work was performed if the cost is not paid to the village within 30 days of the
date of the invoice sent to the owner. The owner must also sign a release
holding the village harmless from any claims or suits brought for damages
pursuant to any adverse or injurious effects of such chemicals or from the
actions taken by the village or its employees to remove the graffiti prior to
the village commencing work on the property. If the village determines they
cannot remove the graffiti, the responsibility of the removal is reinstated to
the owner for the owner. A certified letter will be sent to the owner of the
property so advising. If the property owner does not remove the graffiti within
the time specified or extended time requested and granted by the village, the
owner shall be subject to the penalties listed in division (E) of this section.
      (2)   If the property owner is not located or they are unavailable and
normal attempts to notify the owner have been made, after 14 days after the
time of the discovery of the graffiti the village shall have the right, but not
the duty to remove the graffiti from the exterior or private property. A notice
will be left at the property and a certified letter sent to the property owner
of record advising them of the graffiti abatement.
      (3)   If the village performs the graffiti removal pursuant to division
(D)(1) or (D)(2) of this section and if an invoice was is not paid within 30
days, the village shall be entitled to initiate collection actions and file a
notice of lien against the property upon which the work was performed for the
cost of the removal.
   (E)   Penalty.
      (1)   Upon a finding of guilty for violation of division (B) of this
section, there shall be imposed a fine of not less than $100, nor more than
$750. Additionally, the court may, as a condition of probation, supervision or
conditional discharge, require that the party guilty of violating the
provisions of division (B) of this section make full and complete restitution
to the owner of the property for expenses incurred in the removal of the
graffiti and/or, with the consent of the owner, restore the structure, wall,
building or surface to its previous condition. In addition, the court may order
as a further penalty community service in the form of time to be spent in any
location in the village.
      (2)   Upon a finding of guilty for violation of division (C)(1) of this
section, there shall be imposed a fine of not less than $25, nor more than
$750. The minimum fine for any subsequent violation of division (C)(1) of this
section shall be $50. Each and every day that such graffiti is permitted to
remain beyond the time specified in division (C)(2) of this section shall
constitute a separate violation. The village may also ask the court to issue an
order granting the village permission to enter the property and to make an
effort to remove the graffiti and to charge the cost of the removal to the
owner and to permit the village to secure its costs either through an order
directing the owner to pay the costs incurred by or on behalf of the village in
an attempt to remove the graffiti, or to file a lien against the property.
   (F)   Compliance by village.
      (1)   It is the intention of the village that graffiti discovered upon
village property or public property under the jurisdiction and control of the
village will be removed within the time periods for graffiti removal imposed
upon other governmental bodies and owners of private property under this
article.
      (2)   The Village Manager or his or her designee shall provide, no less
than semi-annually, a written report to the Village Board of graffiti incidents
involving village property and removal efforts by the village. Such report
shall include at a minimum the location of the graffiti, charges filed against
or convictions of offenders where relevant, the date and methods of graffiti
removal undertaken by the village and the cost of such removal.
(Ord. 93-10-91, passed 10-12-1993; Ord. 2009-03-09, passed 3-2-2009)
§ 14-1-4 DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to negligently or willfully injure,
damage, destroy or deface the property of another, including property of the
village.
(Ord. 93-10-91, passed 10-12-1993)
§ 14-1-5 DEFACING NOTICES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and maliciously tear down,
mutilate, place graffiti upon, or deface or render in part or in whole
illegible any poster, notice or handbill lawfully posted in the village.
§ 14-1-6 CRIMINAL TRESPASS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly enter or remain
unlawfully in or upon the premises of another. Any of the following acts by any
person, firm or corporation shall be deemed included among those that
constitute trespass, and appropriate action may be taken to prevent or suppress
any violation of this section, including the following acts:
      (1)   Entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, of another, including
any public property in violation of a notice posted or exhibited at such
premises, or at any point of approach or entry or in violation of any notice,
warning or protest given orally or in writing, by any owner or occupant
thereof;
      (2)   The pursuit of a course of conduct or action incidental to the
making of an entry upon the land of another in violation of a notice posted or
exhibited at the main entrance to such premises or at any point of approach or
entry, or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given orally or in
writing by any owner or occupant thereof;
      (3)   A failure or refusal to depart from the premises of another in case
of being requested, either orally or in writing, to leave by any owner or
occupant thereof; and
      (4)   An entry into or upon any vehicle, aircraft or watercraft made
without the consent of the person having the right to the possession or control
thereof, or a failure or refusal to leave any such vehicle, aircraft or
watercraft after being requested to leave by the person having such right.
   (B)   In any prosecution under this section, it is an affirmative defense
that the person reasonably believed that:
      (1)   The premises involved at the time were open to members of the
public and the person complied with all lawful conditions imposed on access to
or remaining on the premises; or
      (2)   The owner of the premises, or other person empowered to license
access thereto, would have licensed him or her to enter or remain.
§ 14-1-7 THEFT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to:
      (1)   Steal the property of another;
      (2)   By deception or by other means to avoid payment for services or
intentionally obtain services which the person knows to be available only for
compensation; and/or
      (3)   Have control over the disposition of services of others to which
the person is not entitled. Such person knowingly diverts those services to his
or her own benefit or to the benefit of another not entitled thereto.
   (B)   In any prosecution under this section, it is an affirmative defense
that the property or services were openly obtained under a claim of title made
in good faith, even though the claim would not prevail in a court of law.
Statutory reference:  
   Prohibiting theft, see 720 ILCS 5/16-1 et seq.
§ 14-1-8 RETAIL THEFT PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Offense. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit retail theft. A
person commits the offense of retail when he or she knowingly:
      (1)   Takes possession of, carries away, transfers or causes to be
carried away or transferred, any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered
for sale in a retail mercantile establishment without paying the full retail
value of such merchandise;
      (2)   Alters, transfers or removes any labels, price tags, markings,
indicia of value or any other markings which aid in determining value affixed
to any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale, in a retail
mercantile establishment and attempts to purchase such merchandise personally
or in consort with another at less than the full retail value;
      (3)   Transfers any merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for
sale, in a retail mercantile establishment from the container in or on which
such merchandise is displayed to any other container;
      (4)   Under-rings the full retail value of merchandise;
      (5)   Removes a shopping cart from the premises of a retail mercantile
establishment without the consent of the merchant given at the time of such
removal; or
      (6)   Orders food, drink or other consumable items and once having been
presented with the finished item, consumes such item without paying for such
item with the intention of depriving the merchant of the full retail value of
such item.
   (B)   Presumption. If any person meets both of the following criteria, such
person shall be presumed to have possessed, carried away or transferred
merchandise with the intention of retaining it or with the intention of
depriving the merchant permanently of the possession, use or benefit of such
merchandise without paying the full retail value of such merchandise:
      (1)   Conceals upon his or her person or among his or her belongings
unpurchased merchandise displayed, held, stored or offered for sale in a retail
mercantile establishment; and
      (2)   Removes that merchandise beyond the last known station for
receiving payments for that merchandise in that retail mercantile
establishment.
Statutory reference:  
   Provisions concerning retail theft, see 720 ILCS 5/16-25 et seq.
§ 14-1-9 RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to receive stolen property if a
person knowingly receives, retains or disposes of property.
   (B)   The fact that the person who stole the property has not been
convicted, apprehended or identified is not a defense to a charge of receiving
stolen property.
§ 14-1-10 APPROPRIATION OF LOST OR MISDELIVERED PROPERTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to appropriate lost or
misdelivered property if a person obtains or exerts control over the property
of another which the person knows to have been lost or mislaid, or to have been
delivered under a mistake as to the identity of the recipient or as to the
nature or amount of the property, and the person fails to take reasonable
measures to discover and notify the owner.
   (B)   As used in this section, REASONABLE MEASURE includes, but is not
necessarily limited to, notifying the identified owner or any peace officer.
§ 14-1-11 EXTORTION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally obtain property
or services of another by threat.
   (B)   In any prosecution under this section based on a threat to accuse any
person of a crime or to cause criminal charges to be instituted against any
person, it is an affirmative defense that the person reasonably believed the
threatened criminal charge to be true and that his or her sole purpose was to
compel or induce the person threatened to take reasonable action to make good
the wrong which was the subject of such threatened criminal charge.
§ 14-1-12 RECKLESS BURNING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to recklessly, by means of fire or
explosion, damage property of another or place the property of another in
danger of destruction or damage.
§ 14-1-13 VEHICLES; ABANDONMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any vehicle within the
village, and no person shall leave such vehicle at any place within the village
for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably
to appear to have been abandoned. A vehicle or any part thereof so abandoned on
private property, not belonging to the owner or tenant of such property, may be
authorized for removal by the Village Police Department after a waiting period
of seven days or more has expired.
§ 14-1-14 VEHICLES; INOPERABLE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any inoperable motor vehicle on
any street or highway in the village.
§ 14-1-15 VEHICLES; UNAUTHORIZED USE OF.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   (A)   Take, operate or exercise control over a motor vehicle of which the
person does not have the consent of the owner to so act;
   (B)   Ride in a vehicle which the person knows has been unlawfully obtained;
and/or
   (C)   Have custody of a motor vehicle pursuant to an agreement between
himself, herself or another and the owner thereof whereby he, she or another is
to perform for compensation a specific service for the owner, involving the
maintenance, repair or use or storage of such vehicle, he or she intentionally
uses or operates the same, without the consent of the owner, for his or her own
purposes in a manner constituting a gross deviation from the agreed purpose.
§ 14-1-16 PENALTY.
   Subject to the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.1, every person found guilty of
violating §§
14-1-4 or
14-1-6 of this article shall be subject to either or both of the following
penalties:
   (A)   A fine not in excess of $750; and/or
   (B)   A period of conditional discharge not to exceed six months.
      (1)   The conditions of a conditional discharge shall include that the
defendant:
         (a)   Not violate any criminal statute or quasi-criminal ordinance of
any jurisdiction; and
         (b)   Report to and appear in person before such person or agency as
directed by the court.
      (2)   The conditions of conditional discharge may, in addition, require
that the defendant:
         (a)   Work or pursue a course of study or vocational training;
         (b)   Undergo medical or psychiatric treatment for drug addiction or
alcoholism;
         (c)   Make restitution or reparation in an amount not to exceed actual
loss or damage to property and pecuniary loss; and
         (d)   If a minor, to reside with his or her parent or in a foster
home, attend school, attend a non-residential program for youth, or contribute
to his or her own support at home or in a foster home.
      (3)   When a court orders restitution or reparation as a condition of
conditional discharge, the court shall determine the amount and conditions of
payment. When the conditions of payment have not been satisfied, the court at
any time prior to the expiration or termination of the period of conditional
discharge may impose an additional period of not more than six months. Only the
conditions of payment shall continue to apply during such additional period.
The court shall retain all of the incidents of the original sentence, including
the authority to modify or enlarge the original conditions to revoke the
penalty of the conditional discharge if the conditions of payment are violated
during such additional period.
      (4)   When a petition is filed charging a violation of a condition
imposed for conditional discharge, the court:
         (a)   May order a summons to the offender to appear, or order a
warrant for the offender’s arrest where there is danger of his or her fleeing
the jurisdiction or causing serious harm to others or when the offender fails
to answer a summons. The issuance of such warrant or summons shall stay the
sentence of conditional discharge until the final determination of the charge,
and the term of conditional discharge shall not run so long as the offender has
not answered the summons or warrant;
         (b)   Shall conduct a hearing of the alleged violation. The court may
admit the offender to bail pending the hearing;
         (c)   Shall receive evidence in open court with the right of
confrontation, cross-examination and representation by counsel. The village has
the burden of going forward with the evidence and proving the violation by the
preponderance of the evidence;
         (d)   Shall not revoke a conditional discharge for failure to comply
with conditions of a sentence which imposes financial obligations upon the
offender unless such failure is due to his or her willful refusal to pay; and
         (e)   May modify the conditions of a conditional discharge on motion
of the village or on its own motion or at the request of the offender after
notice to all parties and a hearing.
      (5)   If the court finds that the offender has violated a condition at
any time prior to the expiration or termination of the period, it may continue
the offender on the existing period, with or without modifying or enlarging the
conditions, or may impose any other penalty that was available at the time of
the initial penalty.
      (6)   A judgement revoking conditional discharge is a final appealable
order.
§ 14-1-17 LIABILITY OF PARENT OR LEGAL GUARDIAN OF MINOR OFFENDER.
   The parent or legal guardian of a minor defendant who resides with such
parent or legal guardian shall be liable for any fine or condition of
restitution or reparation imposed by a court upon a minor for actual damages
for willful or malicious acts of such minor which cause injury to a person or
property, provided that such minor has not paid such fine or made restitution
or reparation within the time ordered by the court, and further provided that
such parent or legal guardian has been served with summons or notice to appear
in the original cause and all proceedings thereafter as provided by law.
ARTICLE 2: OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
Section
   
14-2-1   Definitions
   
14-2-2   Assault
   
14-2-3   Battery
   
14-2-4   Cannabis; possession of
   
14-2-5   Housing management; reckless
   
14-2-6   Expectorating on sidewalk or in public place
   
14-2-7   Gambling; definitions
   
14-2-8   Gambling offenses
   
14-2-9   Keeping a gambling place
   
14-2-10   Seizure of gambling devices and gambling funds
   
14-2-11   Impersonation
   
14-2-12   Impersonation; impersonating and interfering with village officers
   
14-2-13   Pollution
   
14-2-14   Pollution; creating odors
   
14-2-15   Pollution; noises generally
   
14-2-16   Pollution; noises defined, prohibited
   
14-2-17   Adoption of the State of Illinois noise pollution control regulations
   
14-2-18   Prostitution
   
14-2-19   Prostitution; soliciting for
   
14-2-20   Prostitution; keeping a place of
   
14-2-21   Prostitution; patronizing
   
14-2-22   Indecency; public
   
14-2-23   Indecency; nudity
   
14-2-24   Indecency; indecent exhibition of animals
   
14-2-25   Lewd conduct
   
14-2-26   Obscenity; elements of the offense
   
14-2-27   Obscenity; interpretation of evidence
   
14-2-28   Obscenity; prima facie evidence
   
14-2-29   Obscenity; affirmative defense
   
14-2-30   Harmful material
   
14-2-31   Purchase and possession of tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products and electronic cigarettes by a person under 21 years of age prohibited
   
14-2-32   Drug paraphernalia
   
14-2-33   Hemp-derived cannabinoids, kratom and synthetic alternative drugs
   
14-2-34   Endangering the life or health of a child
   
14-2-35   Powdered alcohol
   
14-2-36   Alcohol vaporizers
   
14-2-37   Electronic sweepstakes machines
   
14-2-38   Cannabis; unlawful use of
   
14-2-39   Cannabis paraphernalia; possession of
§ 14-2-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CANNABIS. Marijuana, hashish, and other substances that are identified as
including any parts of the plant Cannabis sativa and including derivatives or
subspecies, such as indica, of all strains of cannabis, whether growing or not;
the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and any
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant,
its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other
naturally produced cannabinol derivatives, whether produced directly or
indirectly by extraction; however, "cannabis" does not include the mature
stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the
seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture,
or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted from it),
fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of
germination. "Cannabis" does not include industrial hemp as defined and
authorized under the Illinois Industrial Hemp Act. CANNABIS also means cannabis
flower, concentrate, and cannabis-infused products. (410 ILCS 705/1-10).
   CANNABIS CONCENTRATE. A product derived from cannabis that is produced by
extracting cannabinoids from the plant through the use of propylene glycol,
glycerin, butter, olive oil or other typical cooking fats; water, ice, or dry
ice; or butane, propane, CO2, ethanol, or isopropanol. The use of any other
solvent is expressly prohibited unless and until it is approved by the Illinois
Department of Agriculture (410 ILCS 705/1-10).
   CANNABIS CONTAINER. A sealed, traceable, container, or package used for the
purpose of containment of cannabis or cannabis-infused product during
transportation (410 ILCS 705/1-10).
   CANNABIS FLOWER. Marijuana, hashish, and other substances that are
identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis sativa and including
derivatives or subspecies, such as indicia, of all strains of cannabis;
including raw kief, leaves, and buds, but not resin that has been extracted
from any part of such plant; nor any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative,
mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seed, or resin (410 ILCS 705/1-10).
   CANNABIS PARAPHERNALIA. Equipment, products, or materials intended to be
used for planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, ingesting, or otherwise
introducing cannabis into the human body (410 ILCS 705/1-10).
   CANNABIS-INFUSED PRODUCT. A beverage, food, oil, ointment, tincture, topical
formulation, or another product containing cannabis that is not intended to be
smoked (410 ILCS 705/1-10).
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. The meaning ascribed to it in § 102 of the Illinois
Controlled Substances Act, 720 ILCS 570/102, as if that definition were
incorporated herein.
   DELIVER or DELIVERY. The actual, constructive or attempted transfer of
possession, with or without consideration, whether or not there is an agency
relationship.
   DISTRIBUTE. To transfer possession of, whether with or without
consideration.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. All equipment, products and materials of any kind, other
than methamphetamine manufacturing materials as defined in Section 10 of the
Illinois Methamphetamine Control and Community Protection Act and cannabis
paraphernalia as defined in Section 1-10 of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax
Act, which are intended to be used unlawfully in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the
Illinois Controlled Substance Act or the Methamphetamine Control and Community
Protection Act or a synthetic drug product or misbranded drug in violation of
the Illinois Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act. The term DRUG PARAPHERNALIA includes,
but is not limited to:
      (1)   Kits intended to be used unlawfully in manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing or preparing a controlled substance;
      (2)   Isomerization devices intended to be used unlawfully in increasing
the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance;
      (3)   Testing equipment intended to be used unlawfully in a private home
for identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
controlled substances;
      (4)   Diluents and adulterants intended to be used unlawfully for cutting
a controlled substance by private persons;
      (5)   Objects intended to be used unlawfully in ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing cocaine or a synthetic drug product or misbranded drug in
violation of the Illinois Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act into the human body
including, where applicable, the following items:
         (a)   Water pipes;
         (b)   Carburetion tubes and devices;
         (c)   Smoking and carburetion masks;
         (d)   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
         (e)   Carburetor pipes;
         (f)   Electric pipes;
         (g)   Chillums;
         (h)   Bongs;
         (i)   Ice pipes or chillers;
         (j)   Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by the seller,
is for the use in violation of the Illinois Drug Paraphernalia Control Act (720
ILCS 600).
   HARMFUL MATERIAL. The material is harmful if, to the average person,
applying contemporary standards, its predominant appeal, taken as a whole, is
to the prurient interest, that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex
or excretion, which goes substantially beyond customary limits of candor in
description or representation of such matters, and is material the redeeming
social importance of which is substantially less than its prurient appeal.
   INTENT TO DEFRAUD. The use of deception with the intention to injure
another’s interest which has economic value.
   KNOWINGLY. Having knowledge of the content of the subject matter, or
recklessly failing to exercise reasonable inspection which would have disclosed
the contents thereof.
   LEWD ACT.
      (1)   An exposure of one’s genitals or female breasts;
      (2)   The touching, caressing or fondling of the genitals or female
breasts;
      (3)   Sexual intercourse;
      (4)   Masturbation; and
      (5)   Urination or defecation in a place other than a toilet or urinal.
   MATERIAL. Any writing, picture, record or other representation of
embodiment.
   OBSCENE. Any material or performance is OBSCENE if:
      (1)   The average person, applying contemporary adult community
standards, would find that, taken as a whole, it appeals to the prurient
interest;
      (2)   The average person, applying contemporary adult community
standards, would find that it depicts or describes, in a patently offensive
way, ultimate sexual acts or sadomasochistic sexual acts, whether normal or
perverted, actual or simulated, or masturbation, excretory functions or lewd
exhibition of the genitals; and
      (3)   Taken as a whole it lacks serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific value.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place where the conduct may reasonably be expected to be
viewed by others.
   TOBACCO PRODUCTS. Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but not
limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or dipping
tobacco, and any nicotine delivery systems other than those prescribed by a
physician.
(Ord. 95-04-19, passed 4-4-1995; Ord. 2020-01- 01, passed 1-20-2020)
§ 14-2-2 ASSAULT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an assault within the
village.
   (B)   A person commits an assault when, without lawful authority, he or she
engages in conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of receiving
a battery.
§ 14-2-3 BATTERY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a battery within the
village.
   (B)   A person commits a battery if he or she intentionally or knowingly
without legal justification and by any means:
      (1)   Causes bodily harm to an individual; or
      (2)   Makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an
individual.
§ 14-2-4 CANNABIS; POSSESSION OF.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess any quantity
of any substance containing cannabis while:
      (1)   In a school bus, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or
caregiver pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act;
      (2)   On the grounds of any preschool or primary or secondary school,
unless permitted for a qualifying patient or caregiver pursuant to the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act;
      (3)   In a vehicle not open to the public unless the cannabis is in a
reasonably secured, sealed container and reasonably inaccessible while the
vehicle is moving; or
      (4)   In a private residence that is used at any time to provide licensed
child care or other similar social service care on the premises.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a person who is 21 years of age or older and
a resident of the State of Illinois, except as exempted by the Compassionate
Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act (410 ILCS 130), to be in possession of:
      (1)   More than 30 grams, but less than 100 grams of cannabis flower.
      (2)   More than 500 milligrams of THC contained in cannabis-infused
product.
      (3)   More than five grams of cannabis concentrate.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for a person who is 21 years of age or older and
who is not a resident of the State of Illinois to be in possession of:
      (1)   More than 15 grams, but less than 100 grams of cannabis flower.
      (2)   More than 250 milligrams of THC contained in cannabis-infused
product.
      (3)   More than 2.5 grams of cannabis concentrate.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful or any person under the age of 21 to knowingly
possess any quantity of any substance containing cannabis; except as exempted
by the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act (410 ILCS 130) and 720
ILCS 550/11.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess any quantity
of any substance containing cannabis if said substance was not lawfully
purchased in accordance with the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/
1-5).
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for a person, who is not a registered qualifying
patient under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act, to be in
possession of any amount of cannabis plants.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for a person who is a registered qualifying
patient under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act to be in
possession of more than five cannabis plants that are more than five inches
tall.
(Ord. 2020-01-01, passed 1-20-2020)
§ 14-2-5 HOUSING MANAGEMENT; RECKLESS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the offense of reckless
housing management within the village.
   (B)   A person commits the offense of reckless housing management when,
having personal management or control of residential real estate, whether as a
legal or equitable owner of residential real estate or as a managing agent or
otherwise, he or she recklessly permits the physical condition or facilities of
the residential real estate to become or remain in any condition which
endangers the health or safety of any person.
§ 14-2-6 EXPECTORATING ON SIDEWALK OR IN PUBLIC PLACE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to expectorate or spit upon any sidewalk
or within any building or room to which the public is invited, except for the
wash basins and toilets therein.
§ 14-2-7 GAMBLING; DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.
   ACCESS. The same meaning as ascribed in 720 ILCS 5/17-55.
   COMPUTER. The same meaning as ascribed in 720 ILCS 5/ 17-0.5.
   GAMBLING DEVICE. Any clock, tape machine, slot machine or other machines or
device for the reception of money or other thing of value on chance or skill or
upon the action of which money or other thing of value is staked, hazarded,
bet, won, or lost; or any mechanism, furniture, fixture, equipment or other
device designed primarily for use in a gambling place. A GAMBLING DEVICE does
not include:
      (1)   A coin-in-the-slot operated mechanical device played for amusement
which rewards the player with the right to replay such mechanical device, which
device is so constructed or devised as to make such result of the operation
thereof depend in part upon the skill of the player and which returns to the
player thereof no money, property or right to receive money or property.
      (2)   Vending machines by which full and adequate return is made for the
money invested and in which there is no element of chance or hazard.
      (3)   A crane game. For the purposes of this division (3), a CRANE GAME
is an amusement device involving skill, if it rewards the player exclusively
with merchandise contained within the amusement device proper and limited to
toys, novelties and prizes other than currency, each having a wholesale value
which is not more than $25.
      (4)   A redemption machine. For the purposes of this division (4), a
REDEMPTION MACHINE is a single-player or multi-player amusement device
involving a game, the object of which is throwing, rolling, bowling, shooting,
placing, or propelling a ball or other object that is either physical or
computer generated on a display or with lights into, upon, or against a hole or
other target that is either physical or computer generated on a display or with
lights, or stopping, by physical, mechanical, or electronic means, a moving
object that is either physical or computer generated on a display  or with
lights into, upon, or against a hole or other target that is either physical or
computer generated on a display or with lights, provided that all of the
following conditions are met:
         (a)   The outcome of the game is predominantly determined by the skill
of the player.
         (b)   The award of the prize is based solely upon the player's
achieving the object of the game or otherwise upon the player's score.
         (c)   Only merchandise prizes are awarded.
         (d)   The wholesale value of prizes awarded in lieu of tickets or
tokens for single play of the device does not exceed $25.
         (e)   The redemption value of tickets, tokens, and other
representations of value, which may be accumulated by players to redeem prizes
of greater value, for a single play of the device does not exceed $25.
      (5)   Video gaming terminals at a licensed establishment, licensed truck
stop establishment, licensed fraternal establishment, or licensed veterans
establishment licensed in accordance with the Video Gaming Act.
   INTERNET. An interactive computer service or system or an information
service, system, or access software provider that provides or enables computer
access by multiple users to a computer server, and includes, but is not limited
to, an information service, system, or access software provider that provides
access to a network system commonly known as the Internet, or any comparable
system or service and also includes, but is not limited to, a World Wide Web
page, newsgroup, message board, mailing list, or chat area on any interactive
computer service or system or other online service.
   LOTTERY. Any scheme or procedure whereby one or more prizes are distributed
by chance among persons who have paid or promised consideration for
a chance to win such prizes, whether such scheme or procedure is called a
lottery, raffle, gift, sale or some other name, excluding savings promotion
raffles authorized under Section 5g of the Illinois Banking Act, Section 7008
of the Savings Bank Act, Section 42.7 of the Illinois Credit Union Act, Section
5136B of the National Bank Act (12 U.S.C. 25a), or Section 4 of the Home
Owners' Loan Act (12 U.S.C. 1463).
   POLICY GAME. Any scheme or procedure whereby a person promises or guarantees
by any instrument, bill, certificate, writing, token or other device that any
particular number, character, ticket or certificate shall in the event of any
contingency in the nature of a lottery entitle the purchaser or holder to
receive money, property, or evidence of debt.
(720 ILCS 5/28-2)
§ 14-2-8 GAMBLING OFFENSES.
   (A)   Committing offense. A person commits gambling when he or she:
      (1)   Knowingly plays a game of chance or skill for money or other thing
of value, unless excepted in division (B) of this section;
      (2)   Knowingly makes a wager upon the result of any game, contest, or
any political nomination, appointment or election;
      (3)   Knowingly operates, keeps, owns, uses, purchases, exhibits, rents,
sells, bargains for the sale or lease of, manufactures or distributes any
gambling device;
      (4)   Contracts to have or give himself or herself or another the option
to buy or sell, or contracts to buy or sell, at a future time, any grain or
other commodity whatsoever, or any stock or security of any company, where it
is at the time of making such contract intended by both parties thereto that
the contract to buy or sell, or the option, whenever exercised, or the contract
resulting therefrom, shall be settled, not by the receipt or delivery of such
property, but by the payment only of differences in prices thereof; however,
the issuance, purchase, sale, exercise, endorsement or guarantee, by or through
a person registered with the Secretary of State pursuant to Section 8 of the
Illinois Securities Law of 1953, or by or through a person exempt from such
registration under said Section 8, of a put, call, or other option to buy or
sell securities which have been registered with the Secretary of State or which
are exempt from such registration under Section 3 of the Illinois Securities
Law of 1953 is not gambling within the meaning of this paragraph (4);
      (5)   Knowingly owns or possesses any book, instrument or apparatus by
means of which bets or wagers have been, or are, recorded or registered, or
knowingly possesses any money which he has received in the course of a bet or
wager;
      (6)   Knowingly sells pools upon the result of any game or contest of
skill or chance, political nomination, appointment or election;
      (7)   Knowingly sets up or promotes any lottery or sells, offers to sell
or transfers any ticket or share for any lottery;
      (8)   Knowingly sets up or promotes any policy game or sells, offers to
sell or knowingly possesses or transfers any policy ticket, slip, record,
document or other similar device;
      (9)   Knowingly drafts, prints or publishes any lottery ticket or share,
or any policy ticket, slip, record, document or similar device, except for such
activity related to lotteries, bingo games and raffles authorized by and
conducted in accordance with the laws of Illinois or any other state or foreign
government;
      (10)   Knowingly advertises any lottery or policy game, except for such
activity related to lotteries, bingo games and raffles authorized by and
conducted in accordance with the laws of Illinois or any other state;
      (11)   Knowingly transmits information as to wagers, betting odds, or
changes in betting odds by telephone, telegraph, radio, semaphore or similar
means; or knowingly installs or maintains equipment for the transmission or
receipt of such information; except that nothing in this division (A)(11)
prohibits transmission or receipt of such information for use in news reporting
of sporting events or contests; or
      (12)   Knowingly establishes, maintains, or operates an Internet site
that permits a person to play a game of chance or skill for money or other
thing of value by means of the Internet or to make a wager upon the result of
any game, contest, political nomination, appointment, or election by means of
the Internet. This division (A)(12) does not apply to activities referenced in
divisions (B)(6), (B)(6.1), (B)(8), (B)(8.1), and (B)(15) of this section.
   (B)   Conviction. Participants in any of the following activities shall not
be convicted of gambling:
      (1)   Agreements to compensate for loss caused by the happening of chance
including without limitation contracts of indemnity or guaranty and life or
health or accident insurance.
      (2)   Offers of prizes, award or compensation to the actual contestants
in any bona fide contest for the determination of skill, speed, strength or
endurance or to the owners of animals or vehicles entered in such contest.
      (3)   Pari-mutuel betting as authorized by the law of this state.
      (4)   Manufacture of gambling devices, including the acquisition of
essential parts therefor and the assembly thereof, for transportation in
interstate or foreign commerce to any place outside this State when such
transportation is not prohibited by any applicable federal law; or the
manufacture, distribution, or possession of video gaming terminals, as defined
in the Video Gaming Act, by manufacturers, distributors, and terminal operators
licensed to do so under the Video Gaming Act.
      (5)   The game commonly known as "bingo", when conducted in accordance
with the Bingo License and Tax Act.
      (6)   Lotteries when conducted by the State of Illinois in accordance
with the Illinois Lottery Law. This exemption includes any activity conducted
by the Department of Revenue to sell lottery tickets pursuant to the provisions
of the Illinois Lottery Law and its rules.
      (6.1)   The purchase of lottery tickets through the Internet for a
lottery conducted by the State of Illinois under the program established in
Section 7.12 of the Illinois Lottery Law (20 ILCS 1605/7.12).
      (7)   Possession of an antique slot machine that is neither used nor
intended to be used in the operation or promotion of any unlawful gambling
activity or enterprise. For the purpose of this division (B)(7), an antique
slot machine is one manufactured 25 years ago or earlier.
      (8)   Raffles and poker runs when conducted in accordance with the
Raffles and Poker Runs Act.
      (8.1)   The purchase of raffle chances for a raffle conducted in
accordance with the Raffles and Poker Runs Act.
      (9)   Charitable games when conducted in accordance with the Charitable
Games Act.
      (10)   Pull tabs and jar games when conducted under the Illinois Pull
Tabs and Jar Games Act.
      (11)   Gambling games conducted on riverboats when authorized by the
Riverboat Gambling Act.
      (12)   Video gaming terminal games at a licensed establishment, licensed
truck stop establishment, licensed fraternal establishment, or licensed
veterans establishment when conducted in accordance with the Video Gaming Act.
      (13)   Games of skill or chance where money or other things of value can
be won but no payment or purchase is required to participate.
      (14)   Savings promotion raffles authorized under Section 5g of the
Illinois Banking Act, Section 7008 of the Savings Bank Act, Section 42.7 of the
Illinois Credit Union Act, Section 5136B of the National Bank Act (12 U.S.C.
25a), or Section 4 of the Home Owners' Loan Act (12 U.S.C. 1463).
      (15)   Sports wagering when conducted in accordance with the Sports
Wagering Act.
   (C)   Sentence. Gambling is a Class A misdemeanor. A second or subsequent
conviction under divisions (A)(3) through (A)(12) of this section, is a Class 4
felony.
   (D)   Circumstantial evidence. In prosecutions under this section
circumstantial evidence shall have the same validity and weight as in any
criminal prosecution.
(720 ILCS 5/28-1)
§ 14-2-9 KEEPING A GAMBLING PLACE.
   A GAMBLING PLACE is any real estate, vehicle, boat, or any other property
whatsoever used for the purposes of gambling other than gambling conducted in
the manner authorized by the Illinois Gambling Act or the Video Gaming Act. Any
person who knowingly permits any premises or property owned or occupied by him
or under his control to be used as a gambling place commits a Class A
misdemeanor. Each subsequent offense is a Class 4 felony. When any premises is
determined by the circuit court to be a gambling place:
   (A)   Such premises is a public nuisance and may be proceeded against as
such, and
   (B)   All licenses, permits or certificates issued by the State of Illinois
or any subdivision or public agency thereof authorizing the serving of food or
liquor on such premises shall be void; and no license, permit or certificate so
cancelled shall be reissued for such premises for a period of 60 days
thereafter; nor shall any person convicted of keeping a gambling place be
reissued such license for one year from his conviction and, after a second
conviction of keeping a gambling place, any such person shall not be reissued
such license, and
   (C)   Such premises of any person who knowingly permits thereon a violation
of any section of this chapter shall be held liable for, and may be sold to pay
any unsatisfied judgment that may be recovered and any unsatisfied fine that
may be levied under any section of this chapter.
(720 ILCS 5/28-3)
§ 14-2-10 SEIZURE OF GAMBLING DEVICES AND GAMBLING FUNDS.
   (A)   Every device designed for gambling which is incapable of lawful use or
every device used unlawfully for gambling shall be considered a GAMBLING
DEVICE, and shall be subject to seizure, confiscation and destruction by the
Department of State Police or by any municipal, or other local authority,
within whose jurisdiction the same may be found. As used in this section, a
GAMBLING DEVICE includes any slot machine, and includes any machine or device
constructed for the reception of money or other thing of value and so
constructed as to return, or to cause someone to return, on chance to the
player thereof money, property or a right to receive money or property. With
the exception of any device designed for gambling which is incapable of lawful
use, no gambling device shall be forfeited or destroyed unless an individual
with a property interest in said device knows of the unlawful use of the
device.
   (B)   Every gambling device shall be seized and forfeited to the county
wherein such seizure occurs. Any money or other thing of value integrally
related to acts of gambling shall be seized and forfeited to the county wherein
such seizure occurs.
(720 ILCS 5/28-5(a),(b))
§ 14-2-11 IMPERSONATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to assume a false identity and do an act
in his or her assumed character with the intent to defraud another, or pretend
to be a representative of some person or organization and do an act in his or
her pretended capacity with the intent to defraud another.
§ 14-2-12 IMPERSONATION; IMPERSONATING AND INTERFERING WITH VILLAGE OFFICERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent himself or herself
to be an officer of the village or shall, without being duly authorized,
exercise or attempt to exercise any of the duties, functions or powers of a
village officer or shall hinder, obstruct, resist or otherwise interfere with
any village officer in the discharge of his or her official duties.
§ 14-2-13 POLLUTION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit the discharge,
emission, escape or release into the atmosphere from any source such quantities
of soot, fly ash, dust, cinders, dirt, oxides, gases, vapors, odors, toxic or
radioactive substances, waste or other solid, liquid or gaseous matter in such
quantities and in such place or manner as to endanger the health, comfort or
safety of any person or of the public, or in any such manner as to cause or
tend to cause injury or damage to property or business.
   (B)   Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to
cause or permit the emission of any smoke consisting of small airborne
particles other than water from any source whatever, or a density, shade or
opacity equal to or greater than described as No. 1 on the Ringelmann Chart as
published by the United States Bureau of Mines. A copy of the Ringelmann Chart
is on file with the village.
   (C)   During any eight-hour period, smoke having a density, shade or opacity
equal to but not greater than Ringelmann No. 3 shall be permitted for a total
time of no greater than two minutes.
§ 14-2-14 POLLUTION; CREATING ODORS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any business or use any
premises so as to create an offensive smell or an odor that may taint the air
and render it unwholesome or disagreeable to any reasonable person, or to the
public or to cause or tend to cause injury or damage to persons, property or
business.
§ 14-2-15 POLLUTION; NOISES GENERALLY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the village to make, continue or
cause to be made or continued any noise, of whatever type or nature, which
unreasonably disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace
or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivity; or any noise so harsh
or prolonged, unnatural or unusual in time or place as to occasion unreasonable
discomfort to any person of ordinary sensitivity.
(Ord. 2013-05-17, passed 5-6-2013)
§ 14-2-16 POLLUTION; NOISES DEFINED, PROHIBITED.
   The following acts, among others, are declared to constitute a nuisance and
to be noise which unreasonably disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort,
repose, health, peace or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivity:
   (A)   Musical instruments and audio media devices. The operation of any
musical instrument or any audio media device, including but not limited to
radio receiving set, stereo system, compact disk player, iPod, or television,
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly
audible at a distance of 25 feet or more from where such audio media device is
located or at the lot line of the property upon which such instrument,
phonograph, machine or device is located, whichever is the greater distance
therefrom.
   (B)   Air conditioning units and the like.
      (1)   The use, operation, or permitting of use or operation of any
refrigerating equipment, fans, blowers humidifiers, dehumidifiers, or other air
circulating or air conditioning equipment, whether part of a structure or a
vehicle, in such manner as to be plainly audible upon residential property at a
distance of 30 feet from which such equipment is located or at the lot line of
the property upon which such equipment is located, whichever is the greater
distance therefrom.
      (2)   In any air cooled air conditioning installation, the condensers
must be located in such a manner that the discharged air is not directed at the
adjoining properties.
   (C)   Sound amplification.
      (1)   The operation of any sound amplification device between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. daily, which is plainly audible on any residential
property at a distance of 25 feet or more from where such sound amplification
device is located or at the lot line of the property upon which such sound
amplification device is located, whichever is the greater distance therefrom.
      (2)   The operation of any sound amplification device between the hours
of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. daily, which is plainly audible on any residential
property at a distance of 75 feet or more when measured from the lot line of
the property upon which the sound amplification device is located.
   (D)   Yelling, shouting and the like. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling,
or singing outdoors in such a manner as to be plainly audible within 25 feet of
any residential property between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
   (E)   Animals, birds, and the like. The keeping of any animal or bird which
vocalizes (howls, yelps, barks, squawks or other similar vocalization) and such
vocalization is plainly audible upon residential property beyond the property
from which the vocalization is generated for more than four minutes without
interruption. The term without interruption shall be defined as an average of
four vocalizations per minute within a four-minute period.
   (F)   Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam
engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat, or motor vehicle
except through an operational muffler or other device properly maintained to
prevent excessive noise therefrom.
   (G)   Construction or repairing of buildings. The erection (including
excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building other than
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday, and
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Saturday, except in the case of
urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only
with a permit from the Building Official, which permit may be granted for a
period not to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues and which
permit may be renewed for periods of three days or less while the emergency
continues. If the Building Official should determine that the public health and
safety of other persons will not be impaired by the erection, demolition,
alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways
within such hours, and he or she further determines that loss or inconvenience
would result to any party in interest seeking permission, he or she may grant
permission for such work to be done during other hours, upon application made
at the time the permit for work is awarded or during the progress of the work.
   (H)   Exemptions. Sounds caused by the following are exempt from the
provision contained herein.
      (1)   Repairs of utility structures that pose a clear and immediate
danger to life or safety.
      (2)   Sirens, whistles or bells lawfully used by emergency vehicles.
      (3)   The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the
existence of an emergency or emergency work.
      (4)   Repairs or excavations of bridges, streets or highways by or on
behalf of the village, Du Page County, the State of Illinois or the United
States government between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., when the public
welfare and convenience renders it impractical to perform the work during hours
otherwise allowed by ordinance.
      (5)   Outdoor gatherings and public events, provided that a permit has
been obtained from the appropriate permitting authority.
      (6)   Internal combustion engines when used to prevent freezing or
flooding during power outages.
   (I)   Definitions. The following terms shall have the meanings as set forth
herein.
      (1)   AUDIO MEDIA DEVICE. Any machine or device by which music, rhythmic
sounds or speech is produced or provided and shall include but not be limited
to radios, stereos, compact disk players, iPods, televisions or other such
machines or devices.
      (2)   EMERGENCY. An occurrence of set of circumstances involving actual
or imminent physical trauma or property damage demanding immediate attention.
      (3)   EMERGENCY WORK. Any work performed for the purpose of preventing or
alleviating physical trauma or property damage, whether actual or threatened by
an emergency, or work by public or private utilities when restoring utility
service.
      (4)   PLAINLY AUDIBLE. Any sound that can be detected by a person using
his or her hearing faculties, unaided by any mechanical device such as a
hearing aid. For a sound to be PLAINLY AUDIBLE, it is not required that
particular words or phrases are determinable or that the name, artist or type
of instrument producing the sound can be determined. The detection of any
rhythmic bass or reverberating type of sound is sufficient to constitute a
plainly audible sound.
      (5)   PROPERTY or LOT LINE. Either:
         (a)   The boundary line of a parcel of real estate;
         (b)   The vertical and horizontal boundary of a dwelling unit that is
part of a multi-family dwelling unit; or
         (c)   On a mixed use property, the interface between the two portions
of the property on which different categories of activity are being performed.
      (6)   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Any real property which contains a building
constructed for a residential purpose or in which one or more persons reside,
provided that the building is property zoned or is legally nonconforming for
residential use within the village.
      (7)   SOUND AMPLIFICATION DEVICE. Any speaker, loudspeaker, amplifier or
any other device or system by which sounds may be enhanced or magnified.
(Ord. 2013-05-17, passed 5-6-2013)
§ 14-2-17 ADOPTION OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS NOISE POLLUTION CONTROL
REGULATIONS.
   There is hereby adopted by reference the State of Illinois Noise Pollution
Control Regulations, as set forth in Title 35 Environmental Protection,
Subtitle H, Noise, Chapter I, Pollution Control Board, dated May 1, 1984, as
now or hereafter amended.
(Ord. 2013-05-17, passed 5-6-2013)
§ 14-2-18 PROSTITUTION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit prostitution within the
village.
   (B)   Any person who performs, offers or agrees to perform any act of sexual
penetration, as defined by 720 ILCS 5/11-0.1, for any money, property, token,
object or article or anything of value, or any touching or fondling of the sex
organs of one person by another person, for any money, property, token, object
or article or anything of value, for the purpose of sexual arousal or
gratification commits an act of prostitution.
§ 14-2-19 PROSTITUTION; SOLICITING FOR.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit for a prostitute within
the village.
   (B)   Any person who performs any of the following acts commits soliciting
for a prostitute:
      (1)   Solicits another for the purpose of prostitution;
      (2)   Arranges or offers to arrange a meeting of persons for the purpose
of prostitution; or
      (3)   Directs another to a place knowing such direction is for the
purpose of prostitution.
§ 14-2-20 PROSTITUTION; KEEPING A PLACE OF.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a place of prostitution
within the village.
   (B)   Any person who has or exercises control over the use of any place
which could offer seclusion or shelter for the practice of prostitution who
performs any of the following acts keeps a place of prostitution:
      (1)   Knowingly grants or permits the use of such place for the purpose
of prostitution;
      (2)   Grants or permits the use of such place under circumstances from
which he or she could reasonably know that the place is used or is to be used
for purposes of prostitution; or
      (3)   Permits the continued use of a place after becoming aware of facts
or circumstances from which he or she should reasonably know that the place is
being used for purposes of prostitution.
§ 14-2-21 PROSTITUTION; PATRONIZING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to patronize a prostitute within
the village.
   (B)   Any person who performs any of the following acts with a person not
his or her spouse commits the offense of patronizing a prostitute:
      (1)   Engages in an act of sexual penetration, as defined in 720 ILCS 5/
11-0.1, with a prostitute; or
      (2)   Enters or remains in a place of prostitution with intent to engage
in an act of sexual penetration, as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-0.1.
§ 14-2-22 INDECENCY; PUBLIC.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit a public indecency
within the village.
   (B)   Any person of the age of 17 years and upwards who performs any of the
following acts in a public place commits a public indecency:
      (1)   An act of sexual penetration or sexual conduct, as defined in 720
ILCS 5/11-0.1; or
      (2)   A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to
satisfy the sexual desire of the person.
   (C)   Breast-feeding of infants is not an act of public indecency.
   (D)   For purposes of this section, PUBLIC PLACE means any place where the
conduct may reasonable be expected to be viewed by others.
§ 14-2-23 INDECENCY; NUDITY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, for the purpose of bathing or
otherwise, to appear in any public place in a state of nudity.
§ 14-2-24 INDECENCY; INDECENT EXHIBITION OF ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to instigate, cause or procure, or in
any manner assist in any indecent exhibition of any animal or exhibit or
perform an indecent, immoral or lewd play or show or representation of any
kind.
§ 14-2-25 LEWD CONDUCT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally perform any lewd act in
a public place or at a place and under circumstances where such act could be
reasonably viewed by any member of the public.
§ 14-2-26 OBSCENITY; ELEMENTS OF THE OFFENSE.
   (A)   A person commits obscenity when, with knowledge of the nature or
content thereof, or recklessly failing to exercise reasonable inspection which
would have disclosed the nature or content thereof, he or she:
      (1)   Sells, delivers, or provides, or offers or agrees to sell, deliver
or provide any obscene writing, picture, record or other representation or
embodiment of the obscene;
      (2)   Presents or directs an obscene play, dance or other performance or
participates directly in that portion thereof which makes it obscene;
      (3)   Publishes, exhibits or otherwise makes available anything obscene;
      (4)   Performs an obscene act or otherwise presents an obscene exhibition
of his or her body for gain;
      (5)   Creates, buys, procures or possesses obscene matter or material
with intent to disseminate it in violation of this section, or of the penal
laws or regulations of any other jurisdiction; or
      (6)   Advertises or otherwise promotes the sale of material represented
or held out by him or her to be obscene, whether or not it is obscene.
   (B)   Any material or performance is OBSCENE if:
      (1)   The average person, applying contemporary adult community
standards, would find that, taken as a whole, it appeals to the prurient
interest;
      (2)   The average person, applying contemporary adult community
standards, would find that it depicts or describes, in a patently offensive
way, ultimate sexual acts or sadomasochistic sexual acts, whether normal or
perverted, actual or simulated, or masturbation, excretory functions or lewd
exhibition of the genitals; and
      (3)   Taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific value.
(720 ILCS 5/11-20)
§ 14-2-27 OBSCENITY; INTERPRETATION OF EVIDENCE.
   (A)   Obscenity shall be judged with reference to ordinary adults; except
that, it shall be judged with reference to children or other specially
susceptible audiences if it appears from the character of the material or the
circumstances of its dissemination to be specially designed for or directed to
such an audience.
   (B)   Where circumstances of production, presentation, sale, dissemination,
distribution or publicity indicate that material is being commercially
exploited for the sake of its prurient appeal, such evidence is probative with
respect to the nature of the matter and can justify the conclusion that the
matter is lacking in serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
   (C)   In any prosecution for an offense under this section, evidence shall
be admissible to show:
      (1)   The character of the audience for which the material was designed
or to which it was directed;
      (2)   What the predominant appeal of the material would be for ordinary
adults or a special audience, and what effect, if any, it would probably have
on the behavior of such people;
      (3)   The artistic, literary, scientific, educational or other merits of
the material, or absence thereof;
      (4)   The degree, if any, of public acceptance of the material in this
state;
      (5)   Appeal to prurient interest, or absence thereof, in advertising or
other promotion of the material; and
      (6)   Purpose of the author, creator, publisher or disseminator.
(720 ILCS Ch. 5/11-20)
§ 14-2-28 OBSCENITY; PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE.
   The creation, purchase, procurement or possession of a mold, engraved plate
or other embodiment of obscenity specially adapted for reproducing multiple
copies, or the possession of more than three copies of obscene material shall
be prima facie evidence of an intent to disseminate.
(720 ILCS Ch. 5/11-20)
§ 14-2-29 OBSCENITY; AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE.
   It shall be an affirmative defense to obscenity that the dissemination:
   (A)   Was not for gain and was made to personal associates other than
children under 18 years of age; and
   (B)   Was to institutions or individuals having scientific or other special
justification for possession of such material.
(720 ILCS Ch. 5/11-20)
§ 14-2-30 HARMFUL MATERIAL.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DISTRIBUTE. Transfer possession of, whether with or without
consideration.
      HARMFUL TO MINORS. The quality of any description or representation, in
whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sado-masochistic
abuse, when, taken as a whole, it:
         (a)   Predominately appeals to the prurient interest in sex of minors;
         (b)   Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult
community in the state as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for
minors; and
         (c)   Lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value
for minors.
      KNOWINGLY. Having knowledge of the contents of the subject matter, or
recklessly failing to exercise reasonable inspection which would have disclosed
the contents.
      MATERIAL. 
         (a)   Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, film, video game,
computer game, video or similar visual depiction, including any such
representation or image which is stored electronically; or
         (b)   Any book, magazine, printed matter however reproduced, or
recorded audio of any sort.
      MINOR. Any person under the age of 18.
      NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or
buttocks with less than a full opaque covering, or the showing of the female
breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion below the top of
the nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state.
      SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad
in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being
fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one clothed
for sexual gratification or stimulation.
      SEXUAL CONDUCT. Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse or physical
contact with a person’s clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or,
if such person be a female, breast.
      SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals when in
a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   (B)   A person is guilty of distributing harmful material to a minor when he
or she:
      (1)   Knowingly sells, lends, distributes or gives away to a minor,
knowing that the minor is under the age of 18 or failing to exercise reasonable
care in ascertaining the person’s true age:
         (a)   Any material which depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sado-
masochistic abuse, or which contains explicit and detailed verbal descriptions
or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual conduct or sado-masochistic
abuse, and which taken as a whole is harmful to minors;
         (b)   A motion picture, show or other presentation which depicts
nudity, sexual conduct or sado-masochistic abuse and is harmful to minors; or
         (c)   An admission ticket or pass to premises where there is exhibited
or to be exhibited such a motion picture, show or other presentation.
      (2)   Admits a minor to premises where there is exhibited or to be
exhibited such a motion picture, show, or other presentation, knowing that the
minor is a person under the age of 18 or failing to exercise reasonable care in
ascertaining the person’s true age.
   (C)   In any prosecution arising under this section, it is an affirmative
defense:
      (1)   The minor as to whom the offense is alleged to have been committed
exhibited to the accused a draft card, driver’s license, birth certificate or
other official or apparently official document purporting to establish that the
minor was 18 years of age or older, which was relied upon by the accused;
      (2)   The defendant was in a parental or guardianship relationship with
the minor or that the minor was accompanied by a parent or legal guardian;
      (3)   The defendant was a bona fide school, museum or public library, or
was a person acting in the course of his or her employment as an employee or
official of such organization or retail outlet affiliated with and serving the
educational purpose of such organization;
      (4)   The act charged was committed in aid of legitimate scientific or
educational purposes; or
      (5)   An advertisement of harmful material as defined in this section
culminated in the sale or distribution of such harmful material to a child
under circumstances where there was no personal confrontation of the child by
the defendant, his or her employees, or agents, as where the order or request
for such harmful material was transmitted by mail, telephone, Internet or
similar means of communication, and delivery of such harmful material to the
child was by mail, freight, Internet or similar means of transport, which
advertisement contained the following statement, or a substantially similar
statement, and that the defendant required the purchaser to certify that he or
she was not under the age of 18 and that the purchaser falsely stated that he
or she was not under the age of 18:
      NOTICE
      It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to purchase the matter
advertised. Any person under the age of 18 that falsely states that he or she
is not under the age of 18 for the purpose of obtaining the material advertised
is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor under the laws of the State.
   (D)   The predominant appeal to prurient interest of the material shall be
judged with reference to average children of the same general age of the child
to whom such material was sold, lent, distributed or given, unless it appears
from the nature of the matter or the circumstances of its dissemination or
distribution that it is designed for specially susceptible groups, in which
case the predominant appeal of the material shall be judged with reference to
its intended or probable recipient group.
   (E)   Distribution of harmful material in violation of this section is a
class A misdemeanor. A second or subsequent offense is a class 4 felony.
   (F)   Any person under the age of 18 that falsely states, either orally or
in writing, that he or she is not under the age of 18, or that presents or
offers to any person any evidence of age and identity that is false or not
actually his or her own for the purpose of ordering, obtaining, viewing or
otherwise procuring or attempting to procure or view any harmful material is
guilty of a class B misdemeanor.
   (G)   A person over the age of 18 who fails to exercise reasonable care in
ascertaining the true age of a minor, knowingly distributes to, or sends, or
causes to be sent, or exhibits to, or offers to distribute, or exhibits any
harmful material to a person that he or she believes is a minor is guilty of a
class A misdemeanor. If that person utilized a computer web camera, cellular
telephone or any other type of device to manufacture the harmful material, then
each offense is a class 4 felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (H)   Telecommunications carriers, commercial mobile service providers and
providers of information services, including, but not limited to, Internet
service providers and hosting service providers, are not liable under this
section, except for willful and wanton misconduct, by virtue of the
transmission, storage or caching of electronic communications or messages of
others or by virtue of the provision of other related telecommunications,
commercial mobile services or information services used by others in violation
of this section.
(720 ILCS 5/11-21)
§ 14-2-31 PURCHASE AND POSSESSION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS, ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE
PRODUCTS AND ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES BY A PERSON UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE
PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 year to
possess, purchase or attempt to purchase or use any tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products or electronic cigarettes, or to misrepresent his
or her identity or age, or to use any false or altered identification for the
purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products or electronic cigarettes.
   (B)   The terms, TOBACCO PRODUCTS, ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS and
ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES shall have the same meanings as defined in Chapter 10,
Article 9, §
10-9-1 of the Carol Stream Code of Ordinance.
   (C)   Any person who violated division (A) of this section shall be punished
by a fine of not less than $100, nor more than $750.
   (D)   Any police officer observing a violation of this section may, as an
alternative to arresting the offender, issue a “hang-on ticket” as provided in
Chapter 15, Article 4 of this Code of Ordinances pursuant to which the person
cited may pay the sum of $100 within the time stated on the ticket as a
compromise or settlement to avoid the prosecution of an ordinance violation in
the Circuit Court.
(Ord. 95-04-19, passed 4-4-1995; Ord. 2017-05- 22, passed 5-1-2017; Ord. 2019-
08-29, passed 8-5-2019)
§ 14-2-32 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   (A)   No person shall keep for sale, offer for sale, sell or deliver for any
commercial consideration any item of drug paraphernalia.
   (B)   Any store, place or premises from which or in which any item of drug
paraphernalia is kept for sale, offered for sale, sold or delivered for any
commercial consideration is declared to be a public nuisance.
   (C)   In addition to any other penalties already provided for by law and
this section, a person or store owner convicted of selling drug paraphernalia
shall be subject to having his or her license to sell tobacco revoked, as
provided by § 10-1-13 of the Village of Carol Stream Code of Ordinances.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly possesses an item of drug paraphernalia with
the intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing a
controlled substance into the human body, or in preparing a controlled
substance for that use. This section does not apply to a person who is legally
authorized to possess hypodermic syringes or needles under the Hypodermic
Syringes and Needles Act (720 ILCS 635/0.01).
   (E)   This section shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   Items historically and customarily used in connection with the
planting, propagating, cultivating, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, or inhaling of cannabis, tobacco, or any
other lawful substance, and including but not limited to, garden hoes, rakes,
sickles, baggies, tobacco pipes, and cigarette-rolling papers.
      (2)   A person who is legally authorized to possess hypodermic syringes
or needles under the Hypodermic Syringes and Needles Act.
   (F)   In determining whether or not a particular item is exempt under this
section, the trier of fact should consider, in addition to all other logically
relevant factors, the following:
      (1)   The general, usual, customary, and historical use to which the item
involved has been put;
      (2)   Expert evidence concerning the ordinary or customary use of the
item and the effect of any peculiarity in the design or engineering of the
device upon its functioning;
      (3)   Any written instructions accompanying the delivery of the item
concerning the purposes or uses to which the item can or may be put;
      (4)   Any oral instructions provided by the seller of the item at the
time and place of sale or commercial delivery;
      (5)   Any national or local advertising concerning the design, purpose or
use of the item involved, and the entire context in which such advertising
occurs;
      (6)   The manner, place and circumstances in which the item was displayed
for sale, as well as any item or items displayed for sale or otherwise
exhibited upon the premises where the sale was made;
      (7)   Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a
legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a
licensed distributor or dealer of cannabis or tobacco products;
      (8)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community.
   (G)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be fined not
less than $750.
(Ord. 2011-12-44, passed 12-19-2011; Ord. 2020-01-01, passed 1-20-2020)
§ 14-2-33 HEMP-DERIVED CANNABINOIDS, KRATOM AND SYNTHETIC ALTERNATIVE DRUGS.
   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires different meaning.
      CANNABINOID. (1) Any of various naturally occurring, biologically active
chemical constituents of hemp; or cannabis; (2) any substance that is
structurally or functionally similar to cannabinoids derived from hemp or
cannabis; (3) any substance that is synthetically produced to mimic the effects
of natural cannabinoids.
      DELIVER or DELIVERY. The actual, constructive, or attempted transfer of
possession to another, with or without consideration, and whether or not there
is an agency relationship.
      HEMP. The plant Cannabis Sativa and any part of that plant, including the
seeds and resin thereof and all derivatives, extracts, cannabinoids, isomers,
acids, salts, and salts of isomers, whether growing or not, with a delta -
9 tetrahydrocannabinol concentration of not more than 0.3 percent on a dry
weight basis.
      HEMP-DERIVED CANNABINOID PRODUCT.
         (a)   Any cannabinoid compound, substance, mixture, preparation salt,
derivative, salt, extract, isomer, acid, salts of isomers, derived or
synthesized from hemp, (1) including but not limited to delta-8 THC, delta-
6 THC, delta-10 THC, THCA (Tetrahydrocannabinolic acid), THC-O acetate, THCP
(Tetrahydrocannabiphorol), THCV (tetrahydrocannabivarin), HHC
(Hexahydrocannabinol) and HHC-O acetate; or (2) containing a total delta-
9 tetrahydrocannabinol content in excess of 0.5 milligrams per labeled serving
or individual unit or 2.5 milligrams per package regardless of the number of
labeled servings or individual units therein.
         (b)   The term HEMP-DERIVED CANNABINOID PRODUCT does not include the
following products that do not have an intoxicating effect on the mind or the
body: CBD (cannabidiol), CBC (cannabichromene), CBT (cannabicitran), CBL
(cannabicyclol), CBE (cannabielsoin), CDG (cannabigerol, or CBN (cannabinol).
      KRATOM. Any part of the plant Mitragyna Speciosa, whether growing or not,
and any compound, substance, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of that
plant, including but not limited to mitragynine and 7-hydroxymitragynine.
      KRATOM PRODUCT. Any compound, substance, mixture, or preparation
containing kratom.
      PRODUCT CONTAINING A SYNTHETIC ALTERNATIVE DRUG. Any product containing a
synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant or psychedelic/ hallucinogen, as those terms
are defined herein.
      SYNTHETIC CANNABINOID. Any compound or substance made by synthesis that
functions similar to the active ingredient in marijuana, tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC), including, but not limited to, any quantity of a natural or synthetic
material, compound, mixture, preparation, substance and their analog [including
isomers (whether optical, positional or geometric), esters, ethers, salts,
homologues, salts of isomers and salts of homologues)] containing a cannabinoid
receptor agonist, including but not limited to:
         (a)   JWH-007 (l-pentyl-2-methyl- 3-(l-naphthoyl)indole);
         (b)   JWH-015 ((2-Methyl-l-propyl-IH- indol-3 -yl)-I -
naphthalenylmethanone);
         (c)   JWH-018 (1-penty1-3-(1- naphthoyl)indole);
         (d)   JWH-019 (l-hexyl-3- (naphthalen-l-oyl)indole);
         (e)   JWH-073 (naphthalen-l-yl-(l- butylindol-3-yl)methanone);
         (f)   JWH-081 (4-methoxynaphthalen-l- y1-(1-pentylindo1-3-
yl)methanone);
         (g)   JWH-098 (4-methoxynaphthalen-l- yl-(l-penty 1-2-methylindol-3-
yl)methanone);
         (h)   JWH-I22 (1-Pentyl-3-(4-methy)- l-naphthoyl)indole);
         (i)   JWH-164 (7-methoxynaphthalen- l-yl-(l-pentylindol-3-
yl)methanone;
         (j)   JWH-200 (I-(2-morpholin-4- ylethypindol-3-yl)-naphthalen-l-
ylmethanone);
         (k)   JWH-203 (2-(2-chloropheny 1)-1- (1 -pentylindo 1 -3-y)thanone;
         (l)   JWH-210 (4-cthylnaphthalen-l-yl- (l-pentylindol-3-yl)methanone;
         (m)   JWH-250 (1-penty1-3-(2- methoxyphenylacetypindole);
         (n)   JWH-251 (1-pentyl-3-(2- methylphenylacetypindole);
         (o)   JWH-398 (1-pentyl-3-(4-chloro-l- naphthoypindole);
         (p)    HU-210((6aR,10aR)-9- (Hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-
methyloctan -2- yl)-6a,7,10,1 Oa-tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-l-ol);
         (q)   HU-211 ((6aS,10aS)-9- (Hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl -3-(2-
methyloctan-2-y 1)-6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-l-ol);
         (r)   HU-308 (ffIRJ2R,5R)-242,6- dimethoxy-4-(2-methyloctan-2-
yl)phenyl]-7,7- dimethyl-4-bicyclo[3.1.I]hept-3-enyl] methanol);
         (s)   HU-331 ((3-hydroxy-2-[(IR,6R)- 3-methyl-6-(l-methylethenyl)-2-
cyclohexen-l-y1] -5- pentyl-2,5-cyclohexadiene-1,4-dione);
         (t)   CP 55,940 (2-[(IR,2R,5R)-5- hydroxy-2-(34rydroxypropyl)
cyclohexyl]-5-(2- methyloctan-2-yl)phenol);
         (u)   CP47,497 (2-((IR,3S)-3- hydroxycyclohexyl)-5-(2-methyloctan-
2y1)phen ol) and its homologues;
         (v)   WIN 55,212-2((R)-(+)-[2,3- Dihydro-5-methyl-3-(4-
morpholinylmethyl)pyrro lo[l,2,3-de)-I,4-benzoxazin-6-yl]-1-
nepthalenylmethanone);
         (w)   RCS-4 ((4-methoxyphenyl)(l- pentyl-IH-indol-3-yl)methanone);
         (x)    RCS-8(I-(I-(2-cyclohexylethyl)-I H- indol-3-yl)-2-(2-
methoxyphenypethanone);
         (y)   AM-694 (1-(5-flouropentyl)-3-(2-iodobenzoyl)indole);
         (z)   AM-2201 (1-(5-flouropentyl)-3-(1-iodobenzoyl)indole);
         (aa)   UR-144 (1-pentyl-1H-indlo-3-yl)(2,2,3,3-tetramethylcycl o-
propyl)menthanone;
         (bb)   XLR11 [1-(5-fluoropentyl)-1H-indol-3-yl](2,2,3,3-tetram
enthlcyclo-propyl)mehanone;
         (cc)    WIN 54,461 (6-Bromopravadoline);
         (dd)   WIN 48,098.
      SYNTHETIC PSYCHEDELIC/HALLUCINOGEN. Any compound that mimics the effects
of any federally controlled Schedule I substance, including, but not limited
to, any quantity of a natural or synthetic material, compound, mixture,
preparation, substance and their analog (including salts, isomers, esters,
ethers and salts of isomers) containing substances which have a psychedelic/
hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system and/or brain, including but
not limited to:
         (a)    2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4- ethylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-E);
         (b)    2-(2,5-dimethoxy-4- methylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-D);
         (c)    2-(4-Chloro-2,5-dimethoxy-phenyl) ethanamine (2C-C);
         (d)    2-(4-lodo-2,5-dimethoxy-phenyl) ethanamine (2C-I);
         (e)    2-(4-(Ethylthio)-2,5-dimethoxy-phenyl)ethanamine (2C-T-2);
         (f)    2-(4-(lsopropylthio)-2,5- dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-T-4);
         (g)    2-(2,5-Dimethoxyphenyl) ethanamine (2C-H);
         (h)    2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-nitro- phenyl)ethanamine (2C-N); and
         (i)    2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-(n)-propylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-P).
      SYNTHETIC STIMULANT. Any compound that mimics the effects of any
federally controlled Schedule I substance such as cathinone, methcathinone,
MDMA and MDEA, including, but not limited to, any quantity of a natural or
synthetic material, compound, mixture, preparation, substance and their analog
(including salts, isomers, and salts of isomers) containing substances which
have a stimulant effect on the central nervous system, including but not
limited to:
         (a)    3-Fluoromethcathinone;
         (b)    4-Fluoromethcathinone (other name: flephedrone);
         (c)    3,4-Methylenedioxymethcathinone (other name: methylone, MDMC);
         (d)    3,4-Methylenedioxypyrovalerone (other name: MDPV);
         (e)    4-Methylmethcathinon (other names: mephedrone, 4-MMC);
         (f)    4-Methoxymethcathinone (other names: methedrone, bk-PMMA,
PMMC);
         (g)    4-Ethylmethcathinone (other name: 4-EMC);
         (h)   Ethcathinone;
         (i)    Beta-keto-N-methylbenzo-dioxyolylpropylamine (other names:
butylone, bk-MBDB);
         (j)    Napthylpyrovalerone (other names: naphyrone, NRG-1);
         (k)    N,N-dimethylcathinone (other name: metamfepramone);
         (l)    Alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name: alpha-PPP);
         (m)   4-methoxy-alpha- pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name: MOPPP);
         (n)    3,4-methylenedioxy-alpha- pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name:
MDPPP);
         (o)    Alpha-pyrrolidinovalerophenone (other name: alpha-PVP); and
         (p)    6,7-kihydro-5H-indeno(5,6-d)-I,3-dioxal-6-amine) (other name:
MDAI).
      THC. Tetrahydrocannabinol in any of its forms or chemical analogs,
whether natural, a derivative or synthetically produced.
   (B)   Sale or delivery unlawful. No person shall sell, offer for sale, or
deliver any hemp-derived cannabinoid product, kratom product, or any product
containing a synthetic cannabinoid, a synthetic stimulant or a synthetic
psychedelic/hallucinogen including, but not limited to, those products set
forth in division (E) below.
   (C)   Possession unlawful. No person shall knowingly possess any hemp-
derived cannabinoid product, kratom product, or product containing a synthetic
cannabinoid, a synthetic stimulant, or a synthetic psychedelic/hallucinogen,
and including, but not limited to, those products set forth in division (E)
below.
   (D)   Driving under influence unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person
to drive a motor vehicle while under the influence of a hemp-derived
cannabinoid product, kratom, synthetic cannabinoid, a synthetic stimulant, or a
synthetic psychedelic/hallucinogen.
   (E)   List. The following products have been determined to contain synthetic
cannabinoid, synthetic stimulus, or synthetic psychedelic/hallucinogen or
kratom:
2010                       2NE1                       8-Ball
AK47                       Aztec Gold                 Aztec Midnight Wind
Back Draft                 Bad 2 the Bone             Banana Cream Nuke
Bayou Blaster              Beach Bean                 Black Diamond
Black Magic Salvia         Black Mamba                Blaze
Bliss                      Bloom                      Blue Lotus
Blue Silk                  Blue Water Lily            Blueberry Hayze
Bombay Blue                Buzz                       C3
C4                         C4 Herbal Incense          Caneff
Cherry Bomb                Chill Out                  Chill X
Chronic Spice              Citrus                     Colorado Chronic
Cosmic Blast               Crazy Clown                Da Block
Dark Night II              Demon                      Diablo
Diamond Spirit             Dog Rose                   Dragon Spice
D-Rail                     Dream                      Drone
Dwarf Skullcap             Earthquake                 Energy-1
Eruption Spice             Euphoria                   exSES
EX-SES                     Ex-SES Platinum            EX-SES Platinum Blueberry
EX-SES Platinum Cherry     EX-SES Platinum Strawberry EX-SES Platinum Vanilla
Fire Bird Ultimate         Flakka                     Forest Humus
Freedom                    Fully Loaded               Funky Monkey
Funky Monkey )OOO(         G Four                     G Greenies Caramel Crunch
Genie                      Gold Spirit Spice          Green Giant
Green Monkey Chronic       Greenies Strawberry        Happy Joker
Salvia
Heaven Improved            Heavenscent Suave          Humboldt Gold
Indian Warrior             Ivory Wave                 Jamaican Gold
K Royal                    K2                         K2 Amazonian Shelter
K2 Blonde                  K2 Blue                    K2 Blueberry
K2 Citron                  K2 Cloud 9                 K2 Kryptonite
K2 Latte                   K2 Mint                    K2 Orisha Black Magic Max
K2 Orisha Max              K2 Orisha Regular          K2 Orisha Super
K2 Orisha White Magic      K2 Peach                   K2 Pina Colada
Super
K2 Pineapple Express       K2 Pink Panties            K2 Sex
K2 Silver                  K2 Solid Sex on the        K2 Standard
                           Mountain
K2 Strawberry              K2 Summit                  K2 Summit Coffee Work
K2 Summit Space            K2 Thai Dream              K2 Ultra
K2 Watermelon              K2Pink                     K3
K3 )00(                    K3 Blueberry               K3 Cosmic Blend
K3 Dusk                    K3 Grape                   K3 Heaven Improved
K3 Heaven Legal            K3 Kryptonite              K3 Legal
K3 Legal - Earth (silver)  K3 Legal - Original        K3 Legal - Sea (silver)
                           (Black)
K3 Legal - Sun (Black)     K3 Mango                   K3 Original
K3 Original Improved       K3 Strawberry              K3 Sun
K3 Sun Improved            K3 Sun Legal               K4 Bubble Bubble
K4 Silver                  K4 Summit Remix            KA Gold
KI Gravity                 KI Orbit                   Killer Buzz
Kind Spice                 Klimax                     Legal Eagle
Legal Eagle Apple          Legal Weed                 Lion's Ear
Lion's Tail                Love Potion 69             Love Strawberry
Lunar Wave                 Maconha Brava              Mad Hatter
Mad Monkey                 Magic Dragon Platinum      Magic Gold
Magic Silver               Magic Spice                Marshmellow
Mega Bomb                  Mellon K2                  Meow Meow
Mid-Atlantic Exemplar      Midnight Chill             MNGB Almond/Vani lla
MNGB Peppermint            MNGB Pinata Colada         MNGB Spear Mint
MNGB Tropical Thunder      Moe Joe Fire               Mojo
Moon Rocks                 Mr. Happy                  Mr. Nice Guy
Mr. Smiley's               MTN-787                    Mystery
Naughty Nights             New Improved K3 Cosmic     New Improved K3 Dynamite
                           Blend
New Improved K3 Kryptonite New K3 Earth               New K3 Heaven
New K3 Improved            New K3 Sea Improved        New-Kron Bomb
Ninja                      Nitro                      Ocean Blue
Ocean Bust                 OG Kush                    p.e.p. pouiri Original
                                                      Spearmint
p.e.p. pourri Love         p.e.p. pourri Twisted      p.e.p. pourri X Blueberry
Strawberry                 Vanilla
Paradise                   Pie K4 Purple Haze         Pineapple
Pineapple Express          Pink Tiger                 Platinum Strawberry
Potpourri                  POW                        Pulse
Pure Ivory                 Purple Diesel              Purple Punch
Purple Wave                Rasta Citrus Spice         Rebel Spice
Red Bird                   Red Dove                   Red X
Sacred Lotus               Samurai Spirit             Sativah
Scarface                   Scooby Snax                Scope Vanilla
Scope Wildberry            Sence                      Serenity
Shanti Spice               Shanti Spice Blueberry     Si. S Werve
Siberian Motherwort        Silent Black               Skunk
Smacked                    Smoke                      Smoke Plus
Smoking Santa              Snax                       Snow Leopard
Sour Diesel                Space                      Spice Artie Synergy
Spice Diamond              Spice Diamond              Spice Diamond
Spice Gold                 Spice Silver               Spice Tropical Synergy
Spice Tropical Synergy     Spicey )00(                Spicey Regular XXX
                                                      Blueberry
Spicey Regular XXX         Spicey Ultra Strong )OO(   Spicey Ultra Strong )OO
Strawberry                                            ( Vanilla
Spicylicious               Spike 99                   Spike 99 Ultra
Spike 99 Ultra Blueberry   Spike 99 Ultra Cherry      Spike 99 Ultra Strawberry
Spike Diamond              Spike Gold                 Spike Maxx
Spike Silver               Stardust                   Stinger
Strength Cinnamon          Summer Sky                 Super Kush
Super Lemon Haze           Super Summit               Swagger Grape
SYN Chill                  SYN Incense LemonLime      SYN Incense Smooth
SYN Incense Spearmint      SYN Lemon Lime             SYN Lemon Lime #2
SYN Smooth                 SYN Spearmint              SYN Spearmint #2
SYN Suave                  SYN Swagg                  SYN Vanilla
SYN Vanilla #2             Texas Gold                 Tezcatlipoca
Time Warp                  Tribal Warrior             Ultra Cloud 10
Unknown cigarette          Utopia                     Utopia-Blue Bern/
Vanilla Sky                Voo Doo Remix (black       Voo Doo Remix (orange
                           package)                   package)
Voodoo Child               Voodoo Magic               Voodoo Remix
Wedding Cake               White Dove                 White Knight
White Lightening           White Water Lily           White Widow
Who Dat                    Who Dat Herbal Incense     Wicked X
Wild Dagga                 Winter Boost               Wood Stock
XTREME Spice               Yucatan                    Yucatan Fire
Yucatan Fire Smoke         Zohai                      Zombie World
 
   (F)   Penalty. Violation of any provision of this section shall result in a
fine of not less than $500 nor more than $1,500 for each such offense. Each
violation of this section, or every day a violation continues to exist, shall
constitute a new and separate violation.
   (G)   License suspension. In addition to any other penalties provided by law
and this code, any person or business license holder convicted of selling any
hemp-derived cannabinoid product, kratom, or product containing synthetic
cannabinoid, synthetic stimulant or synthetic psychedelic/hallucinogen shall be
subject to having their business license suspended or revoked as provided in §
10-1-13 of the Village of Carol Stream Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 2011-12-46, passed 12-19-2011; Ord. 2024-05-26, passed 5-6-2024)
§ 14-2-34 ENDANGERING THE LIFE OR HEALTH OF A CHILD.
   (A)   A person commits the offense of endangering the life or health of a
child when he or she knowingly (1) causes or permits the life or health of a
child under the age of 18 to be endangered; or (2) causes or permits a child
under the age of 18 to be placed in circumstances that endanger the child's
life or health. It is not a violation of this section for a person to
relinquish a child in accordance with the Abandoned Newborn Infant Protection
Act, 325 ILCS 2/1 et seq., as amended.
   (B)   A trier of fact may infer that a child six years of age or younger is
unattended if that child is left in a motor vehicle for more than ten minutes.
   (C)   UNATTENDED means either (1) not accompanied by a person 14 years of
age or older; or (2) if accompanied by a person 14 years of age or older, out
of the sight of that person.
   (D)   A violation of this section shall be a Class A misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2016-04-20, passed 4-18-2016)
§ 14-2-35 POWDERED ALCOHOL.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, POWDERED ALCOHOL means any powder or
crystalline substance containing alcohol, as defined in Section 1-3.01 of the
Illinois Liquor Control Act of 1934 (235 ILCS 5/1-3.01).
   (B)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, or deliver, receive or purchase,
or possess in the village any product consisting of or containing powdered
alcohol.
(Ord. 2017-05-17, passed 5-1-2017)
§ 14-2-36 ALCOHOL VAPORIZERS.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, ALCOHOL VAPORIZER means any device
designed, manufactured, marketed or used for the purpose of mixing alcoholic
liquor with oxygen, air or another gas to produce a mist or vapor for
inhalation or snorting for non-medicinal purposes. ALCOHOL VAPORIZER shall not
include medical devices as inhalers, nebulizers, atomizers or other devices
properly prescribed by a physician and being used to dispense a prescribed
medication to the holder of such prescription.
   (B)   No person shall possess, sell, offer for sale, deliver, receive, or
purchase any alcohol vaporizer within the village.
   (C)   No person shall use a medical device such as an inhaler, nebulizer,
atomizer or other device for the purpose of mixing alcoholic liquor with
oxygen, air or another gas to produce a mist or vapor for inhalation or
snorting for non-medicinal purposes within the village.
(Ord. 2017-05-17, passed 5-1-2017)
§ 14-2-37 ELECTRONIC SWEEPSTAKES MACHINES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this article, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   ELECTRONIC MACHINE or DEVICE. A mechanically, electrically, or
electronically operated machine or device, that is owned, leased, or otherwise
possessed by a sweepstakes sponsor or promoter, or any of the sweepstakes
sponsors or promoters partners, affiliates, subsidiaries or contractors, that
is intended to be used by a sweepstakes entrant, that uses energy, and that is
capable of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism.
      (2)   ENTER or ENTRY. The act or process by which a person becomes
eligible to receive any prize offered in a sweepstakes.
      (3)   ENTERTAINING DISPLAY. Visual information capable of being seen on
an electronic machine or device by a sweepstakes entrant that takes the form of
actual game play or simulated game play.
      (4)   PRIZE. Any gift, award, gratuity, goods, service, credit, or
anything else of value, which may be transferred to a person, whether
possession of the prize is actually transferred or placed on an account or
other record as evidence of the intent to transfer the prize.
      (5)   SWEEPSTAKES. Any game, advertising scheme or plan, or other
promotion which, with or without payment of any consideration, a person may
enter to win or become eligible to receive any prize, the determination of
which is based upon an element of chance.
   (B)   Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, lease,
operate, or place into operation an electronic machine or device in any
location open to the public within the Village of Carol Stream for the
following purposes:
      (1)   To conduct a sweepstakes through the use of an entertaining display
including the entry process or the reveal of a prize; or
      (2)   To promote a sweepstakes that is conducted through the use of an
entertainment display including the entry process or reveal of a prize.
   (C)   Exceptions. Nothing contained in Article 4, Chapter 11 shall be
construed as prohibiting duly licensed video gaming terminals as authorized by
§ 11-2-7(Q) of this code.
   (D)   Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this article shall be
fined not less than $250 nor more than $1,500 for each offense. Each machine or
device found to be in violation, and each day such violation occurs or
continues, shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. 2019-06-20, passed 6-3-2019)
§ 14-2-38 CANNABIS; UNLAWFUL USE OF.
   (A)   As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any place where a person could reasonably be expected to be
observed by others. PUBLIC PLACE includes all parts of buildings owned in whole
or in part, or leased, by the state or a unit of local government. PUBLIC PLACE
does not include a private residence unless the private residence is used to
provide licensed child care, foster care, or other similar social service care
on the premises.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke, consume or use any
substance containing cannabis:
      (1)   In a school bus, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or
caregiver pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act
(410 ILCS 130);
      (2)   On the grounds of any preschool or primary or secondary school,
unless permitted for a qualifying patient or caregiver pursuant to the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act (410 ILCS 130);
      (3)   In any motor vehicle;
      (4)   In a private residence that is used at any time to provide licensed
child care or other similar social service care on the premises;
      (5)   In any public place;
      (6)   Knowingly in close physical proximity to anyone under 21 years of
age who is not a registered medical cannabis patient under the Compassionate
Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act (410 ILCS 130);
      (7)   In any place where smoking is prohibited under the Smoke Free
Illinois Act.
(Ord. 2020-01-02, passed 1-20-2020)
§ 14-2-39 CANNABIS PARAPHERNALIA; POSSESSION OF.
   It shall be unlawful for a person who is under 21 years of age to possess
cannabis paraphernalia, unless he or she is a qualified patient under the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Act (410 ILCS 130).
(Ord. 2020-01-02, passed 1-20-2020)
ARTICLE 3: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER
Section
   
14-3-1   Breach of the peace
   
14-3-2   Disorderly conduct
   
14-3-3   Disturbing the peace
   
14-3-4   Disturbing schools, assemblies
   
14-3-5   Fighting
   
14-3-6   Loitering; definitions
   
14-3-7   Loitering
   
14-3-8   Nuisances; definition; prohibition
   
14-3-9   Nuisances; non-summary abatement; notice
   
14-3-10   Nuisances; non-summary abatement
   
14-3-11   Nuisances; summary abatement
   
14-3-12   False alarms and calls
   
14-3-13   Passing fire or police lines
   
14-3-14   Prisoners
   
14-3-15   Weapons; unlawful possession of; definition
   
14-3-16   Weapons; unlawful use of; offense exemptions
   
14-3-17   Weapons; discharge and possession of air rifles, air guns, spring
guns and similar objects
   
14-3-18   Weapons; possession in motor vehicles
   
14-3-19   Weapons; discharge of firearms
   
14-3-20   Reserved
   
14-3-21   Weapons; confiscation and disposition of
   
14-3-22   Smoking prohibited
§ 14-3-1 BREACH OF THE PEACE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person in any public place to provoke a breach
of the peace or use any violent, threatening, profane, indecent or abusive
language toward or about any other person in his or her presence or hearing,
which language in its common acceptance is calculated to arouse, to anger the
person addressed or cause a breach of the peace or an assault.
§ 14-3-2 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly:
   (A)   Do any act in such unreasonable manner as to provoke, make or aid in
making a breach of peace or an assault;
   (B)   Refuse or fail to cease and desist any peaceful conduct or activity
likely to produce a breach of peace where there is an imminent threat of
violence, and where the police have made all reasonable efforts to protect the
otherwise peaceful conduct and activity, and have requested that such conduct
and activity be stopped, and explained the request if there be time;
   (C)   Fail to obey a lawful order of dispersal by a person known by him or
her to be a peace officer under circumstances where three or more persons are
committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity, and where the
public health and safety is imminently threatened;
   (D)   Interfere with or hinder an officer or employee of the village while
such officer or employee is engaged in the duties of his or her office or
employment;
   (E)   Assemble with three or more persons for the purpose of using force or
violence to disturb the public peace;
   (F)   Appear in any public place manifestly under the influence of narcotics
or other drug, not therapeutically administered, to the degree that he or she
may endanger himself, herself or other persons or property, or annoy persons in
his or her vicinity;
   (G)   Carry in a threatening or menacing manner, without authority of law,
any pistol, revolver, dagger, razor, dangerous knife, stiletto, knuckles,
slingshot, an object containing noxious or deleterious liquid, gas or substance
or other dangerous weapon, or conceals such weapon on or about the person or
vehicle;
   (H)   While on public or private ground adjacent to any building in which a
school or any class thereof is in session, to willfully make or assist in the
making of any noise or diversion which disturbs or tends to disturb the peace
or good order of such school session or class thereof;
   (I)   Be drunk or be in a state of intoxication in any street, avenue or
public place or in any private house or place to the degree that the person may
endanger himself, herself or other persons or property, or create an annoyance
or disturbance of other persons;
   (J)   To consume any alcoholic liquor, as defined by law, on any public way
or in or about any motor vehicle upon a public way, or in, about, or on any
government owned property within the village, unless expressly permitted by the
governmental entity that has authority over such property; or
   (K)   To transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor within the
passenger area of any motor vehicle, except in the original package and with
the seal unbroken;
   (L)   The term public place shall have the same meaning as in § 14-3-6 of
this code.
(Ord. 2025-12-44, passed 12-15-2025)
§ 14-3-3 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully, maliciously or
intentionally disturb the peace and quiet of another, of any neighborhood,
family, religious congregation or other private or public assembly by being
unreasonably loud, unusual noises or indecent behavior or by threatening,
swearing or uttering any obscene, profane, vulgar or indecent language or by
any disorderly or unusual conduct.
§ 14-3-4 DISTURBING SCHOOLS, ASSEMBLIES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully interrupt or disturb
any school by menace, profane swearing, vulgar language or any disorderly or
unusual conduct, which causes substantial disruption of the activity of the
school.
   (B)   A person is guilty of disruption of school activities if he or she
comes into or remains in any school building, classroom or upon any school
ground, or street, sidewalk or public way adjacent thereto, without lawful
reason, and intentionally causes substantial disruption of the activities of
the school.
§ 14-3-5 FIGHTING.
   It shall be unlawful for any persons angered with each other to fight, box
or wrestle in public view. It shall also be unlawful for any person to
instigate, cause or procure any dog fight, prize fight, cock fight or any
public or private fighting.
§ 14-3-6 LOITERING; DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LOITERING. Remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the
concept of spending time idly, to be dilatory, to linger, to stay, to saunter,
to delay, to stand around and shall also include the colloquial expression
“hanging around”.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the general public has access and a right
to resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose, but does not
necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. It shall
also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern
or other place of business and also public grounds, areas or parks.
§ 14-3-7 LOITERING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain
idle either alone or in consort with others in a public place in such manner
and for such an unreasonable length of time so as to:
   (A)   Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk, public
parking lot or any other public place or building by hindering or impeding or
tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles,
traffic or pedestrians; or
   (B)   Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk,
public parking lot or any other public place or building any act or thing which
is an obstruction of interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property
or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or
fronting on any such public street, public highway, public sidewalk, public
parking lot or any other public place or building, all of which prevents the
free and uninterrupted ingress, egress and regress, therein, thereon and
thereto.
§ 14-3-8 NUISANCES; DEFINITION; PROHIBITION.
   The following acts, conduct and conditions are hereby declared and defined
to be nuisances, and when committed, performed or permitted to exist by any
individual, firm, association or corporation within the territorial limits of
the village, are hereby declared to be unlawful and prohibited:
   (A)   Any act or offense which is a nuisance according to the common law of
the state, or declared or defined to be a nuisance by the ordinances of the
village. In addition, the village officials shall be authorized to abate any
nuisance which, while not specifically defined within this article, shall
constitute the unreasonable, unwarrantable or unlawful use by persons of
property real or personal, or from his or her own improper, indecent or
unlawful personal conduct which works an obstruction or injury to a right of
another, or of the public, and produces such material annoyance, inconvenience,
discomfort or hurt that the law will presume an actionable nuisance. Nuisances
may be abated which are public or which are both public and private in nature;
   (B)   To cause or suffer the carcass of any animal or any offal, filth or
noisome substance to be collected, deposited or to remain in any place under
his or her ownership or control to the prejudice of others;
   (C)   To throw or deposit any offal or other offensive matter, or the
carcass of any dead animal in any watercourse, lake, pond, spring, well or
common sewer, street or public highway;
   (D)   To corrupt or render unwholesome or impure the water of any spring,
river, stream, pond or lake, to the injury or prejudice of others;
   (E)   To obstruct or encroach upon public highways, private ways, streets,
alleys, commons, landing places and ways to burying places;
   (F)   To erect, continue or use any building or other place for the exercise
of any trade, employment or manufacture, which, by occasioning noxious
exhalations, offensive smells or otherwise, is offensive or dangerous to the
health of individuals, or of the public;
   (G)   To advertise wares or occupation by painting notices of the same on,
or affixing them to fences, walls, windows, building exteriors, utility poles
or on hydrants, other public or private property, or on rocks or other natural
objects, without the consent of the owner, or if in the highway or other public
place, without permission of the proper authorities;
   (H)   To harass, intimidate or threaten any person who is about to sell or
lease or has sold or leased a residence or other real property or is about to
buy or lease or has bought or leased a residence or other real property, when
the harassment, intimidation or threat relates to a person’s attempt to sell,
buy or lease a residence, or other real property, or refers to a person’s sale,
purchase or lease of a residence or other real property;
   (I)   To dump, abandon, deposit, dismantle or burn upon any public property
or right-of-way, highway, park, street or parkway anywhere in the village any
trash, garbage, ashes, junk, junked or wrecked motor vehicles or parts thereof,
or miscellaneous waste;
   (J)   To own, maintain or keep a dwelling unit unfit for human habitation,
or dangerous or detrimental to life, safety or health because of lack of
repair, defects in the plumbing system, lighting or ventilation, the existence
of contagious diseases or unsanitary conditions likely to cause sickness or
discomfort among persons residing in such premises or residing in proximity
thereof; and/or
   (K)   To store or place any materials in a manner which is likely to harbor
rats.
§ 14-3-9 NUISANCES; NON-SUMMARY ABATEMENT; NOTICE.
   Any officer of the village possessing police powers may serve or cause to be
served a notice, in writing, upon the owner, agent, occupant or person in
possession, charge or control of any land, building or premises or item of
personalty in or upon which any nuisance may be found, or who may be the owner
or cause of any nuisance, requiring them, or either or both of them, to abate
the same within a specified reasonable time, in such manner as the notice shall
direct.
§ 14-3-10 NUISANCES; NON-SUMMARY ABATEMENT.
   If the person so served and notified does not abate the nuisance within the
specified reasonable time, the corporate authorities may proceed to abate the
nuisance in any or all manner allowable by law, including, without limiting the
generality thereof, the following:
   (A)   Seeking to impose a monetary penalty as defined by §
1-1-9 of this code by instituting an ordinance enforcement action; and/or
   (B)   Seeking to enjoin the continuation of the nuisance by the filing of a
lawsuit in a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 14-3-11 NUISANCES; SUMMARY ABATEMENT.
   Whenever, in the opinion of an officer of the village possessing police
powers, the maintenance or continuation of a nuisance creates an imminent
threat of serious injury to persons or serious damage to persons or real
property, or if the nuisance can be abated summarily without or with only minor
damage to the items or premises which are creating the nuisance, and the
continuation of the nuisance poses a substantial threat of injury to persons or
property or a substantial interference with the quiet enjoyment of life
normally present in the community, such officer shall proceed and shall
subsequently inform the owner of the property, if known, of the action taken;
provided, further, that, whenever the owner, occupant, agent or person in
possession, charge or control of the real or personal property which has become
a nuisance is unknown or cannot readily be found, the village officer shall
reasonably attempt to learn the identity of the owner and provide notice of the
action taken. Where the abatement of nuisance requires continuing acts by the
corporate authorities beyond the initial summary abatement and any other
additional emergency abatements, it shall seek abatement of such nuisance on a
permanent basis through judicial process as soon as reasonably possible.
§ 14-3-12 FALSE ALARMS AND CALLS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make or send in any alarm
or call for emergency fire, police or ambulance service unless there is
sufficient cause therefor.
§ 14-3-13 PASSING FIRE OR POLICE LINES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to pass fire or police lines without
specific permission to do so from a firefighter, police officer or other
officer of the village who can be later identified by the person. Officials of
the village and members of the press may pass such lines unless specifically
directed by a firefighter or police officer to remain outside of the cordoned
area.
§ 14-3-14 PRISONERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to rescue or attempt to rescue any
person from the custody of any village officer. No person shall aid, abet or
encourage the rescue or escape from prison of any person legally committed
thereto or shall supply, or attempt to supply, any such person with any weapon
or intoxicating liquors or with any implement or means of escape while in
prison or in the legal custody of any village officer.
§ 14-3-15 WEAPONS; UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF; DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIR GUN. Any air rifle, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol, B-B gun,
pellet gun or any similar implement that is not a firearm which impels a pellet
constructed of hard plastic, steel, lead or other hard material with a force
that reasonably is expected to cause bodily harm or property damage.
   FIREARM. Any item as defined by 430 ILCS 65/1.1.
   PROJECTILE-TYPE WEAPON. Includes, but is not limited to, “wrist rockets”,
slingshots or any other similar implement capable of propelling any type
projectile.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Shall include any of the following places within the village:
      (1)   Any publicly owned land, roadway, sidewalk or building;
      (2)   Any public place of accommodation or amusement;
      (3)   The common area of any apartment or condominium complex; or
      (4)   Any businesses open to the public.
   WEAPON. Shall have the following meaning:
      (1)   Any instrument which, by reason of its design, is primarily
intended for use as a weapon, such as, but not limited to, firearm, dagger,
stiletto, stun gun or taser, noxious liquid gas or substance, nunchucks, bill,
police baton, cross-bow or bow and arrow. A STUN GUN or TASER, as used in this
definition, means any device which is powered by electrical charging units,
such as batteries, and which fires one or several barbs attached to a length of
wire and which, upon hitting a human can send out current capable of disrupting
the person’s nervous system in such a manner as to render him or her incapable
of normal functioning;
      (2)   Any knife having a fixed or locking blade which is three or more
inches in length; or
      (3)   Any instrument which could be used as a weapon and is carried or
possessed in such a manner as to indicate intent on the part of the possessor
to use it as a weapon.
(Ord. 2002-06-33, passed 6-17-2002)
§ 14-3-16 WEAPONS; UNLAWFUL USE OF; OFFENSE EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Offense. No person shall possess a weapon on or about his or her
person while in a public place or in any vehicle while in a public place with
the intent to use the same unlawfully against another.
   (B)   Exemption. This section shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   Any person who is in possession of a weapon pursuant to his or her
employment; provided that, such person is either:
         (a)   The proprietor or manager of a licensed business; or
         (b)   An employee of a licensed business who has been authorized by
the proprietor or manager to possess such weapon.
      (2)   Any person who is in possession of a weapon and who is a
proprietor, employee, instructor or patron of any licensed business engaged in
the manufacture, sale, use or demonstration of such weapon, when and to the
extent that possession of such weapon is necessary to the conduct of such
business, such as but not limited to possession of a firearm at a firearm
dealership, possession of a firearm at a shooting range or possession of
nunchucks at a martial arts school;
      (3)   Any person who is in possession of a weapon and who is a
supervisor, instructor or participant in a recreational program offered by a
political subdivision, such as, but not limited to, a park district or a school
district, or offered by a civil organization, such as, but not limited to, the
Boy Scouts, when and to the extent that possession of such weapon is a part of
such recreational program;
      (4)   Any person who is authorized to possess a weapon by divisions (B)
(1), (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section while such person is transporting such
weapon from his or her residence to such business or recreational program, and
from such business or recreational program to his or her residence; provided
that, during such transport such weapon is not concealed and is, to the extent
possible, either in a non-functional condition or not readily accessible to
such person;
      (5)   Any person defined by 720 ILCS 5/24-2, subject to the provisions
and limitations of that section; or
      (6)   Any person 18 years of age or older who possesses an object
containing a non-lethal liquid gas or substance designed solely for personal
defense.
(Ord. 2002-06-33, passed 6-17-2002)
§ 14-3-17 WEAPONS; DISCHARGE AND POSSESSION OF AIR RIFLES, AIR GUNS, SPRING
GUNS AND SIMILAR OBJECTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or discharge on any
street, public parkway, public alley or other public place or way within the
village or out of doors of any place within the village within 1,000 feet of
any such public way any air gun, air rifle or air pistol, spring gun or spring
pistol or other projectile-type weapon device, which is calculated or intended
to propel or project a bullet, pellet, arrow or similar projectile.
   (B)   Weapons used in violation of this section shall be forfeited to and
confiscated by the village.
§ 14-3-18 WEAPONS; POSSESSION IN MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, carry or transport any
firearms, air guns or other projectile-type weapons in the passenger
compartment area of a motor vehicle within the village limits.
   (B)   Exceptions include:
      (1)   A peace officer or any officer of any court whose duty it may be to
serve warrants or make arrests;
      (2)   Firearms that are broken down in a non-functioning state;
      (3)   Firearms that are not immediately accessible; and
      (4)   Firearms that are unloaded and enclosed in a case, firearm carrying
box, shipping box or other container by a person who has been issued a
currently valid firearm owner’s identification card.
   (C)   Persons found in violation of this section shall be fined not less
than $50 for each offense and have the firearm air gun or other projectile-type
weapon confiscated by the village.
(Ord. 2009-09-41, passed 9-21-2009)
§ 14-3-19 WEAPONS; DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person except a peace officer or any officer of
any court whose duty it may be to serve warrants or make arrests, to fire or
discharge any gun, pistol, fowling piece or other firearm, within the corporate
limits of the village, except within a totally enclosed building licensed by
the village to permit the discharge of firearms therein.
§ 14-3-20 RESERVED.
§ 14-3-21 WEAPONS; CONFISCATION AND DISPOSITION OF.
   (A)   Upon conviction of an offense under this article, any weapon seized
shall be confiscated by the trial court. When the weapon is no longer needed
for evidentiary purposes, the court may transfer the weapon to the village’s
Police Department, which shall destroy such weapon, notwithstanding any
interest in such weapon by any other person unless such weapon is exempted
under division (B) of this section.
   (B)   Any stolen weapon so confiscated, when no longer needed for
evidentiary purposes, shall be returned to the person entitled to possession if
known under the following circumstances:
      (1)   The owner provides satisfactory proof of ownership;
      (2)   The owner is not the offender;
      (3)   The owner did not consent to the possession of such weapon for any
purpose by the offender;
      (4)   The ownership of the property predates the offense; and
      (5)   The owner possesses a valid firearms owner’s identification card.
§ 14-3-22 SMOKING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section, the below terms shall have the
following ascribed meanings.
      BAR. An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic
beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and that derives no more
than 10% of its gross revenue from the sale of food consumed on the premises.
BAR includes, but is not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges,
adult entertainment facilities and cabarets.
      EMPLOYEE. A person who is employed by an employer in consideration for
direct or indirect monetary wages or profits or a person who volunteers his or
her services for a non-profit entity.
      EMPLOYER. A person, business, partnership, association or corporation,
including a municipal corporation, trust or non-profit entity that employs the
services of one or more individual persons.
      ENCLOSED AREA. All space between a floor and a ceiling that is enclosed
or partially enclosed with solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways or
solid walls with partitions and no windows, exclusive of doorways, that extend
from the floor to the ceiling, including, without limitation, lobbies and
corridors.
      ENCLOSED OR PARTIALLY ENCLOSED SPORTS ARENA. Any sports pavilion,
stadium, gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller rink, ice
rink, bowling alley or other similar place where members of the general public
assemble to engage in physical exercise or participate in athletic competitions
or recreational activities or to witness sports, cultural, recreational or
other events.
      GAMING EQUIPMENT OR SUPPLIES. Gaming equipment/supplies as defined in the
Illinois Gaming Board Rules of the Illinois Administrative Code.
      GAMING FACILITY. An establishment utilized primarily for the purposes of
gaming and where gaming equipment or supplies are operated for the purposes of
accruing business revenue.
      HEALTHCARE FACILITY. An office or institution providing care or treatment
of diseases, whether physical, mental or emotional, or other medical,
physiological or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to,
hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, weight control clinics, nursing homes,
homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories and offices of surgeons,
chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists and all specialists
within these professions. HEALTHCARE FACILITY includes all waiting rooms,
hallways, private rooms, semi-private rooms and wards within healthcare
facilities.
      PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT. Any area under the control of a public or private
employer that employees are required to enter, leave or pass through during the
course of employment, including, but not limited to, entrances and exits to
places of employment, including a minimum distance of 15 feet from entrances,
exits, windows that open and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area
where smoking is prohibited; offices and work areas; restrooms; conference and
classrooms; break rooms and cafeterias; and other common areas. A private
residence or home-based business, unless used to provide licensed child care,
foster care, adult care or other similar social service care on the premises,
is not a PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT.
      PRIVATE CLUB. A not-for-profit association that has been in active and
continuous existence for at least three years prior to the effective date of
this amendatory Act of the 95th General Assembly, whether incorporated or not,
is the owner, lessee or occupant of a building or portion thereof used
exclusively for club purposes at all times, is operated solely for a
recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent or athletic
purpose, but not for pecuniary gain, and only sells alcoholic beverages
incidental to its operation. For purposes of this definition, PRIVATE CLUB
means an organization that is managed by a board of directors, executive
committee or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting, has
established bylaws, a constitution, or both to govern its activities, and has
been granted an exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club
under 26 U.S.C. § 501.
      PRIVATE RESIDENCE. The part of a structure used as a dwelling, including,
without limitation: a private home, townhouse, condominium, apartment, mobile
home, vacation home, cabin or cottage. For the purposes of this definition, a
hotel, motel, inn, resort, lodge, bed and breakfast or other similar public
accommodation, hospital, nursing home or assisted living facility shall not be
considered a PRIVATE RESIDENCE.
      PUBLIC PLACE. The portion of any building or vehicle used by and open to
the public, regardless of whether the building or vehicle is owned in whole or
in part by private persons or entities, the state, the village, or any other
public entity and regardless of whether a fee is charged for admission,
including a minimum distance of 15 feet from entrances, exits, windows that
open and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is
prohibited. A PUBLIC PLACE does not include a private residence unless the
private residence is used to provide licensed child care, foster care or other
similar social service care on the premises. A PUBLIC PLACE includes, but is
not limited to, hospitals, restaurants, retail stores, offices, commercial
establishments, elevators, indoor theaters, libraries, museums, concert halls,
public conveyances, educational facilities, nursing homes, auditoriums,
enclosed or partially enclosed sports arenas, meeting rooms, schools,
exhibition halls, convention facilities, polling places, private clubs, gaming
facilities, all government-owned vehicles and facilities, healthcare facilities
or clinics, enclosed shopping centers, retail service establishments, financial
institutions, educational facilities, ticket areas, public hearing facilities,
public restrooms, waiting areas, lobbies, bars, taverns, bowling alleys,
skating rinks, reception areas and no less than 75% of the sleeping quarters
within a hotel, motel, resort, inn, lodge, bed and breakfast, or other similar
public accommodation that are rented to guests, but excludes private
residences.
      RESTAURANT. An eating establishment, including, but not limited to,
coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands and private and public school
cafeterias, that gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests or
employees, and a kitchen or catering facility in which food is prepared on the
premises for serving elsewhere. RESTAURANT includes a bar area within the
RESTAURANT.
      RETAIL TOBACCO STORE. A retail establishment that derives more than 80%
of its gross revenue from the sale of loose tobacco, plants or herbs and
cigars, cigarettes, pipes and other smoking devices for burning tobacco and
related smoking accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely
incidental. RETAIL TOBACCO STORE does not include a tobacco department or
section of a larger commercial establishment or any establishment with any type
of liquor, food or restaurant license.
      SMOKE or SMOKING. The carrying, smoking, burning, inhaling or exhaling of
any kind of lighted or burning pipe, cigar, cigarette, hookah pipe, pipe weed,
herbs or any other lighted tobacco product in any manner or in any form.
   (B)   Smoking prohibited in public places and places of employment.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any public place or
place of employment within the village.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any place
designated as a “No Smoking Area”, as provided in division (D) of this section.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for an employer to knowingly permit smoking in
any enclosed area in any place of employment.
      (4)   It shall be unlawful for an employer, owner, occupant or lessee in
control of a public place to knowingly permit smoking in any enclosed area in
said public place.
      (5)   It shall be unlawful for an employer, owner, occupant or lessee in
control of a public place to fail to post signage or remove ashtrays, as
provided in division (E) of this section.
   (C)   Exemptions. The prohibitions on smoking set forth in this section
shall not apply to:
      (1)   Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to guests and are
designated as smoking rooms; provided that all smoking rooms on the same floor
must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into non-
smoking rooms or other areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions
of this section. Not more than 25% of the rooms rented to guests in a hotel or
motel may be designated as rooms where smoking is permitted. The status of
rooms as smoking or non-smoking may not be changed, except to add additional
non-smoking rooms;
      (2)   Private vehicles, not including public transportation facilities or
government vehicles;
      (3)   Private residences or dwelling places except when used as a child
care, adult day care, health care facility or any other home-based business
open to the public;
      (4)   Private and semi-private rooms in nursing homes and long-term care
facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are smokers
and have requested in writing to be placed in a room where smoking is
permitted; and
      (5)   Any public place or place of employment that is a tobacco dealer,
whose principal business is the sale of retail of tobacco and tobacco-related
products; provided that, smoke generated by smoking on the premises of the
tobacco dealer does not infiltrate into enclosed areas where smoking is
otherwise prohibited; and no food or liquor license has been granted.
   (D)   Designation of other no-smoking areas. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this section, any employer, owner, occupant, lessee, operator,
manager or other person in control of any public place or place of employment
may designate a non-enclosed area of said public place or place of employment,
including outdoor areas, as an area where smoking is also prohibited; provided
that, such employer, owner, lessee or occupant shall conspicuously post signs
prohibiting smoking in the manner described in division (E) of this section.
   (E)   Responsibilities of proprietors. Each owner, lessee, occupant,
employer or other person in control of a public place or a place of employment
shall be responsible for all the following:
      (1)   Post conspicuous signs no smaller than five inches by seven inches
in enclosed areas and the entrance or vestibule to the public place, place of
employment or the building wherein they are located, as the case may be,
bearing the text “No Smoking” or the international “No Smoking” symbol, which
consists of a pictorial representation of a cigarette enclosed in a circle with
a bar across it. Such signs shall also be posted outside of the main entrance
to the public place or place of employment, shall reference the 15-foot buffer
zone in which smoking is prohibited, and contain the telephone numbers of the
designated enforcement authorities noted in this section, in addition to the
telephone number and website designated by the Illinois Department of Public
Health for registering complaints;
      (2)   Remove ash trays or other similar containers intended for the
deposit of tobacco ash, cigarettes, cigars or other tobacco products from
public places;
      (3)   Request any person who smokes in an area where smoking is
prohibited to refrain from smoking, and if the person continues to smoke,
request the person to leave; and
      (4)   Notify employees regarding the requirements of this section.
   (F)   Enforcement.
      (1)   This section shall be enforced by the Police Department.
      (2)   Notice of the provisions of this section shall be given to all
applicants for a business license in the village.
      (3)   Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this section
may initiate enforcement by contacting the Police Department.
      (4)   An employer, owner, lessee, manager, operator or employee of an
establishment regulated by this section shall inform persons violating this
section of the appropriate provisions thereof and request that the violator
cease smoking in a prohibited area and, if the person continues to smoke,
request the person to leave.
   (G)   Penalties.
      (1)   Any person who shall violate divisions (B)(1) or (B)(2) of this
section shall, on conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of $100 for a first
violation and $250 for any subsequent violations within one year. Each day in
which a violation of divisions (B)(1) or (B)(2) of this section occurs
constitutes a separate and distinct violation.
      (2)   Any person who shall violate divisions (B)(3) or (B)(4) of this
section shall, on conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of $500 upon
conviction for the first violation and $750 for each subsequent conviction
stemming from a violation within one year of the initial violation of divisions
(B)(3) or (B)(4) of this section. Each day in which a violation of divisions
(B)(3) or (B)(4) of this section occurs constitutes a separate and distinct
violation.
      (3)   Any person who shall violate division (B)(5) of this section shall,
on conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of $250 for each violation. Each
day during which a violation of division (B)(5) of this section continues
beyond the specified time for correction shall constitute a separate punishable
offense, although owners, operators, managers or other controllers of public
places and places of employment shall be given a reasonable time to come into
compliance with division (B)(5) of this section following issuance of a notice
of violation, but such period shall not, in any event, exceed one week.
      (4)   In addition to the fines established by this division (G),
violation of this section by a person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise
controls a public place or place of employment may result in the suspension or
revocation of any permit or license issued to the person for the premises on
which the violation occurred.
      (5)   Violation of this section is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance, which may be abated by an action in the Circuit Court for injunctive
relief, or other means provided for by law, and the village may take action to
recover the costs of the nuisance abatement.
      (6)   Any person granted law enforcement authority in the village, who
observes a violation of any provision of this section may, as an alternative to
initially instituting a charge in the Circuit Court of DuPage County, issue a
“hang-on ticket” as provided in
Ch. 15, Art. 4, of this code, pursuant to which the person cited may pay the
sum of $25 within the time stated on the ticket as a compromise or settlement
to avoid the prosecution of an ordinance violation in the Circuit Court.
(Ord. 2007-12-50, passed 12-17-2007)
ARTICLE 4: MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
Section
   
14-4-1   Litter
   
14-4-2   Abandoned refrigerators and freezers
   
14-4-3   Admission fees, fraudulently avoiding payment of
   
14-4-4   Curfew
   
14-4-5   Activities on public rights-of-way
   
14-4-6   Parental responsibility for certain acts pertaining to minors
   
14-4-7   Remedies for violations of parental responsibility provisions
   
14-4-8   Fireworks
§ 14-4-1 LITTER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   (A)   Throw, drop or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk, alley,
public park or any public park facilities therein, or other public place within
the village, except in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles
for collection;
   (B)   Sweep or deposit in any gutter, street or alley, or other public place
within the village the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from
any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying
property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter;
and/or
   (C)   Drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the village unless
such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or
litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public
place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within the
village, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street,
alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign
matter of any kind.
§ 14-4-2 ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS AND FREEZERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow a discarded
refrigerator or freezer or one not in use to remain in any place accessible to
children unless the latching or locking mechanism on the door of the same has
been removed, or unless the doors of the same are bolted and locked in such
manner that it is impossible to open the same by the use of hands.
§ 14-4-3 ADMISSION FEES, FRAUDULENTLY AVOIDING PAYMENT OF.
   It shall be unlawful for any person fraudulently to enter, without payment
of the proper admission fee, any theater, ballroom, lecture, concert or other
place where admission fees are charged; provided, however, that, nothing herein
contained shall be deemed to prohibit or restrict the free admission of police
officers engaged in the performance of police duties to any place of public
entertainment or amusement.
§ 14-4-4 CURFEW.
   (A)   It is unlawful for a person less than 17 years of age to be present at
or upon any public assembly, building, place, street or highway at the
following times unless one of those exceptions listed in division (B) below
applies:
      (1)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday and Sunday; and
      (2)   Between 11:01 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00 a.m.
on the following day.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to any person less than 17 years of age
who is involved in the following activities:
      (1)   Accompanied and supervised by a parent, legal guardian or other
responsible companion of at least 17 years of age who is approved by the parent
or legal guardian;
      (2)   Engaged in a business or occupation which the laws of this state
authorize a person less than 17 years of age to perform;
      (3)   Attending or traveling to or from an official school, religious or
civic activity;
      (4)   Attending or traveling to or from any assembly activity for which a
permit has been lawfully issued;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency involving the protection of a person or
property from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial
damage; or
      (6)   Any activity which involves the exercise of the minor’s First
Amendment rights.
   (C)   Before issuing any citation pursuant to this section, the citing
officer shall make a reasonable effort to determine whether the person is
involved in any activity specified in division (B) of this section. If the
officer determines that the person is involved in such an activity, then no
citation shall be issued. If the officer reasonably believes that the person is
not involved in such activity, then the officer may issue a citation for
violation of this section.
   (D)   It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other person to
knowingly permit a minor in his or her custody or control to violate division
(A) of this section.
   (E)   A person violating this section shall be issued a citation and fined
no more than $500.
(Ord. 90-10-92, passed 10-23-1990; Ord. 2004-04-21, passed 4-19-2004)
§ 14-4-5 ACTIVITIES ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   It shall be unlawful to throw, kick or knock any ball, stones or other hard
substances, or play ball or engage in any sport, exercise or other recreational
activity upon any public street or place so as to endanger persons or property,
or obstruct or impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
(Ord. 95-08-44, passed 8-21-1995)
§ 14-4-6 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR CERTAIN ACTS PERTAINING TO MINORS.
   It shall be unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other adult having
custody or control of a minor or in whose home a minor resides to:
   (A)   Deliver to or otherwise furnish cannabis or any controlled substances
as defined by state law to that minor or use, engage or employ such minor to
deliver such prohibited materials; and/or
   (B)   Knowingly permit a minor child to use, sell, deliver or obtain
possession of cannabis or of any controlled substance. A parent or legal
guardian or the adult having custody or control of a minor or in whose home a
minor resides shall be presumed to have committed a violation of this section
if that minor has been convicted of violating any of the provisions of local
ordinance or state law pertaining to the use, delivery, possession or sale of
the identified prohibited materials, or has incurred non-judicial sanctions
from any law enforcement officer resulting from an admission of guilt to any
such offense.
(Ord. 94-03-25, passed 3-8-1994)
§ 14-4-7 REMEDIES FOR VIOLATIONS OF PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY PROVISIONS.
   In addition to fines or penalties available to the court pursuant to the
general penalty provisions of this code, including §
14-1-16, or any other applicable ordinance or statute, the court may impose
upon the minor and the responsible adult found guilty of a violation of §
14-4-6, a term of court supervision, community service or counseling for the
minor or the adult, or may order the responsible adult to pay restitution to
the victim as provided in §
14-1-17.
(Ord. 94-03-25, passed 3-8-1994)
§ 14-4-8 FIREWORKS.
   (A)   Definition. The term FIREWORKS shall mean and include any explosive
composition or any substance or combination of substances, or article prepared
for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect of a temporary
exhibitional nature by explosion, combustion, deflagration or detonation, and
shall include blank cartridges, toy cannons in which explosives are used, the
type of balloons which require fire underneath to propel the same,
firecrackers, torpedoes, sky rockets, Roman candles, bombs or other fireworks
of like construction and any fireworks containing any explosive compound; or
any tablets or other device containing any explosive substance, or containing
combustible substances producing visual effects. The term FIREWORKS shall not
include snake or glow worm pellets, smoke devices; sparklers; trick noisemakers
known as “party poppers”, “booby traps”, “snappers”, “trick matches”,
“cigarette loads” and “auto burglar alarms”, toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns
or other devices in which paper or plastic caps containing twenty-five
hundredths grains or less of explosive compound are used; provided, they are so
constructed that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for
the explosion; and toy pistol paper or plastic caps which contain less than
twenty-five hundredths grains of explosive mixture; the sale and use of which
shall be permitted at all times.
   (B)   Possession, sale and use of fireworks.
      (1)   Except as hereinafter provided it shall he unlawful for any person,
firm, co-partnership or corporation to knowingly possess, offer for sale,
expose for sale, sell at retail or use or explode any fireworks. The village
may grant permits for pyrotechnic and consumer displays to persons with proven
experience in the commercial use of fireworks.
      (2)   Any person who violates division (A) of this section shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $500, nor more than $1,000.
      (3)   Any police officer observing a violation of this section may, as an
alternative to arresting the offender, issue a “hang-on ticket” as provided in
Ch. 15, Art. 4, of this code pursuant to which the person cited may pay the sum
of $250 within ten days of the violation as a compromise or settlement to avoid
the prosecution of an ordinance violation in the Circuit Court.
(Ord. 2008-06-28, passed 6-2-2008)
ARTICLE 5: ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
14-5-1   Definitions
   
14-5-2   Adult-use cannabis business establishments prohibited
   
14-5-3   Adult-use cannabis dispensing organizations
   
14-5-4   Public nuisance declared
   
14-5-5   Violations
§ 14-5-1 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this chapter,
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, as follows:
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT. A cultivation center, craft
grower, processing organization, infuser organization, or transporting
organization.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER. A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, dry, cure and package cannabis and perform other necessary
activities to make cannabis available for sale at a dispensing organization or
use at a processing organization, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act,
(P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to cultivate, process, transport and perform necessary activities
to provide cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed cannabis business
establishments, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it
may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed
cannabis business establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing
cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related
supplies to purchasers or to qualified registered medical cannabis patients and
caregivers, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may
be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION OR INFUSER. A facility operated by
an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product, per the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-
time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR. A facility operated
by an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or compounds to produce
cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis product, per the Cannabis Regulation
and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER. An organization
or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
transport cannabis on behalf of a cannabis business establishment or a
community college licensed under the Community College Cannabis Vocational
Training Pilot Program, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-
0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, corporation, association, club, society or other
organization, including any owner, manager, proprietor, employee, volunteer or
agent.
(Ord. 2019-12-53, passed 12-16-2019)
§ 14-5-2 ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED.
   The following adult-use cannabis business establishments are prohibited in
the village. No person shall locate, operate, own, suffer, allow to be operated
or aide, abet or assist in the operation within the village any of the
following:
   (A)   Adult-use cannabis craft grower;
   (B)   Adult-use cannabis cultivation center;
   (C)   Adult-use cannabis infuser organization or infuser;
   (D)   Adult-use cannabis processing organization or processor; and
   (E)   Adult-use cannabis transporting organization or transporter.
(Ord. 2019-12-53, passed 12-16-2019)
§ 14-5-3 ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATIONS.
   Adult-use cannabis dispensing organizations shall be allowed within the
village only as provided in Chapter 16, "Zoning", Article 3, “District Specific
Standards”, §
16-3-11 “Permitted and Special Uses” of the Village Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 2019-12-53, passed 12-16-2019; Ord. 2023-03-09, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 14-5-4 PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED.
   Operation of any cannabis business establishment within the village
prohibited by § 14-5-2 is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be abated
pursuant to all available remedies.
(Ord. 2019-12-53, passed 12-16-2019)
§ 14-5-5 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a
fine in the amount of not less than $750 or more than $1,000 per offense. A
separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed on each day during
which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 2019-12-53, passed 12-16-2019)
CHAPTER 15: MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
      Article
         
1.   CIVIL EMERGENCIES
         
2.   HANDBILLS AND POSTING NOTICES
         
3.   PARADES AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES
         
4.   PROCEDURE FOR SETTLING AND COMPROMISING ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS AND INDEX OF
MINIMUM FINES
         
5.   SOUND AMPLIFIERS
         
6.   FAIR HOUSING
         
7.   RESERVED
         
8.   TOWN CENTER RULES AND REGULATIONS
         
9.   POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITIES
         
10.   ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION SYSTEM
ARTICLE 1: CIVIL EMERGENCIES
Section
   
15-1-1   Definitions
   
15-1-2   Declaration of civil emergency
   
15-1-3   General curfew order
   
15-1-4   Other orders
   
15-1-5   Notice
   
15-1-6   Length of effectiveness
   
15-1-7   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Emergency Management Agency, see
Ch. 3, Art. 5
§ 15-1-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CIVIL EMERGENCY. 
      (1)   A riot, or any unlawful assembly or gathering of three or more
persons, characterized by the use of force or violence upon persons or
property, or threatened or obvious intended use of force or violence upon
persons or property accompanied by immediate power to execute, acting together
or in conjunction with each other, without authority of law, which has or could
result in injury to persons or property, or jeopardize the public peace, safety
and welfare.
      (2)   Any natural disaster, or human-made calamity, including flood,
conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake, explosion or bombing, within the
corporate limits of the village or within the area adjacent to the village,
resulting in the death or injury of persons or in the damage or destruction of
property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be taken for the
protection and preservation of the public peace, safety and welfare within the
village.
   CURFEW. A prohibition against any person or persons, standing, sitting,
lying, loitering, walking, running or being within or upon any vehicle, in or
upon any alley, street, highway, public property or vacant premises in any
geographical area within the corporate limits of the village, except persons
officially designated to duty with reference to such civil emergency.
§ 15-1-2 DECLARATION OF CIVIL EMERGENCY.
   Whenever a civil emergency, as defined in §
15-1-1, exists, the Village President shall declare the existence by means of a
written declaration, signed under oath, setting forth the facts which
constitute the civil emergency.
§ 15-1-3 GENERAL CURFEW ORDER.
   After proclamation of a civil emergency by the Village President, the
Village President may order a general or limited curfew applicable to such
geographical areas of the village or to the village as a whole, as the Village
President deems advisable, and applicable during such hours of the day or night
as the Village President deems necessary for the protection and preservation of
the public peace, safety and welfare.
§ 15-1-4 OTHER ORDERS.
   After the proclamation of a civil emergency, the Village President may also,
in the interest of public peace, safety and welfare, make any or all of the
following orders:
   (A)   Order the closing of all liquor stores and establishments, including
restaurants and private clubs or portions thereof, wherein the consumption of
alcoholic liquor is permitted;
   (B)   Prohibit the sale, serving or giving away of any intoxicating liquor
in or by any store, restaurant, private club or other establishment having an
alcoholic liquor license issued by the village;
   (C)   Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor by any
wholesaler or retailer;
   (D)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away of
gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container
other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle;
   (E)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or
giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever; and
   (F)   Such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection of
life and property.
§ 15-1-5 NOTICE.
   Upon issuance of the proclamation authorized, it shall be filed with the
Village Clerk as soon as practicable, and the Chief of Police shall notify the
news media of the village and shall cause three copies of the proclamation
declaring the existence of the civil emergency to be posted in three prominent
places within the village.
§ 15-1-6 LENGTH OF EFFECTIVENESS.
   A state of civil emergency, declared as provided in this article, shall
expire not later than the adjournment of the first regular meeting of the
corporate authorities after the state of civil emergency is declared.
§ 15-1-7 PENALTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of any
curfew or any other order issued by the Village President under the provisions
of this article, or to fail or refuse to obey promptly any reasonable order,
direction or command issued by any police officer acting in the performance of
his or her duty or power in the enforcement of the provisions of this article
for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety.
   (B)   Any person guilty of such violation shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine of not less than $100, nor more than $750, for each offense.
ARTICLE 2: HANDBILLS AND POSTING NOTICES
Section
   
15-2-1   Placing handbills on vehicles prohibited
   
15-2-2   Depositing handbills on vacant premises prohibited
   
15-2-3   Placing newspapers and handbills on private property
   
15-2-4   Persons liable
   
15-2-5   Posting notices prohibited
§ 15-2-1 PLACING HANDBILLS ON VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any commercial or
non-commercial handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, that, it
shall not be unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or
distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, a commercial or non-
commercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it.
§ 15-2-2 DEPOSITING HANDBILLS ON VACANT PREMISES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any commercial or
non-commercial handbill in or upon any private premises which, because of its
appearance or the presence of unremoved handbills, newspapers or magazines,
appears to be unoccupied.
§ 15-2-3 PLACING NEWSPAPERS AND HANDBILLS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place newspapers or commercial or
non-commercial hand-bills on private property in a manner resulting in their
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other
public place or upon private property.
§ 15-2-4 PERSONS LIABLE.
   It shall be a violation of this article for any person to instruct agents or
employees to distribute commercial or non-commercial handbills and news-papers
in a manner inconsistent with the prohibitions of this article or to fail to
supervise agents or employees so that a violation of this article occurs.
§ 15-2-5 POSTING NOTICES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to post or affix any notice,
advertisement, poster or other paper or device calculated to attract the
attention of the public to any lamp post, public utility pole, tree or upon any
public structure, building or public property, except as may be authorized by
the Sign Code, being
Ch. 6, Art. 11, of this code.
(Ord. 92-06-64, passed 6-9-1992)
ARTICLE 3: PARADES AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES
Section
   
15-3-1   Definitions
   
15-3-2   Permit required
   
15-3-3   Application
   
15-3-4   Time
   
15-3-5   Not to obstruct traffic
   
15-3-6   Grant or denial of permit
   
15-3-7   Procedure when permit denied
   
15-3-8   Simultaneous applications
   
15-3-9   Issuance of multiple permits
§ 15-3-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARADE. Any march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession of any
kind, or similar display, in or upon any public way or other public property.
   PUBLIC ASSEMBLY. Any outdoor meeting, congregation or gathering of persons
held on public property for the purpose of expressive activity.
(Ord. 92-05-60, passed 5-26-1992)
§ 15-3-2 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall participate in or hold a parade or any public assembly
unless a written permit therefor shall first be obtained.
(Ord. 92-05-60, passed 5-26-1992)
§ 15-3-3 APPLICATION.
   (A)   An application to conduct a parade or public assembly shall be made in
writing to the Village Manager at least 72 hours prior to the event by a
representative of the group seeking the permit.
   (B)   The application to conduct a parade or public assembly shall set forth
the following information:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct such parade or public assembly;
      (2)   If the parade or public assembly is proposed to be conducted for,
on behalf of or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of
the headquarters of the organization;
      (3)   The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
the parade Chairperson or person in charge of the public assembly;
      (4)   The date when the parade or public assembly is to be conducted;
      (5)   The route to be traveled, the starting point, the termination point
and the location of speakers’ platforms;
      (6)   The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles
which, will constitute such parade or public assembly; the type of animals and
description of the vehicles;
      (7)   The hours when such parade or public assembly will start and
terminate;
      (8)   A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a
portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed;
      (9)   The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade or
public assemblies;
      (10)   The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at
any such assembly area or areas;
      (11)   The interval of space to be maintained between units of such
parade; and
      (12)   If the parade is designed to be held by and on behalf of or for
any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file
with the Village Manager a communication in writing from the person proposing
to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his or
her behalf.
(Ord. 92-05-60, passed 5-26-1992)
§ 15-3-4 TIME.
   All parades on public ways and all public assemblies shall be held at times
other than peak traffic periods (7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. to 6:00
p.m., Monday through Saturday) and not before noon on Sundays. All public
assemblies shall conclude by midnight.
(Ord. 92-05-60, passed 5-26-1992)
§ 15-3-5 NOT TO OBSTRUCT TRAFFIC.
   Parades and public assemblies shall be limited to such numbers as will not
obstruct traffic, either vehicular or pedestrian, in an unreasonable manner.
(Ord. 92-05-60, passed 5-26-1992)
§ 15-3-6 GRANT OR DENIAL OF PERMIT.
   Following receipt of an application or reapplication for a parade or public
assembly meeting, and its approval, the Village Manager shall either issue a
permit within 24 hours, or reject the application for a permit for the holding
of a parade or public assembly.
(Ord. 92-05-60, passed 5-26-1992)
§ 15-3-7 PROCEDURE WHEN PERMIT DENIED.
   Permits may be rejected on the basis of improper or incomplete application.
The reasons for rejection shall be made known to the applicant, in writing, at
the time of rejection. The applicant shall be allowed to correct or complete
any improper application and resubmit it to the Village Manager within 24 hours
prior to the time of the event.
(Ord. 92-05-60, passed 5-26-1992)
§ 15-3-8 SIMULTANEOUS APPLICATIONS.
   If the Village Manager shall receive more than one application for a parade
or public assembly at the same time and the same place, or on the same day, the
application filed first in time shall take precedence. An application shall be
considered to be “at the same time” if the event is scheduled to commence
within two hours before or after the holding of another event. An application
shall be considered to be “at the same place” if the requested parade route
comes at any point within six blocks or any equivalent distance from the route
of another parade, or if the public assembly is to be conducted within one-half
mile of another public assembly. If the Village Manager receives an application
for more than one parade or public assembly in a single day, he or she may set
a time for the duration of each parade or public assembly, which time shall
not, without the consent of the group seeking the permit, be less than three
hours.
(Ord. 92-05-60, passed 5-26-1992)
§ 15-3-9 ISSUANCE OF MULTIPLE PERMITS.
   The Village Manager shall issue permits for more than a single parade during
one day in accordance with the requirements of this article. However, he or she
may not issue multiple permits beyond the point at which the issuance of an
additional permit would require the continuing diversion of so great a number
of police officers or other village personnel so as to prevent normal police
protection or other services to the village.
(Ord. 92-05-60, passed 5-26-1992)
ARTICLE 4: PROCEDURE FOR SETTLING AND COMPROMISING ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS AND
INDEX OF MINIMUM FINES
Section
   
15-4-1   Notice of violation
   
15-4-2   Hang-on tickets
   
15-4-3   Payment of settlement
   
15-4-4   Prosecutions
   
15-4-5   Index of minimum fines
§ 15-4-1 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   All persons accused of violating or failing to comply with any provisions of
the code of ordinances of the village or any other ordinances of the village
not reprinted within the loose-leaf volume entitled “Code of Ordinances of the
Village of Carol Stream”, including, but not limited to, ordinances relating to
traffic control, shall be notified of such violation or failure to comply in
one of the following two ways:
   (A)   By arrest, or by the issuance of a formal complaint in the Circuit
Court of DuPage County, which complaint shall require the appearance of the
defendant at the Circuit Court upon a noted day. A violation or a failure to
comply commenced in this manner shall not be settled or compromised, but shall
proceed to a hearing at which the defendant may plead “guilty” or “not guilty”;
or
   (B)   By the issuance to the defendant of a “hang-on ticket”. A violation or
failure to comply commenced in this manner may be settled or compromised as
provided in this article.
§ 15-4-2 HANG-ON TICKETS.
   (A)   A person receiving a “hang-on ticket” may settle or compromise such
ticket by payment of the amount shown on the ticket or, if no amount is shown
on the ticket, then the amount of the minimum fine provided in this article for
the offense, at the village building of the village within ten days after the
issuance of such ticket or within 30 days if such ticket is for a violation of
§§
8-2-7,
8-2-8,
8-2-9,
8-2-10,
8-2-11,
8-2-12,
8-2-13,
8-2-14,
8-2-15, and
8-2-16, §§
8-7-1,
8-7-2 and
8-7-3, and §§ 7, 8, 9, 10 and 16 of Village Ord. 90-07-55. If such ticket is
not settled or compromised within the initial ten- or 30-day period, it may be
settled or compromised by the payment of twice the amount of such ticket, or if
no amount is shown on the ticket, then twice the amount of the minimum fine
provided in this article for the offense, for a period of 20 days after the
lapse of the initial ten- or 30-day period.
   (B)   In the case of failure to make payment as herein provided, the officer
issuing the ticket shall issue a written notice to appear and complaint which
shall state the name and address of the person, if known; the offense
committed; be signed by the officer; and request the person to appear at the
Circuit Court of DuPage County at a specific time and date. The notice to
appear and complaint shall be served in the manner provided by the rules of the
Circuit Court of DuPage County.
   (C)   In the event that the person fails to appear in court on the date set
forth in the notice to appear and complaint, the matter shall be referred to
the Circuit Court of DuPage County for issuance of summons or an arrest warrant
and the setting of a date for a hearing.
(Ord. 93-08-77, passed 8-24-1993; Ord. 2003-12-85, passed 12-1-2003)
§ 15-4-3 PAYMENT OF SETTLEMENT.
   Payment of a settlement and compromise amount shall be made to the village
in person or by mail, and a receipt shall be issued for all money so received.
§ 15-4-4 PROSECUTIONS.
   Officers of the Village Police Department are hereby authorized to refrain
from initiating a prosecution for the alleged offense for which “hang-on
tickets” are issued until the expiration of 11 days from the date of issuance
of the ticket, as provided in this article.
§ 15-4-5 INDEX OF MINIMUM FINES.
   (A)   This index in no way limits the right of the village to assess or to
seek a higher fine than is listed herein, or to impose or seek any other remedy
which is provided by ordinance or other law. Except as otherwise provided
within the Carol Stream Code of Ordinances, the maximum penalty which may be
assessed in the event of any violation of the code of ordinances of the village
is $1,500 per offense.
   (B)   This index is provided for reference purposes only. Failure to include
an existing or future minimum fine within this index in no way invalidates such
fine.
Violation Minimum Fine for Violation
                                                                                   Minimum
Violation                                                                          Fine for
                                                                                   Violation
Administration                                                                     $10
Animals and fowl                                                                   $10
Buildings and building regulations
                                                                                   $150 -
   Building Code                                                                maximum
                                                                                   fine
                                                                                   $1,500
                                                                                   $150 -
   Electrical Code                                                              maximum
                                                                                   fine
                                                                                   $1,500
                                                                                   $150 -
   Energy Code                                                                  maximum
                                                                                   fine
                                                                                   $1,500
                                                                                   $150 -
   Existing Building Code                                                       maximum
                                                                                   fine
                                                                                   $1,500
                                                                                   $150 -
   Fire Code                                                                    maximum
                                                                                   fine
                                                                                   $1,500
                                                                                   $150 -
   Fuel Gas Code                                                                maximum
                                                                                   fine
                                                                                   $1,500
                                                                                   $150 -
   Mechanical Code                                                              maximum
                                                                                   fine
                                                                                   $1,500
                                                                                   $150 -
   Plumbing Code                                                                maximum
                                                                                   fine
                                                                                   $1,500
                                                                                   $150 -
   Private swimming pools                                                       maximum
                                                                                   fine
                                                                                   $1,500
                                                                                   $150 -
   Property Maintenance Code                                                    maximum
                                                                                   fine
                                                                                   $1,500
                                                                                   $150 -
   Residential Code                                                             maximum
                                                                                   fine
                                                                                   $1,500
                                                                                   $150 -
   Solar Energy Code                                                            maximum
                                                                                   fine
                                                                                   $1,500
                                                                                   $150 -
   Stop work orders                                                             maximum
                                                                                   fine
                                                                                   $1,500
Business and licensing regulations                                                 $50
General provisions                                                                 $10
Health regulations                                                                 $200
Intoxicating liquors                                                               $50
Miscellaneous provisions and offenses
   Cannabis possession                                                          $75
   Firearms                                                                     $75
   Litter                                                                       $75
   Miscellaneous                                                                $10
   Parades and open air meetings                                                $10
   Retail theft                                                                 $75
   Weeds and plants                                                             $75
Police alarm systems                                                               $25
Regulations of dogs and animals
   Control of defecation                                                        $100
   Dangerous animal                                                             $100
   Dog license                                                                  $10
   Vicious animal                                                               $400
Streets, sidewalks and driveways                                                   $10
Subdivisions
   All other violations                                                         $10
   Construction of public improvements, sale, offer for sale, lease or offer for$25
lease prior to approval of final plat
   Flood prone areas                                                            $100
   Land movement                                                                $10
   Stop work orders                                                             $100
Taxation and finance                                                               $10
Traffic
   All other parking                                                            $30
   Operation of motor vehicle on sidewalk                                       $30
   Operation of motorized skateboards                                           $30
   § 8-6-20 Prohibited Parking of Vehicles and Trailers over 8,000 pounds on a $150
Roadway in a Residence District
                                                                                   $150 -
Unified Development Ordinance                                                      maximum
                                                                                   fine
                                                                                   $1,500
Water generally and storm water drainage
   Any violation of Chapter 13, Article 3                                       $150
Zoning                                                                             $75
 
(Ord. 93-08-77, passed 8-24-1993; Ord. 95-06-26, passed 6-5-1995; Ord. 2003-12-
85, passed 12-1-2003; Ord. 2006-02-05, passed 2-6-2006; Ord. 2008-04-15, passed
4-21-2008; Ord. 2017-11- 62, passed 11-6-2017; Ord. 2019-05-16, passed 5- 6-
2019; Ord. 2019-07-22, passed 7-15-2019; Ord. 2020-05-15, passed 5-18-2020;
Ord. 2023-04-17, passed 4-17-2023; Ord. 2025-07-27, passed 7-7- 2025)
ARTICLE 5: SOUND AMPLIFIERS
Section
   
15-5-1   Permit required
   
15-5-2   Permit fee
   
15-5-3   Application
   
15-5-4   Issuance of permits
   
15-5-5   Restrictions
§ 15-5-1 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate any sound amplification
device by which sounds are magnified and made heard over any public street or
public place without having first obtained a permit therefor.
   (B)   No permit shall be required for amplification devices used on private
property in residential districts only. However, all restrictions contained in
§
14-2-17(C) and §
15-5-5 shall also apply to amplification devices on private property in
residential districts, including during block parties.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to audio media devices
in homes or in private pleasure vehicles, when the same are operated in such a
manner as not to be audible at a distance of 50 feet from such vehicle; to
noise devices, bands, or other musical devices used in any public parade,
procession or event which is operated under a permit in accordance with this
code; or to church bells, chimes or carillons.
(Ord. 92-07-79, passed 7-14-1992; Ord. 92-08-98, passed 8-25-1992; Ord. 2013-
05-17, passed 5-6-2013)
§ 15-5-2 PERMIT FEE.
   The fee for the use or operation of any radio receiving set, talking
machine, amplifier or other similar device to be operated from a fixed location
or in a moving vehicle on any public place shall be $25 for any day or part of
a day for which the permittee desires to have a permit. The permit fee may be
waived by the Village Manager for governmental entities.
(Ord. 92-07-79, passed 7-14-1992; Ord. 2025-05- 17, passed 5-5-2025)
§ 15-5-3 APPLICATION.
   Any person, firm or corporation desiring a permit for the use or operation
of such a device shall file an application with the Village Manager upon a form
provided therefor, setting forth the name and address of the applicant, the
name and address of the owner of such device, the date upon which it is
intended to be used, the purpose for its use and such other information as may
be prescribed.
§ 15-5-4 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   Such permit shall be issued upon the payment of the fee to the Village
Manager, as provided above, and shall permit the use of such device subject to
the terms and conditions of this article, only upon the date specified on such
permit and no other.
§ 15-5-5 RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate any sound amplification
device by which sounds are magnified and made heard over any public street or
public place within the village limits between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 9:00
a.m. on any day.
   (B)   No person shall use, operate or employ any sound amplification device
within a radius of two blocks from any hospital or within the radius of two
blocks from any church or other place of worship while services are being held.
This section shall not apply to church bells, chimes or carillons.
   (C)   No person shall cause or permit to be emitted from any such device any
lewd, obscene, profane or indecent language or sounds, or allow any false
representation of any matter, product or product advertised whereby the sale of
which is prohibited by law, ordinance or statute.
   (D)   This section shall not apply to audio media devices in homes or in
private pleasure vehicles, when the same are operated in such a manner as not
to be audible at a distance of 50 feet from such vehicle.
(Ord. 92-07-79, passed 7-14-1992; Ord. 2013-05-17, passed 5-6-2013)
ARTICLE 6: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
15-6-1   Declaration of policy
   
15-6-2   Definitions
   
15-6-3   Committee created, membership
   
15-6-4   Qualifications of members
   
15-6-5   Appointment; term
   
15-6-6   Chairperson
   
15-6-7   Quorum; majority
   
15-6-8   Powers; duties
   
15-6-9   Unlawful real estate practices
   
15-6-10   Advertisements, signs, notices
   
15-6-11   Withholding housing
   
15-6-12   Refusal of offers
   
15-6-13   Refusal to negotiate
   
15-6-14   Discriminatory terms
   
15-6-15   Discrimination in lending
   
15-6-16   Representation
   
15-6-17   Miscellaneous violations
   
15-6-18   Complaints of violation
   
15-6-19   Service of complaint; investigation
   
15-6-20   Procedure upon determination of probable cause
   
15-6-21   Hearing without further mediation
   
15-6-22   Hearings by Committee
   
15-6-23   Enforcement
   
15-6-24   Time limitations
   
15-6-25   Remedies
§ 15-6-1 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the village and the purpose of
this article, in the exercise by the village of its police and regulatory
powers for the protection of the public safety, for the health, morals, safety
and welfare of the persons in and residing in the village, and for the
maintenance and promotion of commerce, industry and good government in the
village, to secure to all persons living or working or desiring to live or work
in the village a fair opportunity to purchase, lease, rent or occupy real
estate without discrimination based on race, color, religion or national
origin.
§ 15-6-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMITTEE. The Ad Hoc Carol Stream Fair Housing Committee.
   LEASE. Includes sublease, assignment or rental and includes any contract to
do any of the foregoing.
   NATIONAL ORIGIN. Includes the national origin of an ancestor.
   OWNER. Any person who holds legal or equitable title to, or owns any
beneficial interest in, any real property or who holds legal or equitable title
to shares of, or holds any beneficial interest in, any real estate cooperative
which owns any real property.
   PERSON. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, legal representatives, mutual companies, unincorporated
organizations, trusts, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers and
fiduciaries.
   PURCHASE. Includes any contract to purchase.
   REAL ESTATE TRANSACTION. The purchase, sale, exchange, rental or lease of
any real property, or an option to do any of the foregoing.
   REAL PROPERTY. Any real estate, vacant land, building or structure within
the village limits.
   SALE. Includes any contract to sell, exchange or to convey, transfer or
assign legal or equitable title to or a beneficial interest in real property.
§ 15-6-3 COMMITTEE CREATED, MEMBERSHIP.
   Pursuant to the village policy established in this article, the Village
President is hereby authorized to establish, at his or her discretion, an ad
hoc Fair Housing Committee, which shall consist of five members appointed by
the Village President with the consent and approval of the Board of Trustees.
§ 15-6-4 QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS.
   All five members of the ad hoc Fair Housing Committee shall be appointed
from the community at large and shall be citizens who have previously exhibited
commitment and interest in various activities concerned with improving
community human relations.
§ 15-6-5 APPOINTMENT; TERM.
   Members of the ad hoc Fair Housing Committee shall be appointed by the
Village President with the consent and approval of the Board of Trustees. The
ad hoc Fair Housing Committee shall cease to exist at the expiration of 30 days
from the date of appointment or upon the submission of the report required
under this article, whichever occurs sooner, unless the existence of the
Committee is extended by the Village President with the consent and approval of
the Board of Trustees.
§ 15-6-6 CHAIRPERSON.
   The Village President shall designate one of the members of the ad hoc Fair
Housing Committee to be its Chairperson.
§ 15-6-7 QUORUM; MAJORITY.
   Three members of the ad hoc Fair Housing Committee shall constitute a quorum
and the concurrence of a majority shall be sufficient for any Committee action.
§ 15-6-8 POWERS; DUTIES.
   The ad hoc Fair Housing Committee shall have and exercise the following
duties and powers:
   (A)   Investigate allegations and complaints of discrimination in housing as
a result of the race, color or religion or national origin of any person
seeking housing within the village. Any complaint or allegation of
discrimination shall be made in writing to the corporate authorities of the
village and shall fully set forth circumstances of the alleged violation and
the source of all information upon which the complaint is based, including the
names and addresses of all complainants. A copy of such written complaint shall
be mailed to the party alleged to be engaging in housing discrimination;
   (B)   Report to the corporate authorities no later than 30 days from the
date the Committee was appointed, the Committee’s results of its investigation
regarding housing discrimination and any recommendations which the Committee
wishes to make therefor; and
   (C)   Any other duties and powers which are granted by the Village President
with the consent and approval of the Board of Trustees when the ad hoc Fair
Housing Committee is created or at any time during its existence.
§ 15-6-9 UNLAWFUL REAL ESTATE PRACTICES.
   The following acts, as set forth in §§
15-6-10 through
15-6-17, are hereby prohibited acts by an owner, real estate broker, real
estate salesperson or any other person acting as agent for the owner of any
real estate and are hereby declared to constitute unlawful real estate
practices, and the commission or omission of any of these acts shall be deemed
a violation of this article.
§ 15-6-10 ADVERTISEMENTS, SIGNS, NOTICES.
   It shall be unlawful and an unlawful real estate practice for any person to
publish or circulate a statement, advertisement or notice, or to post or erect
or cause any person to post or erect, any sign or notice upon any real
property, indicating any intent to sell or lease any real property in a manner
that is unlawful under this article.
§ 15-6-11 WITHHOLDING HOUSING.
   It shall be unlawful and an unlawful real estate practice for any person to
represent to any person that any real property is not available for inspection,
purchase, sale, lease or occupancy when in fact it is so available, or
otherwise to withhold real property from any person because of race, color,
religion or national origin.
§ 15-6-12 REFUSAL OF OFFERS.
   It shall be unlawful and an unlawful real estate practice for any real
estate agent or other person to refuse to receive or to fail to transmit a bona
fide offer for the purchase, sale, exchange or lease of any real property
because of the race, color, religion or national origin of the person making
such offer.
§ 15-6-13 REFUSAL TO NEGOTIATE.
   It shall be unlawful and an unlawful real estate practice for any person to
refuse to negotiate for, enter into or perform any sale or rental of any real
property, because of the race, color, religion or national origin of any party
to such sale or rental, or of any member of the family of any such party, or of
any person using or occupying or intending to use or occupy such real property,
or of any person using or occupying any real property in the area in which such
real property is located.
§ 15-6-14 DISCRIMINATORY TERMS.
   It shall be unlawful and an unlawful housing practice for any person to sell
or rent or offer to sell or rent real property on terms, conditions or
privileges that discriminate between persons because of race, color, religion
or national origin.
§ 15-6-15 DISCRIMINATION IN LENDING.
   It shall be unlawful and an unlawful real estate practice for any lending
institution to refuse to negotiate for, enter into or perform any agreement to
lend or guarantee the loan of funds, or in making, agreeing to make, arranging
or negotiating any loan or guarantee of funds, for the purpose of financing the
purchase or sale, construction, lease, rehabilitation, improvement, renovation
or repair of any real property, or to offer or agree to terms, conditions or
privileges that discriminate between persons because of race, color, religion
or national origin of any party to such agreement, or of any member of the
family of any such party, or of the residents of the area in which such real
property is located.
§ 15-6-16 REPRESENTATION.
   It shall be unlawful and an unlawful real estate practice for any person,
for the purpose of inducing any other person to enter into a real estate
transaction with such person, his or her principal or his or her agent:
   (A)   To represent that a change has occurred, will occur or may occur with
respect to race, color, religion or national origin in the composition of the
owners or occupants in any block, neighborhood or area in which the real
property (which is the subject of the real estate transaction) is located; or
   (B)   To represent that a change, with respect to the race, color, religion
or national origin in the composition of the owners or occupants in any block,
neighborhood, or area will result in the lowering of property values, or in an
increase in criminal or antisocial behavior, or in a decline in the quality of
schools, in such blocks, neighborhood or area.
§ 15-6-17 MISCELLANEOUS VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful and an unlawful real estate practice for any person:
   (A)   To aid, abet, incite or coerce a person to commit an unlawful real
estate practice;
   (B)   To deliberately and knowingly refuse examination of copies of any
listing of real property in the village to any person because of race, color,
religion or national origin;
   (C)   To enter into a listing agreement which prohibits the inspection,
sale, lease or occupancy of real property to any person because of race, color,
religion or national origin; and/or
   (D)   To knowingly and willfully interfere with the performance of a duty or
the exercise of a power by the Fair Housing Committee or one of its members or
representatives.
§ 15-6-18 COMPLAINTS OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved in any manner of any violation of any provision
of this article may file with the Committee a written verified complaint
setting forth his or her grievance.
   (B)   The complaint shall state:
      (1)   The name and address of the complainant;
      (2)   The name and address of the person against whom the complaint is
brought, if known to the complainant;
      (3)   The alleged facts surrounding the alleged violation of this
article; and
      (4)   The name and address of all persons believed to have knowledge
concerning the alleged facts.
   (C)   The Committee shall provide a printed form of complaint for the use of
aggrieved persons and such complaint shall be accompanied by a filing fee of
$25 to be deposited with the village.
§ 15-6-19 SERVICE OF COMPLAINT; INVESTIGATION.
   After the filing of any complaint, the Fair Housing Committee shall serve a
copy of the complaint on the party or parties charged and the Chairperson of
the Committee shall designate a panel to make a prompt investigation in
connection therewith.
§ 15-6-20 PROCEDURE UPON DETERMINATION OF PROBABLE CAUSE.
   If the panel shall determine after such investigation that probable cause
exists for the allegations of the complaint filed under this article, the panel
shall set a time and date for a conference, and at such meeting, the panel or
any member thereof shall interview the complainant and the person or persons
against whom the complaint has been directed and shall attempt to resolve the
complaint by all proper methods of conciliation and persuasion.
§ 15-6-21 HEARING WITHOUT FURTHER MEDIATION.
   If at any time within 60 days after the date of filing of a complaint
pursuant to this article such panel shall determine that such attempts at
conciliation would not be in furtherance of the objectives of this article, the
Committee shall thereupon proceed promptly to a full hearing on the complaint.
§ 15-6-22 HEARINGS BY COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Committee hearings shall be conducted by the entire Fair Housing
Committee, or a quorum thereof, upon due and reasonable notice to all parties.
The Committee shall have power to administer oaths and to take sworn testimony.
Any party alleged to have violated this article shall be entitled to be
represented by counsel and shall have the right to call witnesses on his or her
own behalf and to cross-examine witnesses.
   (B)   At the conclusion of any hearing, the Committee shall render to the
Village President and Board of Trustees a written report with recommendations,
which shall also be served by mail upon the complainant and the party or
parties charged. No report shall be delayed more than 60 days after the first
issuance of notice for commencement of a hearing.
   (C)   If the Fair Housing Committee determines that a grievance exists, or
if the complaint is settled by conciliation, then, upon recommendation of the
committee, the filing fee of $25 shall be refunded. However, if no grievance
exists, or the charges of such complaint are not sustained, the filing fee
shall not be refunded.
§ 15-6-23 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Fair Housing Committee shall be empowered, at the conclusion of
the proceedings, to recommend to the Village President and Board of Trustees
that the Village President and Board of Trustees order any person found to be
engaging in any unfair real estate practice to cease and desist from such
practice, upon such terms as necessary and proper for the enforcement of this
article.
   (B)   The Fair Housing Committee shall be empowered, at the conclusion of
its proceedings, as part of its report, to recommend to the Village President
and Board of Trustees that it direct the Village Attorney to do any one or more
of the following:
      (1)   To institute and prosecute proceedings to enforce, against any
person found in violation of this article, the fine provided for in this code;
      (2)   To apply to any court of competent jurisdiction:
         (a)   For an order restraining any person from violating any provision
of this article; and/or
         (b)   For such other or future relief as may seem to the court
appropriate for the enforcement of this article and for the elimination of
violations hereof.
      (3)   To petition or institute proceedings with the State Department of
Registration and Education for the purpose of causing the Department to revoke,
suspend or refuse to renew the license granted by such Department to any real
estate broker or real estate salesperson found to have violated any provision
of this article.
   (C)   After receipt of the recommendation of the Fair Housing Committee, the
Village President and Board of Trustees may issue such cease and desist orders
and may direct such action by the Village Attorney, including the procedures in
division (B) above, as shall be necessary for the enforcement of this article.
§ 15-6-24 TIME LIMITATIONS.
   Any complaint filed with the Fair Housing Committee must be filed within 60
days after the alleged discriminatory practice occurred or it shall be barred.
§ 15-6-25 REMEDIES.
   Any person aggrieved in any manner by the violation of any provision of this
article who has exhausted the remedies provided in this article may apply to
any court of competent jurisdiction for appropriate relief from such violation,
including:
   (A)   An order compelling compliance with this article;
   (B)   An order to prohibit any person found by the court to have violated
any provision of this article from the sale, lease, exchange, transfer,
conveyance or assignment of any real property, by any person who in violation
of this article refuses or fails to perform such contract;
   (C)   Compensatory damages; and
   (D)   Such other and further relief as may seem appropriate to the court for
the enforcement of this article and the elimination of violations hereof.
ARTICLE 7: RESERVED
ARTICLE 8: TOWN CENTER RULES AND REGULATIONS
Section
   
15-8-1   Hours of use
   
15-8-2   Conduct or activities restricted or prohibited on premises
   
15-8-3   Penalties
§ 15-8-1 HOURS OF USE.
   (A)   Generally. No person shall be or remain in the Town Center between the
hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. each day or during any other times as may be
specified by posted notice.
   (B)   Exceptions to closing hours. The provisions of division (A) shall not
be applicable in cases where a scheduled village program, activity or event
extends beyond or ends shortly before the closing hours, in which case a person
attending such program, activity or event may remain for its duration and for
such reasonable time period thereafter as is necessary to vacate the premises
following the conclusion of the program, activity or event.
(Ord. 98-06-48, passed 6-15-1998)
§ 15-8-2 CONDUCT OR ACTIVITIES RESTRICTED OR PROHIBITED ON PREMISES.
   (A)   Alcoholic beverages/drugs. No person shall bring illegal drugs to the
Town Center. No person shall be on the Town Center premises while intoxicated
or under the influence of illegal drugs. The term “drugs”, as set forth in this
provision, refers to any “controlled substance”, as defined in an Act to
Establish a Uniform System for the Control Of the Manufacture, Distribution and
Possession Of Controlled Substances, known as the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act, 720 ILCS 570/100 et seq. Only persons who have applied for and
been approved a Town Center use permit are allowed to contract with a licensed
caterer to provide beer and/or wine service as part of a permitted event.
   (B)   Skateboards and skates. No person shall ride upon or otherwise use any
skateboard, roller skates, in-line skates, coaster or other similar self-
propelled wheeled device, except wheelchairs and other wheeled devices for use
by disabled persons, on the Town Center premises.
   (C)   Improper use of and damage to property. No person shall stand, climb
on or cut, break or in any way injure, deface, disfigure or remove any tree,
shrub, bush, plant, turf or any of the buildings, fences, bridges, lamps or
posts, equipment or other structure or property located within the Town Center,
including the stones in and around the Town Center Fountain, or sit upon any
structures not designed or intended for such purpose.
   (D)   Swimming. No person shall swim, bathe or wade in, or place objects
into the Town Center Fountain, or the ponds, or other waters located on the
premises.
   (E)   Games and sorts. No person shall take part in or abet the playing of
any games involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects such as balls,
stones, arrows, javelins or model airplanes, except in areas that may be set
apart for such forms of recreation. The playing of rough or comparatively
dangerous games such as football, baseball and soccer and the participation in
hazardous recreational activities which create a substantial risk of injury to
a participant or spectator are prohibited.
   (F)   Firearms and fireworks. No person shall carry or discharge firearms or
discharge or set off any rocket, cracker, torpedo, squib or other fireworks or
things containing any substance of an explosive nature; except that, this
prohibition shall not apply to any village sponsored or authorized fireworks
display.
   (G)   Offering articles for sale. No person shall offer for sale any
article, thing or service, or do any hawking, peddling or soliciting, or take
any collection or solicit or receive contributions of money or anything of
value, except when authorized to do so by permit from or scheduling by the
corporate authorities.
   (H)   Public meeting. No person shall call or hold any public meeting or
give any concert or public entertainment of any kind in the Town Center without
the express consent of the corporate authorities.
   (I)   Obstructing travel. No person shall set or place or cause to be set or
placed any goods, wares or merchandise or property of any kind so as to
obstruct or interfere with pedestrian travel within the Town Center without the
express consent of the corporate authorities.
   (J)   Camping. No person shall camp or use any structures or vehicles for
camping purposes.
   (K)   Erection of structures. No person shall erect any structure, tent or
shelter of any kind.
   (L)   Advertisement. No person shall place any hand bill, pamphlet,
circular, advertisement or notice of any kind, nor post, stencil or otherwise
affix any notice, or bills, advertisement or other papers, upon any structure
or thing in or about the Town Center premises, except as authorized by the
corporate authorities.
(Ord. 98-06-48, passed 6-15-1998; Ord. 2006-03-09, passed 3-6-2006)
§ 15-8-3 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Every person who violates any provisions of §
15-8-2 of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $750 and
shall be further subject to the general penalties set forth in §
1-1-9 of the village code.
   (B)   Any police officer observing a violation of any provisions of §
15-1-2 of this article may, as an alternative to arresting the offender, issue
a “hang-on ticket” as provided in
Ch. 15, Art. 4, of this code pursuant to which the person cited may pay the sum
of $25 within the time stated on the ticket as a compromise or settlement to
avoid the prosecution of an ordinance violation in the Circuit Court.
(Ord. 98-06-48, passed 6-15-1998)
ARTICLE 9: POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITIES
Section
   
15-9-00   Applicability
   
15-9-01   Definitions
   
15-9-02   Petitions
   
15-9-03   Payment and administration of costs
   
15-9-04   Participants
   
15-9-05   Public hearing
   
15-9-06   Public comment; written and oral
   
15-9-07   The public record
   
15-9-08   Decision by the Village Board
Cross-reference:
   Sewage, sewage disposal, discharge standards, pretreatment, wastewater use
charges and collections, see
Ch. 13, Art. 4
§ 15-9-00 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This article is applicable to a request for site location approval of
a new pollution control facility that does not handle hazardous waste as
defined by the Illinois Environmental Protection Act, being 415 ILCS 5/3.220.
   (B)   To the extent a facility, described in a petition, proposes to handle
or manage material that is not a waste, or proposes to conduct an activity
which is excluded from the Illinois Environmental Protection Act’s definition
of a pollution control facility, or proposes to conduct an activity which does
not require a permit from the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, this
article does not govern the petition, and authorization to locate such a
facility shall be determined by other provisions in the village code,
including, but not limited to, those related to zoning, special use, building
or environmental requirements, as applicable.
   (C)   The terms of this article do not constitute or imply a policy decision
by the village concerning siting pollution control facilities of any kind
within the village, but exist to guide the village in the fulfillment of its
statutory duties with respect to requests for site location approval.
(Ord. 2003-07-43, passed 7-21-2003)
§ 15-9-01 DEFINITIONS.
   All words used in this article shall have the same meaning and definition as
set forth in the Environmental Protection Act, 415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
(hereinafter the “Act”), unless otherwise set forth herein below. Defined terms
in this article need not be capitalized to have the meaning proscribed to them
in this section or the Act.
   ACT. The Environmental Protection Act, 415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.
   APPLICANT. Any person, group of persons, partnership, firm, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind that files an application for
site approval pursuant to this article.
   FACILITY. A new pollution control facility as defined in the Act.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE SITE. A site where hazardous waste is received, stored,
treated, dumped or disposed. HAZARDOUS WASTE is defined by the Act.
   HEARING OFFICER. An attorney, licensed to practice in the State of Illinois,
appointed by the Mayor to conduct the public hearing(s) associated with a
siting petition.
   IEPA. The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of the Village of Carol Stream, Illinois.
   PETITION. The application filed by the applicant requesting site approval
for a facility.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Carol Stream, Illinois.
   VILLAGE BOARD. The Board of Trustees of the Village of Carol Stream.
   VILLAGE CLERK. The Village Clerk for the Village of Carol Stream, Illinois,
or the Clerk’s designee. Most references to the VILLAGE CLERK refer to the
administrative office of the VILLAGE CLERK.
(Ord. 2003-07-43, passed 7-21-2003)
§ 15-9-02 PETITIONS.
   (A)   Filing.
      (1)   The applicant shall file one original and 20 copies of the petition
with the Village Clerk, in the form described in divisions (C) and (D) of this
section.
      (2)   The applicant shall include, with the filing of the petition, the
application fee, as described in §
15-9-03 of this article.
   (B)   Processing. Upon receiving the petition, the Village Clerk shall do
the following.
      (1)   Accept for filing and date stamp as filed any petition that is
filed with the correct number of copies, as required by division (A) above, in
the form as required by division (C) below; and with the application deposit as
provided in §
15-9-03.
         (a)   The date on the stamp of the Village Clerk shall be considered
the official filing date for all purposes relating to the time of filing.
         (b)   Receipt and acceptance of a petition by the Village Clerk is pro
forma, and does
not constitute an acknowledgment that the applicant has complied with the Act
or this article.
         (c)   Should the petition be presented to the Village Clerk without
the correct number of copies, in the incorrect form, or without the sections
and fee described in this division (B)(1), the petition shall be rejected by
the Village Clerk.
      (2)   Upon the filing of a petition, the Village Clerk shall promptly
distribute the copies of the petition to the following parties in the following
numbers: one copy to the Mayor; one copy to each Trustee; five copies to the
Village Manager’s office; two copies to the Village Attorney; one copy to the
Fire Protection District; two copies to the Hearing Officer; and two copies to
the village public library.
         (a)   The original petition and two copies shall be maintained by the
Village Clerk.
         (b)   The Village Clerk has the option of sending one of the copies to
a copy service within the village.
      (3)   The Village Clerk shall make available a copy of the petition and
public record concerning the petition for public inspection during the normal
business hours of the Village Clerk’s office. Additionally, the Village Clerk
shall provide to any person so requesting, copies of the petition or the public
record, upon such person’s payment of the actual cost of reproduction.
   (C)   Form of petitions.
      (1)   All petitions shall be in writing on eight and one-half-inch by 11-
inch, eight and one-half-inch by 14-inch or 11-inch by 17-inch paper, and in an
electronic P.D.F. format; except that, this format is optional for exhibits or
drawings.
      (2)   The pages of the petition and all exhibits, including pages
intentionally left blank, shall be consecutively numbered.
   (D)   Content of petitions. The determination of the quality and quantity of
information to be included in a petition is, ultimately, the applicant’s to
make, as it is the applicant’s burden to demonstrate that the siting criteria
set forth in § 39.2 of the Act are met. However, for purposes of this article,
a petition shall contain, at a minimum, the following documents and
information, in addition to what the applicant submits in support of the § 39.2
criteria, together with — to the extent that such documents and information are
based on other information or data — citations to the primary sources of data:
      (1)   The identification as well as current address of the applicant, all
landowners and the operator for the proposed facility:
         (a)   If the proposed site is owned by a land trust, each beneficiary
of the land trust must be identified and their name and address listed, and the
extent of their interest must be defined;
         (b)   Indicate whether or not the applicant, if not the property
owner, is to purchase or lease the site;
         (c)   Also indicate whether the applicant, the landowner and the
operator is a corporation, partnership, individual or unit of government;
         (d)   In the case of a partnership, submit the names of all partners;
         (e)   In the case of a corporation, submit the names and addresses of
all officers and directors, and the names and addresses of all shareholders
owning 5% or more of the capital stock of the corporation; and
         (f)   In the case of a corporation, attach as exhibits articles of
incorporation and a certified copy from the Secretary of State of, the entity’s
incorporation in the state or, if not incorporated in the State of Illinois,
its license to do business in the State of Illinois.
      (2)   The proposed operator of the proposed facility shall submit audited
financial statements for the preceding three years or the total number of years
the entity has been in existence, whichever is less.
         (a)   If an entity has no audited financial statements, then it shall
include pro forma statements for the same time period as required for audited
statements.
         (b)   Also, the proposed operator shall present a certificate of good
standing issued by the Illinois Secretary of State and a certificate of
authority to do business in DuPage County issued by the appropriate authority.
      (3)   The legal description of the proposed site and a street address as
well as other reasonable description of where the proposed site is located. A
plat of survey of the proposed facility boundary must be attached to the
petition;
      (4)   A brief description of the proposed facility, its operation, the
expected longevity thereof and copies of any proposed or actual agreements for
host fees or incentives offered or agreed to by the applicant with the village;
      (5)   Identification of the area to be served by the proposed facility, a
map showing the extent of the service area the facility is intended to serve,
and a statement of the need for the identified area for such a facility;
      (6)   The expected types, amounts and methods of treatment, disposal,
consolidation, transfer or storage of all wastes proposed for the site;
      (7)   Reasons supporting approval of the application;
      (8)   A request for site approval;
      (9)   Proof of notice, pursuant § 39.2 of the Act;
      (10)   A site plan showing details of the proposed facility, including:
         (a)   Engineering cross sections;
         (b)   All known and proposed wells (identified as such), whether
potable, monitoring or other, within the proposed site and within 1,500 feet of
the property line of the proposed site;
         (c)   Fences, buildings other structures and berms and landscaping;
         (d)   Roads, entrances and driveways;
         (e)   Existing and proposed underground or aboveground storage tanks
(identified as such), identifying, if applicable, which are known to be out of
operation or abandoned;
         (f)   Location of property lines of neighboring properties and
properties whose owners were provided notice pursuant to § 39.2(b) of the Act;
         (g)   Existing and proposed utility lines (identified as such and
identified as to type of utility), indicating which are above and which are
below the ground;
         (h)   Surface water drainage systems and ways shown on village public
records within 1,500 feet of the property line of the proposed site, including,
but not limited to, drain tiles, creeks and the like;
         (i)   Any information to demonstrate that the proposed facility is so
designed, located and proposed to be operated in such a manner that the public
health, safety and welfare will be protected, in addition to that which has
been provided already pursuant to this article; and
         (j)   Whether any existing uses will be continued.
      (11)   A description of the general characteristics of the site
(industrial park, open field, gravel pit, quarry, strip mine, swamp, floodplain
and the like);
      (12)   A statement of the plan of operation for the proposed facility,
including, but not limited to, the following (where applicable):
         (a)   Type of facility, including method of transfer or, if
applicable, landfilling, incineration, resource recovery or other proposed
storage, process, treatment or management, and the proposed layout of the site,
including identification of the location of proposed buildings or other above
or below ground structures, and identification of the location of any proposed
process flows, storage, treatment, disposal, consolidation or other waste
management activity;
         (b)   Description of the design criteria and design features of the
facility, where applicable, including:
            1.   Leachate collection system:
               a.   Type, location and construction of the subsurface
collection system;
               b.   Written narrative describing methods and processes of the
collection, management and treatment of the leachate;
               c.   Program for monitoring effectiveness of the collection,
management and treatment of the leachate; and
               d.   Discharge points of effluent.
            2.   Drainage and erosion control, including a description of the
type, location and design of drainage and erosion control devices;
            3.   All monitoring systems, including, but not limited to, ground
water, surface water and air:
               a.   Techniques, location and construction;
                b.   Frequency of sampling and analysis; and
               c.   Future corrective action program.
            4.   Surface water control;
            5.   Air emissions control;
            6.   Final cover system, including proposed soil and/or geomembrane
specifications if applicable;
            7.   Facility construction quality assurance and quality control
program:
               a.   Hours of operation;
               b.   Personnel;
               c.   Both on-site and off-site litter, vector, dust, odor and
noise control;
               d.   Fire control;
               e.   Corrective actions for spills and other operational
accidents;
               f.   If applicable, the stages of development or use;
               g.   If applicable, an end use plan; and
               h.   Operating procedures including:
                  i.   Personnel require-ments, including number of full- and
part-time employees, which personnel positions and in what numbers are
considered minimally necessary for facility operation, and the training and
supervision of employees. In addition, identify whether the proposed facility
intends on utilizing any contract or temporary employees and, if so, the
positions those employees would fill, the training requirements and supervision
of such employees, and whether they would be considered minimally necessary for
the facility operation;
                  ii.   Plans for chemical analysis of waste;
                  iii.   Plans for identifica-tion and verification of waste;
                  iv.   Plans for identifica-tion of unacceptable waste, soils
or other material and removal of same;
                  v.   Leachate collection, management and treatment system or
plan;
                  vi.   Noise control;
                  vii.   Operation of air emission monitoring system;
                  viii.   Facility cleaning and maintenance, including, but not
limited to, the interior floor; and
                  ix.   For each type of waste proposed to be received for
storage, treatment, management, consolidation or disposal, provide: the maximum
daily and annual receipt and throughput, and the expected types of sources for
such waste within the proposed area to be served.
      (13)   A map showing on-site roadways, vehicle and direction flow signage
and road markings, vehicle staging and parking areas, and a description of the
plan of operation with respect to moving vehicular traffic on-site, including,
but not limited to, on-site traffic flow direction and control;
      (14)   A closure plan, including satisfactory proof of financial
responsibility therefor;
      (15)   Provide a traffic study in accordance with guidelines recommended
by the institute of transportation engineers regarding the proposed site,
including the anticipated number of vehicles, their size, weight and direction
of movement, and a copy of any driveway permit:
         (a)   Included in this study, state the number of each type of vehicle
expected or intended to enter or exit the facility, broken down by each hour of
the day; and
         (b)   If the number of vehicles is expected or intended to be greater
or less on particular days of the week, identify those days, the numbers of
vehicles, and where it includes vehicles other than passenger automobiles,
include the hourly analysis for each day of the week.
      (16)   Provide all physical evidence, including, but not limited to,
studies, maps, reports, permits or exhibits that the applicant desires the
village to consider at the public hearing. It is intended that the applicant
provide a full and complete disclosure of his or her case to facilitate early
review and analysis by all participants;
      (17)   Supply certificates of insurance verifying the insurance policies
carried by the applicant to cover single accidents, such as fires, explosions,
non-sudden accidental occurrences, whether such accidents occur at the proposed
site or while waste is being transported to or from the proposed site;
      (18)   Include a statement describing the past operating experience of
the applicant (and any subsidiary, parent corporation, or subsidiary of the
parent corporation), in the field of solid waste management and identify all
experience in the State of Illinois;
      (19)   Furnish a statement identifying the past record of convictions of
the applicant, including, but not limited to, any individual conviction of its
current officers and directors, concerning a violation of the Act or any
federal environmental law, a description of enforcement actions or lawsuits
brought, if any, by government entity or any person, and remedial action taken,
if any, as a result of, in conjunction with, or as part of a settlement of any
conviction or admission of violation;
      (20)   Furnish a statement regarding adjacent and nearby land uses,
including, but not limited to, as to whether the facility is located so as to
minimize incompatibility with the character of the surrounding area and to
minimize the effect on the value of the surrounding property, providing
documentation detailing:
         (a)   Property values of surrounding property, and a property value
impact analysis conducted by a certified real estate appraiser;
         (b)   Topographic survey of existing site;
         (c)   Final design grades;
         (d)   Surrounding zoning and land uses within one mile of the property
line of the site, including identification of any surface or subsurface mining
activities in the area, residential (single-family or multiple-family) housing
areas, schools, hospitals, nursing or extended care facilities, daycare or
other childcare facilities, historic, architectural or archaeological
landmarks;
         (e)   Proposed use after operation (i.e., end-use), including changes
in topography and all new surface features;
         (f)   A description of how the applicant will minimize the effect of
traffic flow to and from the proposed facility on the character and property
values of the area through which the traffic is proposed to pass;
         (g)   A description of the external materials to be used in
construction of the proposed facility; and
         (h)   A description of any proposed landscaping or facility screening.
      (21)   A statement as to whether the facility is located outside the
boundary of the 100-year flood- plain or whether the site is floodproofed, and
documentation supporting such statement;
      (22)   Documentation detailing compliance of the proposed facility with
all applicable storm water ordinances;
      (23)   As to whether the plan of operation for the facility is so
designed to minimize the danger to the surrounding area from fire, spills or
other operational accidents, at a minimum, provide documentation detailing:
         (a)   Accident prevention plan, including plans for spill control and
containment;
         (b)   Fire prevention plan; and
         (c)   Proposed responses to spills and other operational accidents.
      (24)   An emergency response plan for the proposed site, including, but
not limited to, documentation detailing procedures to be used in case of a
release or spill, as to:
         (a)   Notification of appropriate agencies and personnel;
         (b)   Containment procedures; and
         (c)   Evacuation procedures for the facility and the surrounding area.
      (25)   The petition shall be signed by the applicant, landowner(s),
operator, engineer registered in the State of Illinois under the Illinois
Professional Engineering Practice Act, land surveyor and any other technical
consultant responsible for drafting all or portions of the petition. The
application shall state a contact address, a phone number and an email address
for each person named.
(Ord. 2003-07-43, passed 7-21-2003)
§ 15-9-03 PAYMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF COSTS.
   (A)   Costs and fees deposit.
      (1)   At the time of filing a petition, the applicant shall submit to the
Village Clerk a costs deposit in the form of a certified or cashier’s check
made payable to “Village of Carol Stream”, to pay the reasonable and necessary
fees and costs of the village in processing and responding to the petition,
including, but not limited to: village employee or staff review time, legal
fees, expert witness fees, scientific testing, records or other investigations,
data searches, notices, court reporters, transcription costs, consultants, as
well as the cost of any agreement for an appropriate forum for the hearing, the
Hearing Officer’s expenses and fees, and any other expenses incurred by the
village in conducting their review of the petition, the public hearing, the
village’s site location decision, and any appeal to the Illinois Pollution
Control Board (“IPCB”), the Appellate or Supreme Courts of the State of
Illinois, any federal court located within the State of Illinois, or any legal
action concerning the siting process or the interpretation of this article
relating to the siting application or process.
      (2)   The amount of the costs and fees deposited is $100,000.
   (B)   Additional initial costs and fees deposit. In the event the applicant
files an amendment in accordance with 415 ILCS 5/39.2(e), an additional initial
costs and fees deposit of $25,000 shall be delivered to the Village Clerk at
the same time as the filing of the amendment, and such deposit shall be in the
same form as described in division (A) above.
   (C)   Payment of fees and expenses. All fees and expenses incurred by the
village as described in division (A) above, shall be paid from the fees and
costs deposits as provided herein.
      (1)   Records of village-incurred fees and costs, including, but not
limited to, relevant time records of village employees and staff, and village
consultants, to the extent the village is seeking reimbursement of their time,
are to be submitted by the persons creating such records to the Finance
Director on a monthly basis.
      (2)   The Finance Director, or his or her designee, shall organize the
records and prepare and submit periodic reports to the Village Board, Village
Clerk and the applicant, of invoices to or expenditures by the village.
         (a)   The actual invoices and bills submitted to the Finance Director
and included in the report submitted to the Village Board, Village Clerk and
applicant, with all privileged and confidential information, if any, redacted.
         (b)   Inadvertent disclosure of confidential or privileged information
by the village is not a waiver of confidentiality or privilege.
      (3)   Upon approval of each report, described in division (C)(2) above,
by the Village Board, the Finance Director may draw upon the applicant’s cost
and fees deposits in the amount of the reported incurred costs and fees, or as
otherwise provided by the Village Board.
      (4)   In determining the fees to be paid to the village to reimburse the
village for its employees’ or staff’s time involved in matters concerning the
petition, the Finance Director shall determine a rate for each employee who
submits a record of his or her time to the Finance Director, including in such
rate, all costs of the village in compensating such employee or staff member,
such as salary, wages or benefits. The Finance Director shall include the rate
calculated per employee in the report described in division (C)(2) above.
      (5)   At any time the amount on deposit with the village falls below
$5,000, then, upon written demand from the Director of Finance, the applicant
shall deposit, within five business days of receipt of the demand, an
additional $15,000, or the amount reasonably estimated to finish the process,
whichever is greater. Any unpaid amount shall constitute a debt and the village
shall recover its costs and attorneys’ fees, if it is required to make a claim
or commence a suit against the applicant to recover the unpaid fees.
      (6)   Any portion of the fees and costs deposit that remains unexpended
at the conclusion of the local site location review process (including all
appeals and resolution of any applicant challenge to fees or costs), shall be
returned to the applicant.
      (7)   Nothing herein limits an applicant’s ability to contest or object
to the reasonableness of costs and expenses described herein.
(Ord. 2003-07-43, passed 7-21-2003)
§ 15-9-04 PARTICIPANTS.
   (A)   The applicant. The applicant is a participant.
   (B)   The village.
      (1)   The village, its employees and staff, and any experts, consultants,
investigators or attorneys hired by the village to review, investigate, present
at hearing, or otherwise work for the village concerning the petition, are
participants.
      (2)   To the extent the village employees and staff wish to participate
in the public hearings outside their roles or employment with the village, they
must submit a notice of participation, as do other members of the public.
   (C)   Notice of participation.
      (1)   Any person, other than those described in divisions (A) and (B)
above, must file a written notification of intent to participate (notice of
participation), with the Village Clerk before the start of the first day of
public hearing or, after the start and before the adjournment of the first day
of public hearing, with the Hearing Officer.
      (2)   Such notification shall state, at a minimum, the name, address,
daytime phone number and, if available, facsimile number of the person filing
the notice of participation, whether the person will be participating on his or
her own behalf or as a representative/spokesperson of another person or entity
(and if on behalf of another person or entity, identify the name of that person
or entity), whether the person (or the entity or association he or she
represents) will be represented by an attorney during the public hearing, and
whether the person intends on providing oral testimony or comment during the
public hearing.
      (3)   A person may not become a participant after the first day of the
hearing, except for good cause shown.
      (4)   The village shall liberally interpret this limitation, if the
additional participation will not delay the process or unfairly prejudice a
prior participant.
      (5)   No late participant shall be entitled to cross-examine a witness
who has previously testified.
   (D)   Participant rights. Participants have the right to:
      (1)   Present sworn testimony and witnesses;
      (2)   Provide unsworn, oral comment during the public hearing (subject to
the Hearing Officer’s judgment and consistent with fundamental fairness); and
      (3)   Cross-examine or question witnesses who provide sworn testimony or,
alternatively, submit to the Hearing Officer written questions to be asked of
the witnesses by the Hearing Officer, at the Hearing Officer’s discretion as to
whether and how such questions are to be posed.
   (E)   Attorneys. Any attorneys representing a participant must be licensed
and in good standing to practice law in the State of Illinois, or if licensed
and in good standing to practice law in another state that is part of the
United States, shall be allowed to serve as an attorney for a participant upon
motion made to and granted by the Hearing Officer.
(Ord. 2003-07-43, passed 7-21-2003)
§ 15-9-05 PUBLIC HEARING.
   (A)   No sooner than 90 days, but no longer than 120 days, from the date the
petition was filed with the Village Clerk, a public hearing shall be held by
the Village Board.
      (1)   Any two members of the Village Board shall constitute a quorum for
the purpose of holding such a public hearing.
      (2)   They will participate in the proceedings.
   (B)   Within 50 days of the filing date of the petition, the Mayor shall
determine the date, time and location upon which such public hearing shall be
held, but in any event the initial public hearing must be scheduled no sooner
than 90 days, but no later than 120 days, from the date the petition was filed
with the Village Clerk.
   (C)   Upon such determination of the hearing date, time and location, as
described in division (B) above, the Mayor or, if he or she designates, the
Hearing Officer, shall notify the Village Clerk of the date upon which such
hearing shall be held and shall request the Village Clerk to cause notice of
such hearing to be made as follows. Upon receipt of such request, the Village
Clerk, and at the Village Clerk’s discretion with the help of the attorney
representing the village (its staff and employees), shall cause the publication
of notice pursuant to the following requirements:
      (1)   By publication of two legal notices in a newspaper of general
circulation published in the village.
         (a)   One such notice shall be published no later than 60 days from
the date the petition was filed.
         (b)   Another such notice shall be published no later than 75 days
from the date the petition was filed.
      (2)   Such notices shall consist of the following information, which,
except for divisions (C)(2)(h) through (C)(2)(k) below, must be disclosed by
the applicant in the petition:
         (a)   The name and address of the person, partnership or corporation
requesting site location approval;
         (b)   The name and address of the owner of the site, and in case
ownership is in a land trust, the names of its beneficiaries;
         (c)   The legal description of the site;
         (d)   The street address of the property, and if there is no street
address applicable to the property, a description of the site with reference to
location, ownership, occupancy or in some other manner that will reasonably
identify the property to residents of the neighborhood;
         (e)   The nature and size of the proposed facility;
         (f)   The nature of the activity proposed;
         (g)   The probable life of the proposed activity and facility;
         (h)   The time and date of the public hearing(s);
         (i)   The location(s) of the public hearing(s);
         (j)   A statement that all copies of evidence other than testimony to
be submitted at the public hearing(s) must be filed with the Village Clerk at
least seven days before the date of the first public hearing. The Hearing
Officer may permit late filing for good cause shown and without prejudice to
the participants; and
         (k)   A statement that any person wanting to present sworn testimony
or cross-examine witnesses must sign up as a participant with the Village Clerk
no later than the first day of the public hearing, or sign up with the Hearing
Officer no later than the adjournment of the first day of the public hearing.
The Hearing Officer may permit late filing for good cause shown and without
prejudice to the participants.
      (3)   A copy of the notice shall also be sent, no later than 55 days
after the date the petition was filed, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the following.
         (a)   Pursuant to § 39.2(d) of the Act, the notice must be delivered
to the following persons/entities no later than 14 days prior to the first day
of public hearing.
         (b)   If a return receipt is not received by the Village Clerk
confirming delivery of the notice on the following persons/entities, by the
sixty-fifth day following the filing of the petition, the Village Clerk shall
arrange for personal service on the following persons/entities:
            1.   All members of the General Assembly from the district in which
the proposed facility is located;
            2.   The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency;
            3.   The governing authority of every municipality whose corporate
limits are within one mile of the boundary of the proposed facility; and
            4.   The county board of the county where the proposed site is to
be located.
      (4)   Additional notice of the public hearing may, at the discretion of
the Mayor, be given, by publishing a notice in a newspaper of general
circulation published as a display ad at least once during the week preceding
the public hearing. Such notice shall consist of all items described in
divisions (C)(2)(a) through (C)(2)(k) above, except for division (C)(2)(c)
above.
   (D)   Prior to the date of the first public hearing, the Mayor shall appoint
the Hearing Officer for the public hearing on the petition.
      (1)   The Hearing Officer shall preside over the public hearing and shall
make any decisions concerning the admission of evidence and the manner in which
the hearing is conducted, subject to this section and the law concerning such
applications.
      (2)   Accordingly, all decisions and rulings shall be in accordance with
the concept of fundamental fairness (unless a different standard is adopted as
a matter of Illinois law).
      (3)   The Hearing Officer may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious testimony.
      (4)   Rulings of the Hearing Officer may be promptly appealed to those
Village Trustees then present.
      (5)   A simple majority of those Trustees present shall be sufficient to
overrule the decision of the Hearing Officer.
      (6)   All testimony and all public meetings concerning the petition shall
be in the presence of a certified court reporter who shall report all
proceedings regarding consideration of the petition.
      (7)   The Hearing Officer shall have the following powers or duties:
         (a)   Administer oaths and affirmations;
         (b)   Prior to the start of the public hearing, conduct a public
meeting to explain the public hearing procedure and site location review
process.
            1.   If the Hearing Officer decides to hold such a meeting, it
shall be held no sooner than the ninetieth day from the date the petition was
filed.
            2.   Notice shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation
one week prior to the meeting (or alternatively, as part of the first published
notice of the hearing).
            3.   Such notice shall expressly state that it is a informational
meeting concerning the procedure to be used at the public hearing and the site
location review process, and that it is not a public hearing at which evidence
will be taken for purposes of making a determination in accordance with the
Act.
         (c)   Arrange for the presence of a certified court reporter to attend
and transcribe the conduct of all public hearings for the public record;
         (d)   Regulate the course of the hearing, including, but not limited
to, controlling the order of proceedings, consistent with this article;
         (e)   Require a witness or person presenting unsworn public comment to
state his or her position either for, against or undecided with respect to the
proposed facility;
         (f)   Examine a witness and direct a witness to testify;
         (g)   Establish reasonable limits on the duration of public hearing
consistent with the Act and this article, including, but not limited to, the
reasonable limitation of sworn testimony, unsworn oral comment, direct and
cross-examination of any witnesses, and the limitation of repetitive or
cumulative testimony and questioning;
         (h)   Rule upon objections and evidentiary questions, with the
understanding that such rulings must be consistent with fundamental fairness,
but need not be in strict compliance with the Illinois
Supreme Court, Illinois Code of Civil Procedure or any local rules of evidence
governing a civil judicial trial in the State of Illinois, County of DuPage;
         (i)   Allow the introduction of late-filed evidence, be it written or
testimonial, on behalf of any participant; provided, good cause is shown for
the late-filing, and the evidence is relevant and not unduly prejudicial to
another participant so that fundamental fairness to all parties is preserved;
         (j)   The Hearing Officer shall be an attorney, licensed to practice
in Illinois.
            1.   The Hearing Officer shall confer with the Village Board
concerning the petition, between the time of the filing of the petition and the
Village Board’s decision on the petition.
            2.   Given the Hearing Officer’s role of communicating with the
Village Board, the Hearing Officer may not confer with the participants
(members of the public, the applicant and the village included) concerning the
petition, unless such conference takes place during the public hearing, is
through correspondence filed with the Village Clerk (and, thus, available for
everyone to view), or concerns location, time or other similar scheduling
aspects of the public meeting or public hearing, or the notices for same.
            3.   The only additional exception from this restriction is that
the Hearing Officer may:
               a.   Confer with the Village Clerk about the upkeep or status of
the public record;
               b.   Make a request to review or copy the public record; or
               c.   Confer with the Village Clerk regarding the scheduling or
location of, or arrangements for, the public meeting or hearing.
         (k)   The Mayor may remove and/or replace the Hearing Officer at will.
            1.   If the Hearing Officer is replaced, a new Hearing Officer
shall be appointed.
            2.   In the interim, the hearing may be adjourned or continued,
with the Mayor or a Trustee as presiding officer.
         (l)   At the conclusion of the public hearing and after consideration
of all timely-filed written comments or late-filed written comments, the
Hearing Officer shall submit written findings of fact and conclusions of law to
the Village Board, and file a copy of such findings with the Village Clerk; and
         (m)   The Hearing Officer does not have the right or the power to vote
on the application. That power resides with the Village Board.
   (E)   All reports, studies, exhibits or other evidence or copies thereof,
other than testimony, which any participant desires to submit for the record at
the public hearing must be filed with the Village Clerk, in the quantity
provided for in §
15-9-02, at least seven calendar days before the public hearing, and shall be
available for public inspection in the office of the Village Clerk.
      (1)   In the event that the seventh day prior to the date set for public
hearing falls on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, the next working day shall be
considered the day that reports, studies and exhibits must be filed.
      (2)   The Hearing Officer may permit the late filing of evidence for good
cause shown and without prejudice to any participant.
   (F)   Conduct of the public hearing shall be substantially as follows:
      (1)   Call to order with determination of a quorum;
      (2)   Introduction of the Village Board members who are present;
      (3)   Introduction of the Hearing Officer;
      (4)   Recognition of the applicant and identification of the petition;
      (5)   Recognition of fees, notices and date of filing of the petition;
      (6)   Recognition of the village staff and attorney present;
      (7)   Recognition of all other participants who have filed the notice of
participation, pursuant to §
15-9-04(C);
      (8)   Recognition of all reports, exhibits, maps or documents of record
as filed pursuant to division (E) above;
      (9)   The applicant, the village and the participants each may then make
an opening statement;
      (10)   The Village Board shall then hear testimony from the applicant
and/or any witnesses the applicant may wish to call. Upon the close of the
applicant’s testimony, participants, other than the applicant or the village,
may present sworn testimony, including any witnesses and evidence they wish to
present;
      (11)   After the close of the applicant’s and the participants’ cases,
the village may present any witnesses and evidence it wishes to present;
      (12)   Rebuttal testimony and evidence will be allowed at the discretion
of the Hearing Officer; but, if it is allowed, it will be presented in the same
order as described in division (F)(9) above;
      (13)   Following rebuttal testimony, if any, any participant who wishes
to present oral, unsworn comment may then present such comment to the Village
Board;
      (14)   Closing statements, if any, will be presented in the same order as
described in division (F)(9) above;
      (15)   Rebuttal statement, if any, by the applicant, subject to
limitations as imposed by the Hearing Officer; and
      (16)   Hearing closed.
   (G)   All witnesses who testify under oath shall be subject to reasonable
questioning as follows: direct, cross-examination, redirect, re-cross and the
like.
   (H)   At any time during the public hearings, any Village Board member and
the Hearing Officer may question participants or cross-examine witnesses.
   (I)   Should any issues, facts, data or other evidence arise during the
course of the public hearing, which were not apparent or reasonably foreseeable
by a party from the petition as filed with the Village Clerk, such situation
may constitute grounds for a recess in the public hearing for a period not to
exceed five working days. Any decision in this regard shall be made by the
Hearing Officer.
(Ord. 2003-07-43, passed 7-21-2003)
§ 15-9-06 PUBLIC COMMENT; WRITTEN AND ORAL.
   (A)   Any person has the right to file a written comment concerning the
appropriateness of the proposed facility, or its compliance with the
requirements of § 39.2 of the Act, with the Village Clerk, at any time after
the filing of a petition and within the time limitation provided in division
(D) below.
   (B)   (1)   On behalf of the Village Board, the Village Clerk shall receive
written comment from any person concerning the appropriateness of the proposed
site.
      (2)   Upon receipt of any such written comment, the Village Clerk shall
date stamp same, and shall file it with the postmarked envelope in which it was
received.
   (C)   Copies of such written comments shall be made available for public
inspection in the offices of the Village Clerk, and members of the public shall
be allowed to obtain a copy of any written comment upon payment of its actual
cost of reproduction.
   (D)   (1)   Any written comment received by the Village Clerk or postmarked
not later than 30 days after the date of the last public hearing shall be made
part of the record at the public hearing, as hereinafter described, and the
Village Board shall consider any such timely written comments in making its
final determination concerning the petition.
      (2)   In the event that the thirtieth day falls on a Sunday or a federal
holiday, the next day on which mail is delivered shall be considered the
thirtieth day for purposes of this division (D).
   (E)   (1)   Any person has the right to provide oral, unsworn comment during
the course of the public hearing, upon reasonable notice to the Hearing Officer
that the person desires to provide such comment.
      (2)   This type of comment, since it is not provided under oath, is not
subject to cross-examination.
(Ord. 2003-07-43, passed 7-21-2003)
§ 15-9-07 THE PUBLIC RECORD.
   (A)   The Village Clerk, or his or her designee, shall prepare and maintain
the public record concerning the petition. Such record shall include the
following documents:
      (1)   The original petition and any amendments filed with the Village
Clerk;
      (2)   All written comment filed with the Village Clerk within the time
frame specified by §
15-9-06(A) and (D);
      (3)   Notices of participation filed with the Village Clerk pursuant §
15-9-04(C);
      (4)   All exhibits entered into evidence at the time of the public
hearing;
      (5)   All transcripts of testimony during the public hearing;
      (6)   Any motions filed during the course of the public hearing;
      (7)   Any evidence filed pursuant to §
15-9-05(F);
      (8)   Copies of all published or displayed notices, and certified or
personally served notices of the public hearings that were prepared by the
Village Clerk or prepared by others and filed with the Village Clerk;
      (9)   All reports submitted to the Village Clerk pursuant to §
15-9-03(C)(2), redacted as necessary to prevent disclosure of confidential or
privileged information;
      (10)   All transcripts, when available, of meetings, other than the
public hearings held pursuant to this article, at which a Village Board member
was in attendance.
         (a)   Although Village Board members are not encouraged to attend
meetings at which the member knows the petition may be discussed, due to the
member’s continuing, regular legislative duties during the course of the
Village Board’s consideration of a petition, attendance at such meetings is
sometimes unavoidable (e.g., attendance at a municipality’s council meeting,
attendance at a local chamber of commerce meeting).
         (b)   As such, the member is required to obtain and file a transcript
of any meeting, where such meeting has been transcribed or recorded, or
otherwise disclose such meeting in the public records (such as disclosing it on
the record during the transcribed public hearings or during the written comment
period provided for in this article).
         (c)   The transcript shall not, however, be utilized by the village in
reaching its decision.
      (11)   The Hearing Officer’s written findings to the Village Board;
      (12)   The resolution containing the final decision of the Village Board
on the petition; and
      (13)   A log, which the Village Clerk shall require each person seeking
to view, copy or file documents with or in the public record to sign, stating
the date of the request, the nature of the request (i.e., view, copy, file or
other, and identifying the “other”), and the requesting person’s name and
address.
   (B)   The Village Clerk, or his or her designee, shall, during the regular
business hours of the Village Clerk’s office, make the public record available
to any person requesting to review it.
   (C)   (1)   The Village Clerk, or his or her designee, shall, during the
regular business hours of the Village Clerk’s office, accept requests from
persons for copies of the public record, in whole or in part, and arrange for
copying so requested upon the requesting person’s payment of the actual cost of
copying.
      (2)   The Village Clerk shall respond to copying requests within a
reasonable time.
   (D)   The Village Clerk shall be responsible for certifying all copies of
the public record.
   (E)   Although late-filed public comments are not part of the public record
pursuant to this Article, they shall be retained by the Village Clerk with any
evidence of its date of filing, such as the Village Clerk’s date stamp copy or
the postmark, if the written comment was mailed.
   (F)   The Village Clerk, or his or her designee, shall make and deliver a
copy of all transcripts to the Mayor and each Trustee for their review.
(Ord. 2003-07-43, passed 7-21-2003)
§ 15-9-08 DECISION BY THE VILLAGE BOARD.
   (A)   On or before the one hundred eightieth day following the date the
petition was filed, or on or before the two hundred seventieth day following
the date the petition was filed if the applicant filed an amendment to the
petition in compliance with the timing requirements of the Act, the Village
Board shall, by written resolution, upon the vote of a majority of its members,
decide whether to:
      (1)   Grant the petition, without any conditions;
      (2)   Grant the petition, but with conditions on such approval; provided,
such conditions are reasonable and necessary to accomplish the purposes of §
39.2 of the Act and are not inconsistent with the regulations promulgated by
the Illinois Pollution Control Board; or
      (3)   Deny the petition.
   (B)   In its decision, the Village Board shall state whether it finds that
the applicant has established, and whether the public record supports the
establishment of each of the following criteria:
      (1)   The facility is necessary to accommodate the waste needs of the
area it is intended to serve;
      (2)   The facility is so designed, located and proposed to be operated
that the public health, safety and welfare will be protected;
      (3)   The facility is located so as to minimize the incompatibility with
the character of the surrounding area and to minimize the effect on the value
of the surrounding property;
      (4)   For a transfer facility or facility other than a sanitary landfill
or waste disposal site, the facility is located outside the boundary of the
100-year floodplain or the site is floodproofed; and for a facility that is a
sanitary landfill or waste disposal site, the facility is located outside the
boundary of the 100-year floodplain; or if the facility is a facility described
in subsection (b)(3) of § 22.19a of the Act, the site is floodproofed;
      (5)   The plan of operations for the facility is designed to minimize the
danger to the surrounding area from fire, spills or other operational
accidents;
      (6)   The traffic patterns to or from the facility are so designed as to
minimize the impact on existing traffic flows;
      (7)   If the facility will be treating, storing or disposing of hazardous
waste, an emergency response plan exists for the facility, which includes
notification, containment and evacuation procedures to be used in case of an
accidental release;
      (8)   The consistency of the facility with the county’s Solid Waste
Management Plan, including any updates of that plan; and
      (9)   If the facility is located in a regulated recharge area, any
applicable requirements specified by the Illinois Pollution Control Board for
such areas have been met.
   (C)   The Village Board shall consider as evidence the previous operating
experience and past record of convictions or admissions of violations of the
applicant (and any subsidiary, parent corporation, or subsidiary of the parent
corporation) in the field of solid waste management, when considering the
second and fifth criteria of the Act, and divisions (B)(2) and (B)(5) above.
   (D)   (1)   In making its decision, the Village Board shall consider the
public record of the hearing proceedings.
      (2)   The Village Board shall give greater evidentiary weight to sworn
testimony and evidence presented during the public hearings than to unsworn,
oral or written comment.
   (E)   No determination by the Village Board of a petition may be
reconsidered, except to the extent it is reversed and remanded on appeal and
the Village Board is directed by the Illinois Pollution Control Board or
Illinois Appellate Court to conduct all or part of the review process again.
   (F)   Any Village Board member may be excused from participation in the
hearing and decision, upon demonstration of any disqualifying direct and
personal interest in the property or the affairs of the applicant or any
objector to the proceedings.
ARTICLE 10: ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION SYSTEM
Section
   
15-10-1   Creation of administrative adjudication system
   
15-10-2   Jurisdiction
   
15-10-3   Administrative Adjudication Administrator
   
15-10-4   Administrative Hearing Officer
   
15-10-5   Administrative hearings under this article
   
15-10-6   Procedure
   
15-10-7   Default
   
15-10-8   Judicial review
   
15-10-9   Enforcement
§ 15-10-1 CREATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION SYSTEM.
   (A)   Pursuant to Division 2.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code, ILCS Ch. 65,
Act 5, §§ 1-2.1-1, et seq., which authorizes municipalities to implement a
system of administrative adjudication, and pursuant to the home rule authority
of the village, there is hereby created a system of administrative adjudication
of charges of Code violations for the Village of Carol Stream. The system will
authorize a hearing officer to conduct adjudicatory hearings of cases
instituted by village departments.
   (B)   The adoption of this article does not preclude the village from using
other lawful methods to enforce the provisions of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 2019-07-22, passed 7-15-2019)
§ 15-10-2 JURISDICTION.
   The Administrative Adjudication Officer shall have jurisdiction over
adjudication of the following violations:
   (A)   Violations of the handicapped parking ordinance.
(Ord. 2019-07-22, passed 7-15-2019)
§ 15-10-3 ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION ADMINISTRATOR.
   There is established the position of Administrative Adjudication
Administrator who shall be appointed by the Police Chief or his designee. The
Administrative Adjudication Administrator's duties shall be to expedite the
prosecution and/or correction of Village Code violations subject to the
jurisdiction of the administrative adjudication system, including:
   (A)   Operation and management of the system of administrative adjudication
of village ordinance violations as may be permitted by law and directed by
ordinance;
   (B)   Promulgation of such rules and regulations reasonably required to
operate and maintain such system;
   (C)   Supervision of the distribution and processing of notices as may be
required under this section or as may be reasonably required to carry out the
purpose of this section;
   (D)   Supervision of the collection of moneys paid as fines and/or penalties
assessed after a final determination of liability; and
   (E)   Pursuit of all post-judgment remedies available by law.
(Ord. 2019-07-22, passed 7-15-2019)
§ 15-10-4 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER.
   (A)   All adjudicatory hearings as provided by this article shall be
presided over by an Administrative Hearing Officer who shall be appointed and
removed by the Mayor. The Administrative Hearing Officer shall be an
independent contractor of the village and shall not be considered an employee
of the village.
   (B)   In addition to adjudications as provided in this article, the
Administrative Hearing Officer may also serve as the hearing officer for
appeals of vehicle seizures and impoundments pursuant to the provisions of
Article 8, Chapter 8 of this Code and as the hearing officer for contesting
violations of the automated traffic signal system pursuant to the provisions of
Article 8, Chapter 9 of this Code.
   (C)   The Administrative Hearing Officer shall be an attorney licensed to
practice law in the state for at least three years who shall have successfully
completed a formal training program as required by law. The village finds that
a person chosen as a hearing officer for any administrative adjudication
undertaken by the village, who is otherwise qualified, shall have fulfilled the
education and training standards referenced herein as "formal training program
as required by law" if, at the time of his or her appointment, that individual
has served for at least ten years in the position of a State's Attorney or
Assistant State's Attorney in the State of Illinois.
   (D)   The Administrative Hearing Officer shall have the following powers and
duties:
      (1)   Hearing testimony and accepting evidence that is relevant to the
existence of the Code violation;
      (2)   Issuing subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give relevant
testimony at the hearing, upon the request of the parties or their
representatives;
      (3)   Preserving and authenticating the record of the hearing and all
exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;
      (4)   Issuing and signing a written finding, decision and order stating
whether a code violation exists; and
      (5)   Imposing penalties consistent with applicable code provisions and
assessing costs upon finding a party liable for the charged violation, except
however, that in no event shall the hearing officer have authority to impose a
penalty of incarceration or any other penalty in excess of that allowed by law.
(Ord. 2019-07-22, passed 7-15-2019)
§ 15-10-5 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS UNDER THIS ARTICLE.
   (A)   All administrative hearings shall be open to the public and shall be
presided over by a duly appointed administrative hearing officer who is charged
with providing the parties a full and fair opportunity to be heard.
   (B)   All administrative hearings shall be conducted on the date set for
hearing. For good cause shown, a continuance may be granted at the discretion
of the Administrative Hearing Officer. The purpose of administrative hearings
is to provide a prompt resolution of the alleged Code violation, and
accordingly, the request for and the grant of continuances shall be curtailed
to the extent fairness permits. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a
continuance. Continuances shall not be granted for more than 28 days.
   (C)   The formal and technical rules of evidence shall not apply in the
conduct of the hearing. Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted only if it
is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct
of their affairs.
   (D)   No violation may be established except upon proof by a preponderance
of the evidence; provided, however, that the original or a legible copy of the
charging document, issued in accordance with the applicable provisions of this
Code, shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts specified
therein.
   (E)   The Administrative Adjudication Administrator, with the advice and
consent of the Administrative Hearing Officer, shall determine the manner in
which the record shall be preserved. Such preservation may be made by tape
recording or other appropriate means. Recording by any means by any member of
the public is prohibited unless expressly authorized by the Administrative
Adjudication Administrator. The record of all hearings before the
Administrative Hearing Officer shall include a copy of the findings, decision,
and order of the Administrative Hearing Officer's final determination.
   (F)   At the conclusion of a hearing, the Administrative Hearing Officer
shall issue his final determination. If the Administrative Hearing Officer
issues a final determination of liability, a fine shall be imposed, consistent
with the specific Code provision(s) found to have been violated. If a
determination of liability is made against the violator, administrative costs
in the amount of $25 shall be imposed. All fines and costs must be paid within
seven days after the date of determination of liability.
   (G)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Administrative Hearing Officer
shall inform the parties orally and in writing of his determination, which
determination constitutes a final determination for purposes of judicial review
and is subject to review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law. Based on
the charging document and the evidence admitted, the Administrative Hearing
Officer may issue the following determinations: liable, not liable, or liable
upon a plea of no contest. The Administrative Hearing Officer also may dismiss
the case with or without prejudice or grant a properly made motion by the
village voluntarily dismissing the case.
(Ord. 2019-07-22, passed 7-15-2019)
§ 15-10-6 PROCEDURE.
   All matters to be adjudicated by the Administrative Hearing Officer shall be
commenced against the party alleged to have violated one or more Code
provisions by issuing and serving upon that party a charging document and shall
be conducted in accordance with the following procedures:
   (A)   The charging document shall be issued by a village officer or employee
authorized to exercise Code enforcement authority.
   (B)   Any charging document issued pursuant to this section shall contain
the following information:
      (1)   The name, position, and identification number, if applicable, of
the person issuing the charging document;
      (2)   The name and address of the person or entity being charged with one
or more Code violations ("respondent");
      (3)   The name and address of the person to whom the charging document is
given if that person is not the respondent;
      (4)   The section(s) of the Code alleged to have been violated;
      (5)   The date, time, and place of the alleged violation(s);
      (6)   A sufficient description of the activity or conduct alleged to
constitute a violation of each Code section set forth in the charging document
or a sufficient description of the facts giving rise to the allegations set
forth in the charging document; and
      (7)   The date, time and place of the adjudicatory hearing to be held
with respect to the violation(s) alleged in the charging document.
   (C)   The village officer or employee shall certify the correctness of the
information required by this subsection by signing his name to the charging
document to be issued. The certification of correctness required under this
subsection shall establish prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts
alleged in the violation notice. In the case of a notice produced by a computer
device, a single certificate may be signed and kept by the Administrative
Adjudication Administrator, attesting to the correctness of all notice produced
by the device while under his or her control.
   (D)   The administrative hearing shall be scheduled with reasonable
promptness, provided that for hearings scheduled in all non-emergency
situations, the respondent shall have at least 15 days after service of process
to prepare for a hearing if requested by the respondent. For purposes of this
subsection, "non-emergency situation" means any situation that does not
reasonably constitute a threat to the public interest, safety or welfare.
   (E)   The respondent named in a charging document, shall be given notice of
the date of the adjudicatory hearing which may appear on the face of the notice
of violation, citation, or other charging document. Notice of the hearing date
may be given in any of the following ways: (i) by first class mail or by
overnight or two-day commercial delivery service at the respondent's last known
address or if the respondent is a business entity, at any address identified
for its registered agent or at its principal place of business; (ii) by
certified mail; (iii) by personal service; (iv) by any other means permitted by
law for service of civil summons. If service is provided by first class mail or
by overnight or two-day commercial delivery service or certified mail, the 15-
day period shall begin to run on the day that the notice is deposited in the
mail or given to the commercial delivery service, as applicable.
   (F)   The original or a legible copy of the notice of violation, citation,
or other charging document shall be filed with the Administrative Adjudication
Administrator as soon as practicable at the place and in the manner as the
Administrative Adjudication Administrator directs. Upon receiving the original
or legible copy of the charging document, the Administrative Adjudication
Administrator shall select a hearing date and give respondent notice of the
date, time, and place of the hearing in the manner set forth in division (D) of
this section, unless the charging document sets forth the date, time, and
location of the hearing and was served personally on the respondent.
   (G)   Parties to an adjudicatory hearing may be represented by an attorney
or other agent, present witnesses, and cross-examine opposing witnesses.
Parties may request the Administrative Hearing Officer to issue subpoenas.
(Ord. 2019-07-22, passed 7-15-2019)
§ 15-10-7 DEFAULT.
   If at the time set for hearing, the respondent, or his attorney or agent of
record, fails to appear, the Administrative Hearing Officer may enter a default
judgment of liability against the respondent and impose fines and assess costs.
A copy of the order of default shall be served in any manner permitted by this
article and applicable to the violation. A copy of the default judgment, which
constitutes a final determination for purposes of judicial review and is
subject to review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law, shall apprise
the respondent of the procedure for setting aside the default judgment and
shall also apprise the respondent of the availability of an appeal of the
default judgment to the Circuit Court of DuPage County.
(Ord. 2019-07-22, passed 7-15-2019)
§ 15-10-8 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   Any final decision of a hearing officer that a code violation does or does
not exist shall constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial
review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law. The findings, decision and
order of the hearing officer shall be subject to review in the Circuit Court of
DuPage County.
(Ord. 2019-07-22, passed 7-15-2019)
§ 15-10-9 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other
sanction or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the
failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the Administrative Review
Law (ILCS Ch. 735, Act 5, §§ 3-101 et seq.) shall be a debt due and owing the
village and, as such, may be collected in accordance with applicable law.
   (B)   After expiration of the period within which judicial review under the
Administrative Review Law (ILCS Ch. 735, Act 5, §§ 3-101 et seq.) may be sought
for a final determination of the Code violation, unless stayed by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the findings, decision and order of the hearing officer
may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
   (C)   In any case in which a respondent has failed to comply with a judgment
ordering a defendant to correct a code violation or imposing any fine or other
sanction as a result of a code violation, any expenses incurred by a
municipality to enforce the judgment, including, but not limited to, attorney's
fees, court costs, and costs related to property demolition or foreclosure,
after they are fixed by a court of competent jurisdiction or a hearing officer,
shall be a debt due and owing the municipality and may be collected in
accordance with applicable law. Prior to any expenses being fixed by a hearing
officer pursuant to this division (C), the village shall provide notice to the
respondent that states that the respondent shall appear at a hearing before the
Administrative Hearing Officer to determine whether the respondent has failed
to comply with the judgment. The notice shall set the date for such a hearing,
which shall not be less than seven days from the date that notice is served. If
notice is served by mail, the seven-day period shall begin to run on the date
that the notice was deposited in the mail.
   (D)   Upon being recorded in the manner required by Article XII of the Code
of Civil Procedure or by the Uniform Commercial Code, a lien shall be imposed
on the real estate or personal estate, or both, of the defendant in the amount
of any debt due and owing the municipality under this section. The lien may be
enforced in the same manner as a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of a
court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2019-07-22, passed 7-15-2019)
CHAPTER 16: UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
   Article
      
1.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
2.   DEFINITIONS
      
3.   DISTRICT SPECIFIC STANDARDS
      
4.   USE SPECIFIC STANDARDS
      
5.   DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
      
6.   SIGN STANDARDS
      
7.   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
      
8.   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
      
9.   SUBDIVISION STANDARDS
      
10.   NONCONFORMING LOTS, BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND USES
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
16-1-1   Title
   
16-1-2   Purpose
   
16-1-3   Intent
   
16-1-4   Interpretation
   
16-1-5   Private agreements
   
16-1-6   Rules and construction of language
   
16-1-7   Incorporation by reference
   
16-1-8   Disclosure by trustee of land trust
   
16-1-9   Successor to rule or standard making agencies
§ 16-1-1 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the "Carol
Stream Unified Development Ordinance", the "Carol Stream Unified Development
Code", Unified Development Ordinance or the "UDO".
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-1-2 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is adopted for the following purposes:
   (A)   Promoting and protecting the public health, safety, comfort, morals,
convenience and general welfare;
   (B)   Securing adequate natural light, pure air and safety from fire and
other dangers;
   (C)   Limiting and controlling the pollution of the environment;
   (D)   Conserving the taxable value of land and buildings;
   (E)   Enhancing aesthetic values throughout the village;
   (F)   Implementing the Comprehensive Plan of the village; and
   (G)   Detailing the developmental policy of the village with respect to the
use of land, intensity of use of land and location of land uses throughout the
village.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-1-3 INTENT.
   To these ends, this chapter is intended to meet certain standards and
objectives by:
   (A)   Categorizing the entire village into districts and regulating therein
the location, construction, reconstruction, alteration and use of buildings,
structures and land, whether for residential, business, manufacturing or other
specified uses;
   (B)   Avoiding or lessening congestion in the public streets;
   (C)   Preventing the overcrowding of land through regulating the height and
bulk of buildings hereafter erected as related to land area;
   (D)   Establishing, regulating and limiting the building or setback lines on
or along streets, easements or property lines;
   (E)   Regulating the intensity of the use of lot areas, and regulating the
area of open spaces within and surrounding such buildings;
   (F)   Establishing standards to which buildings or structures therein shall
conform;
   (G)   Prohibiting uses, buildings or structures incompatible with the
character of the residence, business or industrial districts;
   (H)   Preventing additions to or remodeling of existing buildings or
structures in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and limitations herein
imposed;
   (I)   Limiting the deterioration of the environment by establishing
standards whereby emissions, noise and other potential nuisances or hazards are
regulated;
   (J)   Providing for the gradual elimination of those uses, buildings and
structures which are incompatible with the character of the districts in which
they are located, including, but not necessarily limited to:
      (1)   Elimination of such uses of unimproved lands or lots when the
existing rights of the persons in possession thereof are terminated, the uses
to which they are devoted are discontinued or a reasonable time of use after
the passage of this chapter shall have elapsed;
      (2)   Elimination of uses to which such buildings and structures are
devoted, if they are adaptable for permitted uses; and
      (3)   Elimination of such buildings and structures when they are
destroyed or damaged in a major part as hereinafter provided, or when they have
reached the age fixed as a normal useful life of such buildings or structures.
   (K)   Defining and limiting the powers and duties of the administrative
officers and official bodies as hereinafter provided; and
   (L)   Prescribing penalties for the violation of the provisions of this
chapter, or of any amendment thereto.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-1-4 INTERPRETATION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted and applied so as to
best promote the public health, safety, morals, convenience and general
welfare. Where the provisions of this chapter impose greater restrictions than
those of any statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this
chapter shall be controlling. Where the provisions of any statute, other
ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions than this chapter, the
provisions of such statute, other ordinance or regulation shall be controlling.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-1-5 PRIVATE AGREEMENTS.
   This chapter is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or other
private agreement; provided that, where the regulations of this chapter are
more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than easements,
covenants or other private agreements, the requirements of this chapter shall
be controlling.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-1-6 RULES AND CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE.
   In the construction of this chapter, the rules of language contained herein
shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly indicates
otherwise.
   (A)   The particular shall control the general.
   (B)   In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text
of this chapter and any caption or illustration, the text shall control.
   (C)   The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word
"may" is permissive.
   (D)   Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses
and derivative forms.
   (E)   Words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the
plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
   (F)   The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for", "designed for",
"intended for", "maintained for" and "occupied for".
   (G)   Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation
involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the
conjunction "and", "or" or "either - or", the conjunction shall be interpreted
as follows:
      (1)   "And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events do or shall apply.
      (2)   "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or
events shall apply either singly or in combination.
      (3)   "Either - or" indicates that the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply either singly or in combination.
   (H)   All measured distances or standards shall be to the nearest integer;
if a fraction is one-half or less, the integer next below shall be taken.
   (I)   All words and terms as set forth in
Article 2, "Definitions", wherever they occur in this chapter shall be
interpreted as therein defined. Any word or terms not listed shall be construed
in their general accepted meanings as defined in the most recent publication of
Webster's Dictionary.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-1-7 INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE.
   Any and all standards and other codes, regulations and public records
incorporated by reference into this UDO have been adopted in accordance with
the requirement established in Illinois State Statutes.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-1-8 DISCLOSURE BY TRUSTEE OF LAND TRUST.
   Whenever any trustee of a land trust or any beneficiary or beneficiaries of
a land trust make application to the village or any of its agencies pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter relating to the land which is the subject of
such trust, any interest therein, improvements thereto, or use thereof, such
application shall identify each beneficiary of such land trust by name and
address and define his or her interest therein. All such applications shall be
verified by the applicant in his or her capacity as trustee, or by the
beneficiary as the beneficial owner of an interest in such land trust.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-1-9 SUCCESSOR TO RULE OR STANDARD MAKING AGENCIES.
   Whenever in this chapter a governmental or private agency is referred to as
the promulgator of a rule or standard which is incorporated by reference
herein, the rule or standard shall continue to be incorporated by reference
within this chapter in the event that the same rule or standard is adopted by a
successor agency in name or substance.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
ARTICLE 2: DEFINITIONS
Section
   
16-2-1   Definitions - A
   
16-2-2   Definitions - B
   
16-2-3   Definitions - C
   
16-2-4   Definitions - D
   
16-2-5   Definitions - E
   
16-2-6   Definitions - F
   
16-2-7   Definitions - G
   
16-2-8   Definitions - H
   
16-2-9   Definitions - I
   
16-2-10   Definitions - J
   
16-2-11   Definitions - K
   
16-2-12   Definitions - L
   
16-2-13   Definitions - M
   
16-2-14   Definitions - N
   
16-2-15   Definitions - O
   
16-2-16   Definitions - P
   
16-2-17   Definitions - Q
   
16-2-18   Definitions - R
   
16-2-19   Definitions - S
   
16-2-20   Definitions - T
   
16-2-21   Definitions - U
   
16-2-22   Definitions - V
   
16-2-23   Definitions - W
   
16-2-24   Definitions - X
   
16-2-25   Definitions - Y
   
16-2-26   Definitions - Z
§ 16-2-1   DEFINITIONS - A.
   (A)   ABUT. To have a common property line or district line.
   (B)   ABANDONMENT. An action to give up one's right or interest in a
property or a use.
   (C)   ABOVE-GROUND SERVICE FACILITY (SERVICE FACILITY or SERVICE
FACILITIES).  An above-ground structure, used by a service entity to provide
service to the public.
   (D)   ACCESS DRIVE. An unobstructed way of specified width containing a
drive or roadway that provides vehicular access within a development and
connects to a public street.
   (E)   ACCESSORY USE, GENERAL.
      (1)   A structure, building, or use that is subordinate to and serves a
principal building or principal use; is subordinate in area, extent or purpose
to the principal building or principal use served; contributes to the comfort,
convenience or necessity of occupants of the principal building or principal
use served; and is located on the same zoning lot as the principal building or
principal use served, with the single exception of such accessory off-street
parking facilities as are permitted to locate elsewhere than on the same zoning
lot with the building or use served.
      (2)   Accessory uses otherwise listed in
Table 16-3-11 shall not be considered a general accessory use.
   (F)   ACUTE CARE CENTER. A facility for the short-term, outpatient treatment
of severe injuries or episodes of illness, urgent medical conditions, or during
recovery from surgery.
   (G)   ADULT USE CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed
cannabis business establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing
cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related
supplies to purchasers or to qualified registered medical cannabis patients and
caregivers, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act.
   (H)   ADULT ORIENTED USES. Any facility that provides goods or services or
is otherwise  oriented to the display of materials characterized as sexual or
adult in nature, such as videos, movies, slides, photos, books, or magazines;
or actual persons displaying and/or touching sexually specified areas. Examples
include adult bookstores, adult entertainment cabarets, adult entertainment
centers, adult gift shops, and adult movie theaters, as defined in this Article
2.
   (I)   ADDITION. An extension or increase in floor area or height of a
building or structure.
   (J)   ADJACENT. Touching, lying immediately next to, abutting, and/or
sharing a common wall or lot line.
   (K)   ADJOINING. Touching or contiguous, as distinguished from lying near or
adjacent.
   (L)   AIRPORT. Any area of land which is used or intended for use for the
landing and taking off of aircraft, and any appurtenant areas which are used or
intended for use for airport buildings or other airport facilities located
thereon.
   (M)   ALLEY. Any right-of-way which is used primarily for vehicular traffic
along the side or in the rear of properties and which affords only a secondary
means of access to abutting properties.
   (N)   ALTERATION. Any change in size, shape, occupancy or use of a building
or structure.
   (O)   AMUSEMENT DEVICE. An amusement device shall mean any machine, game,
table or device which is designed, intended, displayed or kept as an amusement
game, test of skill or entertainment, and may be operated by the public upon
the insertion of coin, slug, token, plate, disc or the use of which is made
available for any valuable consideration; it is operated by the manipulation of
buttons, dials, balls, wheels, trigger devices or electrical impulses, whether
or not registering a score, offering a prize or offering free
replays. AMUSEMENT DEVICE shall include, but not be limited to, devices
commonly known as pinball machines, marble machines, video games, electronic
games, skill ball and all games, operations or transactions similar thereto
under whatever name they may be indicated. Not included within the definition
of AMUSEMENT DEVICE are regulation bowling alleys, children's rides, and State
of Illinois licensed video gaming terminals.
   (P)   AMPHITHEATER. A sloping, semicircular seating gallery.
   (Q)   ANIMAL HOSPITAL. Any facility maintained by or for the use of a
licensed veterinarian in the diagnosis, treatment, or prevention of animal
diseases wherein the animals are limited to dogs, cats, or other comparable
household pets and wherein the overnight care of said animals is prohibited
except when necessary in the medical treatment of the animal.
   (R)   ANTENNA STRUCTURE. The rigid portion of the assembly which receives or
transmits radio frequency energy, together with the mast or tower upon which
such assembly is mounted, excluding non-rigid items such as wire, cable
transmission lines, guy wires or guy wire anchors.
   (S)   APARTMENT. A room or suite of rooms in a multiple-unit structure which
is arranged, designed, used or intended to be used as a single housekeeping
unit. Complete kitchen facilities (sink, stove, refrigerator and storage
facilities) permanently installed must always be included for each APARTMENT.
   (T)   ARCHERY RANGE. An outdoor facility that may include buildings or
structures used for target practice with bows and arrows.
   (U)   ART GALLERY, COMMERCIAL. A for profit establishment engaged in the
sale, loan, or display of art, books, paintings, sculpture, or other works of
art, not including libraries or museums.
   (V)   ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY. A facility that provides community-based
residential care for at least three unrelated adults (at least 80% of whom are
55 years of age or older) who need assistance with activities of daily living
(ADLs), including personal, supportive, and intermittent health-related
services available 24 hours per day, if needed, to meet the scheduled and
unscheduled needs of a resident.
   (W)   ATHLETIC COURTS. A hard-surfaced area where sports such as but not
limited to tennis, racquet ball, handball, racquetball, and basketball are
played. Shall not include driveways as defined herein.
   (X)   ATHLETIC FIELDS. A non-hard-surfaced area where sports such as but not
limited to soccer, baseball, football, and lacrosse are played.
   (Y)   AUTOBODY REPAIR, ALL VEHICLES. A facility or portion thereof that
conducts engine rebuilding or major reconditioning of worn or damaged motor
vehicles or trailers; collision service, including body, frame or fender
straightening or repairing and painting of vehicles.
   (Z)   AUTOMOBILE AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLE FUELING PLAZA. A retail facility
that sells gasoline and diesel fuel to the public for the fueling of
automobiles and commercial vehicles up to and including semi-trucks, including
but not limited to one or more of the following accessory uses: convenience
store, restaurant, and short-term truck parking of not more than two hours. The
facility shall not include shower facilities, laundry facilities, sleeping
quarters or overnight parking or storage of commercial vehicles.
   (AA)   AWNING. A roof-like cover, temporary in nature, which projects from
the wall of a building or overhangs the public way.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 2021-09-45, passed 9-20-2021)
§ 16-2-2 DEFINITIONS - B.
   (A)   BANDSHELL. See AMPHITHEATER.
   (B)   BANK. A financial institution that is open to the public and engaged
in deposit banking, and that performs closely related functions such as making
loans, investments, and fiduciary activities.
   (C)   BAR AREA. Part of an establishment used primarily for the sale,
dispensing, or consumption of alcoholic beverages.
   (D)   BASEMENT. A story partly underground. Where more than one-half of its
height is above the established curb level or above the average level of the
adjoining ground where the curb level has not been established, a BASEMENT
shall be counted as a story for the purposes of height measurement.
   (E)   BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets, or a combination of streets
and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, bulkhead lines or shore
lines of waterways or corporate boundary lines of the village.
   (F)   BLOOD DONATION CENTER. A facility or portion thereof that collects,
tests, prepares, and stores blood and blood components. Donors shall be
restricted to unpaid volunteers.
   (G)   BOARDING FACILITY. See KENNEL.
   (H)   BREWERY. An industrial use that brews ales, beers, meads, and/or
similar beverages on site. Breweries are classified as a use that manufactures
more than 15,000 barrels of beverage (all beverages combined) annually.
   (I)   BROADBAND TELE- COMMUNICATIONS. The provision of the ability to
transmit voice, data, text, sound or video programming. A BROADBAND
TELECOMMUNICATIONS UTILITY is any entity engaged in operating, maintaining and/
or providing a broadband telecommunications network to subscribers for a fee,
and may be operated via an open and/or closed transmission path. A TELE-
COMMUNICATIONS UTILITY may be based on a single technology or a combination of
technologies.
   (J)   BUILDING. A structure enclosed within exterior walls, built, erected
and framed of a combination of materials, whether portable or fixed, having a
roof, to form a structure for the shelter of persons, animals, or property.
   (K)   BUILDING, DETACHED. A building surrounded by open space on the same
zoning lot.
   (L)   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the sidewalk
level or its equivalent established grade opposite the middle of the front of
the building to the highest elevation of the roof in the case of a slant or
flat roof; to the deck line of a mansard roof; and to the mean height level
between eaves and ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof; provided that, where
buildings are set back from the street line, the HEIGHT OF THE BUILDING may be
measured from the average elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of
the building.
   (M)   BUILDING, NON-CONFORMING. Any building which does not conform to the
regulations herein prescribing the required yards, coverage, height and
setbacks, minimum required spacing between buildings on a single lot, and
minimum required usable open space for the district in which the building is
located.
   (N)   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A non-accessory building in which the principal
use of the zoning lot on which it is located is conducted.
   (O)   BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line marking the minimum horizontal distance
between the front line of the building or structure and the front property
line.
   (P)   BUSINESS PARK. A large tract of land that has been planned, developed,
and operated as an integrated facility for a number of separate office
buildings and supporting ancillary uses with special attention to circulation,
parking, utility needs, aesthetics, and compatibility.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-2-3 DEFINITIONS - C.
   (A)   CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed
cannabis business establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing
cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related
supplies to purchasers or to qualified registered medical cannabis patients and
caregivers, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act.
   (B)   CANOPY. Any structure, movable or stationary, attached to and deriving
its support from framework or posts or other means independent of a connected
structure for the purpose of shielding a platform, stoop or sidewalk from the
elements.
   (C)   CAR WASH. A facility for the cleaning, steam cleaning, washing,
polishing, or waxing of passenger vehicles by machine or hand-operated
facilities.
   (D)   CARNIVAL. A traveling or transportable group or aggregation of rides,
shows, games, or concessions or any combination thereof.
   (E)   CEMETERY. Land used or dedicated to the burial of the dead including
columbariums and mausoleums and excluding crematoriums and mortuaries.
   (F)   CHARGING LEVEL, AC. The charging station delivers electric power to
the vehicle’s charging module, which converts the AC power to DC power and
delivers it to the battery. Voltage is either 120 or 240 volts.
   (G)   CHARGING LEVEL, DC. The charging station bypasses a vehicle's on-board
charger to directly deliver electricity to the vehicle’s high voltage battery.
Voltage is equal to, or greater than 480 volts.
   (H)   CHARGING STATION, ACCESSORY. Equipment, as an accessory use to a
lawfully established principal use, that supplies electrical power for charging
plug-in electric vehicles.
   (I)   CHARGING STATION, PRIMARY. An electric fueling station with equipment
that supplies electric power for charging plug-in electric vehicles.
   (J)   CHECK CASHING STORE. A facility or portion thereof that for
compensation engages, in whole or in part, in the business of cashing checks,
warrants, drafts, money orders, or other commercial paper serving the same
purpose. A check cashing store does not include a state or federally chartered
bank, savings association, credit union, or industrial loan company.
   (K)   CLOSED CUP FLASHPOINT. The lowest temperature at which a combustible
liquid under the most favorable conditions will give off a flammable vapor
which will burn momentarily.
   (L)   COLLEGE. An educational institution which provides an educational
program for which an associate's degree or higher degree is awarded and is
accredited by a nationally recognized accrediting agency or association. Shall
include dormitories, fraternities, sororities and other accessory buildings
necessary for operation. Shall not include business colleges or trade schools
when operated for profit.
   (M)   COMMERCIAL KITCHEN. A professional food preparation and cooking
facility set up for takeout and delivery-only meals with no dine-in option.
This includes but is not limited to ghost kitchens, virtual kitchens, and the
like.
   (N)   COMMERCIAL SERVICE, GENERAL. Any establishment whose primary activity
is the provision of assistance, as opposed to products, to individuals. Any
service use otherwise listed in §
16-3-11 or defined herein shall not be considered a general service use.
   (O)   COMMISSION. The Plan Commission of the Village of Carol Stream,
Illinois.
   (P)   COMMON AREA. An area or areas of reasonable contiguous open space
available to residents of a planned development for common use. Required
setbacks, parking spaces and driveways are not to be included in the
determination of common area.
   (Q)   COMMUNITY GARDEN. A private or public facility for cultivation of
fruits, flowers, vegetables, or ornamental plants by more than one person or
family.
   (R)   COMMUNITY RESIDENCE. A single dwelling unit occupied on a relatively
permanent basis in a family-like environment by a group of unrelated persons
with disabilities, plus paid professional support staff provided by a
sponsoring agency, either living with the residents on a 24 hour basis, or
present whenever residents with disabilities are present at the dwelling; and
complies with the zoning regulations for the district in which the site is
located.
   (S)   CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT. Any equipment which is used in connection with
the construction, alteration, excavation, or repair of a building or of real
property, including, but not limited to front loaders, trailers, cranes, plows,
bulldozers and other similar equipment.
   (T)   CONSTRUCTION RELATED TEMPORARY USE. A temporary structure such as but
not limited to a mobile home, travel trailer, truck trailer, or other structure
used as an office in conjunction with a construction project.
   (U)   CONTIGUOUS. In actual contact.
   (V)   CREMATION SERVICES. A portion of a funeral home, as an accessory use,
or crematory, as a primary use, used for the act of performing human cremation
in compliance with state and federal regulations. The act of cremation must
take place within the principal structure.
   (W)   CREMATORY. An establishment whose primary use is performing the act of
cremation in compliance with the state and federal regulations.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 2022- 01-04, passed 1-3-2022; Ord.
2023-07-32, passed 7-17-2023)
§ 16-2-4 DEFINITIONS - D.
   (A)   DAY CARE CENTER. An establishment whose primary use is the provision
of care by qualified persons in occupied residences or group day care centers.
This term includes child and adult care.
   (B)   DECIBEL. A unit of measurement of the intensity (loudness) of sound.
Sound level meters, which are employed or measure the intensity of sound, are
calibrated in decibels.
   (C)   DETACHED STORAGE STRUCTURE. Detached storage structures shall include
but not be limited to detached garages, sheds, playhouses, greenhouses, and
other similar structures, but shall not include gazebos, pools, or other
recreational facilities.
   (D)   DEVELOPER. Any person who undertakes development or certifies
development on such person's behalf.
   (E)   DEVELOPMENT. Any activity, excavation or fill, alteration, removal of
vegetation, subdivision, change in land use, or practice, undertaken by private
or public entities that affects the discharge of stormwater; or any man-made
change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials in flood
plain, flood way, wetland, waters or buffer areas. The term DEVELOPMENT does
not include maintenance.
   (F)   DISTILLERY. Any facility that produces distilled spirits from any
source or substance; brews or makes mash, wort, or wash fit for distillation or
for the production of distilled spirits; or by any process separates alcoholic
spirits from any fermented substance.
   (G)   DISTRICT. A portion of the village within which on a uniform basis
certain uses of land and buildings are permitted and certain uses of land and
building are prohibited as set forth in this chapter, or within which certain
yards and other open spaces are required or within which certain lot areas,
dwelling sizes and density requirements are established or within which a
combination of such aforesaid regulations are applied, including both base and
overlay districts.
   (H)   DOMESTIC PET SERVICE. An establishment where clipping, bathing and
other services, except that of a veterinary nature, are rendered to dogs, cats
and domestic pets. No boarding shall be permitted.
   (I)   DONATION DROP BOX. A receptacle designed with a door, slot, or other
opening that is intended to accept and store donated items, not including
trailers where personnel are present to accept donations.
   (J)   DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENTS. An establishment or part thereof in which are
provided facilities where serving or consuming commodities, or both, are
intended to occur primarily in patrons' automobiles parked on the premises, or
where commodities are purchased by customers waiting in automobiles for
consumption off the premises.
   (K)   DRIVE THROUGH. A building opening, including windows, doors, or
mechanical devices, through which occupants of a motor vehicle receive or
obtain a product or service.
   (L)   DRIVEWAY. An unobstructed hard-surfaced area providing access to a
parking pad, garage, dwelling, or other structure.
   (M)   DRIVEWAY APPROACH. The portion of a driveway located within a public
right-of-way and regulated under Chapter 12 of the Village of Carol Stream
Municipal Code.
   (N)   DRY CLEANER. An establishment or business maintained for the pickup
and delivery of dry cleaning and/or laundry without the maintenance or
operation of any laundry or dry-cleaning equipment or  machinery on the
premises.
   (O)   DWELLING. A building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively
for residential purposes,  including single-unit, two-unit and multiple-unit
dwellings, but not including mobile homes, or other trailers or lodging rooms
in hotels, motels or lodging houses.
   (P)   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms which are arranged, designed or used
as living quarters for one family only. Individual bathrooms and complete
single kitchen facilities, permanently installed to serve the entire family,
shall always be included within each dwelling unit.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-2-5 DEFINITIONS - E.
   (A)   EFFICIENCY UNIT. A dwelling unit consisting of one principal room for
living, sleeping and eating, plus facilities for cooking and complete bath and
toilet facilities.
   (B)   EMPLOYMENT TRAINING AND VOCATIONAL CENTER. Educational and vocational
training establishment for adults providing activities which include, but are
not limited to:
      (1)   Vocational training services that provide test preparation,
employment soft skills, life skills and self-improvement classes; employment
certification classes such as forklift operations and IT certification classes;
and an introduction to vocational training for auto maintenance and repair,
furniture repair and electrical appliance repair.
      (2)   Adult educational services that include GED study classes, college
preparation classes such as remedial (pre-college) math and writing classes,
and first- and second-year college and vocational classes provided by a higher
education college institution.
      (3)   Office activities that support educational and vocational services
such as case management and counseling services, administrative functions and
all other administrative and support activities typical of a business,
vocational education or social service office.
   (C)   ESTABLISHMENT, BUSINESS. Any lawful commercial endeavor to engage in
the manufacturing, purchase, sale, lease, or exchange of goods, and/or the
provision of services.
   (D)   EXTENDED STAY HOTEL. An establishment containing lodging rooms, for
occupancy by transient guests in contrast to a hotel. Units contain kitchen
facilities for food preparation including but not limited to such facilities as
refrigerators, stoves and ovens. Extended-stay hotels may contain lobbies,
conference rooms, meeting rooms, child play areas, or restaurants.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-2-6 DEFINITIONS - F.
   (A)   FAMILY. An individual living alone or two or more persons, each
related by blood, marriage, or adoption (including foster children), living
together as a single housekeeping unit and occupying a single dwelling unit; or
a group of not more than four persons not so related, living together as a
single housekeeping unit by joint agreement and occupying a single dwelling on
a nonprofit, cost-sharing basis, or a group of five or more persons living in a
community based residential facility including group community residences and
family community residences.
   (B)   FAMILY COMMUNITY RESIDENCE. A single dwelling unit occupied on a
relatively permanent basis in a family-like environment by a group of no more
than eight unrelated persons with disabilities, plus paid professional support
staff provided by a sponsoring agency, either living with residents on a 24
hour basis, or present whenever residents with disabilities are present at the
dwelling; in compliance with the zoning regulations for the district in which
the site is located.
   (C)   FENCE. An artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone,
wire, metal, or other manufactured material or combination of materials as
permitted herein erected to enclose, screen, or separate areas.
   (D)   FENCE, DOG RUN. An area enclosed on all sides made of wood or metal
for the exclusive use of a dog.
   (E)   FLOOR AREA. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several
floors of the building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls
or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings, computed as follows:
      (1)   For determining floor area ratio, the sum of the following areas:
         (a)   The basement floor area when more than one-half of the basement
height is above the finished lot grade level where curb level has not been
established;
         (b)   Elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor;
         (c)   Floor space used for mechanical equipment (except equipment,
open or enclosed, located on the roof);
         (d)   Penthouses;
         (e)   Attic space having headroom of seven feet ten inches or more;
         (f)   Interior balconies and mezzanines;
         (g)   Enclosed porches; and
         (h)   Floor area devoted to accessory uses.
      (2)   Space devoted to off-street parking or loading shall not be
included in the floor area.
      (3)   The floor area of structures devoted to bulk storage of materials
shall be computed by counting each ten feet of height, or fraction thereof, as
being equal to one floor.
   (F)   FLOOR AREA RATIO (F.A.R.). The floor area ratio of the building or
other structure on any lot is determined by dividing the floor area of such
building or structure by the area of the lot on which the building or structure
is located. When more than one building or structure is located on a lot, then
the floor area ratio is determined by dividing the total floor area of all
buildings or structures by the area of the lot, or, in the case of planned
development, by the net site area. The floor area ratio requirements, as set
forth under each zoning district, shall determine the maximum floor area
allowable for a building or other structure (including both principal accessory
buildings) in direct ratio to the gross area of the lot.
   (G)   FOOD PROCESSING ESTABLISHMENT.A commercial establishment in which food
is manufactured or packaged for human consumption. The term does not include a
restaurant or other eating and drinking use, but does include catering
establishments.
   (H)   FREQUENCY. Signifies the number of oscillations per second in a sound
wave and is an index of the pitch of the resulting sound.
   (I)   FUEL SALES. A retail facility that sells gasoline for the fueling of
automobiles, that may include one or more of the following accessory uses:
convenience store and restaurant. The facility shall not be designed to serve
vehicles over 12,000 pounds.
   (J)   FUNERAL PARLOR. A building, or portion thereof, used for the
preparation of the deceased for burial and for the display of deceased and
ceremonies connected therewith prior to burial or cremation.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 2022-01-04, passed 1-3-2022)
§ 16-2-7 DEFINITIONS - G.
   (A)   GAME ROOM. Any business establishment having two or more amusement
devices, whether or not operated as a principal use.
   (B)   GARAGE, BUS. Any building used or intended to be used for the storage
of three or more passenger motor buses or motor coaches used in public
transportation, including school buses.
   (C)   GARAGE, PRIVATE. Any accessory building or an accessory portion of the
principal building which is intended for and used to store the private
passenger vehicles of the family or families residing on the premises.
   (D)   GARAGE, PUBLIC. A building other than a private garage where motor
vehicles are parked or stored, but not including trucks, tractors, truck
trailers and commercial vehicles exceeding one and one-half tons capacity.
   (E)   GARAGE SALE. All general sales, open to the public, conducted from or
on residential premises in any residential zone for the purpose of disposing of
personal property, including but not limited to all sales entitled "garage,"
"lawn," "yard," "attic," "porch," "room," "backyard," "patio," "estate sale,"
or "rummage" sale.
   (F)   GARAGE, STORAGE OR OFF-STREET PARKING. A building or portion thereof,
designed or used, or land used exclusively for storage of motor vehicles, at
which motor fuels and oils are not sold, and motor vehicles are not equipped,
repaired, hired or sold.
   (G)   GARDEN SUPPLY STORE. A place of business where retail and wholesale
products and produce are sold to the consumer. These centers, which may include
a nursery and/or greenhouses, import most of the items sold, and may include
plants, nursery products and stock, potting soil, hardware, power equipment and
machinery, hoes, rakes, shovels, and other garden tools and utensils.
   (H)   GENERAL COMMERCIAL EDUCATION. A for profit establishment whose primary
activity is the instruction of various classes to the public such as but not
limited to dance, painting, sculpting, musical instruments, and singing.
   (I)   GOLF COURSE. Public, semi-public or private grounds over which the
game of golf is played, including accessory buildings and land uses incidental
thereto.
   (J)   GOVERNMENTAL USES. Services and facilities operated by any level of
government.
   (K)   GRADE. The established grade of the street roadway or street sidewalk
adjoining the front lot line, at a point opposite the middle of the building
wall facing such front lot line. Where no such grade has been established, the
grade shall be the elevation of the street sidewalk at such point; and, where
no sidewalks exist, the grade shall be the average elevation of the street
roadway adjacent to the front lot line. Except in cases of unusual topographic
conditions, as determined by the Engineering Services Director, GRADE shall be
the average elevation of the finished surface of the ground adjoining the
exterior walls of a building at the base of a structure.
   (L)   GREENHOUSE. A detached structure constructed primarily of glass or
other translucent material in which temperature and humidity can be controlled
for the cultivation or protection of plants.
   (M)   GROCERY STORE. A retail establishment which primarily sells food, but
also may sell other convenience and household goods, and which occupies more
than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area.
   (N)   GROUND FLOOR AREA. The lot area covered by a principal building,
measured at grade, from the exterior face of the exterior walls, but excluding
open porches or terraces, garages or carports; except the floor area of a
garage may be included in the ground floor area when it is a part of the ground
floor of a building over one story in height, and the floor above the garage is
used or intended for use as a part of the principal use.
   (O)   GROUP COMMUNITY RESIDENCE. A single dwelling unit occupied on a
relatively permanent basis in a family-like environment by a group of nine to
15 unrelated persons with disabilities, plus paid professional support staff
provided by a sponsoring agency, either living with residents on a 24 hour
basis, or present whenever residents with disabilities are present at the
dwelling; and complies with the zoning regulations for the district in which
the site is located.
   (P)   GUN SHOP. Any premises or portion thereof used for the sale, vending,
dealing, exchange, or transfer, within a 12 month period, of two or more
firearms.
   (Q)   GUN RANGE. Any building or premises where there are facilities of any
sort for the firing of hand guns, rifles, or other firearms.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-2-8 DEFINITIONS - H.
   (A)   HOME OCCUPATION. Any occupation or activity resulting in financial
gain and in which the occupation or activity is conducted entirely within the
structural confines of the residential dwelling, including limited use of an
attached garage for incidental storage only. The use as a home occupation must
be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling as a residential
home.
   (B)   HOSPITAL. A building designed and used for the medical and surgical
diagnosis, treatment, and housing of persons under the care of doctors and
nurses, not including assisted living facilities, nursing homes, total senior
life care facilities, senior cohousing facilities, acute care centers, or
medical and rehabilitation facilities as defined herein.
   (C)   HOTEL. An establishment containing lodging rooms, for occupancy by
transient guests in contrast to an extended stay hotel, lodging house,
boardinghouse, or a rooming house, and is commonly known as a hotel in the
village, and which provides customary hotel services such as maid, telephone
and secretarial, bellboy and desk services, the use and upkeep of furniture,
and furnishings and laundry of linens. A hotel may include a restaurant or
cocktail lounge, public banquet halls, ballroom or meeting rooms.
   (D)   HOUSEHOLDER. The occupant of a dwelling unit who is either the owner
or lessee thereof.
   (E)   HOUSEKEEPING UNIT. Either one or more persons related by blood,
marriage, legal adoption, or through legal custody; or four or fewer persons
all of whom are not necessarily related to each of the others by blood,
marriage, legal adoption, or through legal custody. A housekeeping unit shall
not include persons living together in a group community residence, assisted
living facility, nursing home, or total senior life care facility.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-2-9 DEFINITIONS - I.
   (A)   IMPACT NOISES. Impact noises are sounds that occur intermittently
rather than continuously.
   (B)   IMPACT VIBRATIONS. Discrete impulses which do not exceed 100 per
minute shall be considered impact vibrations.
   (C)   INTERIOR PLAN VIEWS. Preliminary plans showing the size and square
foot area of each unit, the room design within each unit, the halls and
stairwells, indicating fire doors where necessary. All floors of the building
can be typical; however, any variations between floor designs are to be shown
separately.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-2-10 DEFINITIONS - J.
   (A)   JUNKYARD. An open area where waste, scrap metal, paper, rags or
similar materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed,
disassembled or handled, including auto and building wrecking yards, but
excluding similar uses taking place entirely within a completely enclosed
building.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-2-11 DEFINITIONS - K.
   (A)   KENNEL. Any structure, land, or combination thereof used, designed, or
arranged for the short term boarding, or care of dogs, cats, or other domestic
animals for profit, but exclusive of animals used for agricultural purposes.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-2-12 DEFINITIONS - L.
   (A)   LABORATORY, MEDICAL OR DENTAL. A place that provides opportunity for
systematic observation, experimentation, or practice related to health or
dental care.
   (B)   LAUNDRY SHOP, SELF-SERVICE. A business that provides self-service type
washing, drying and ironing facilities.
   (C)   LODGING HOUSE. A building originally designed for and used as a
single- or two-unit dwelling, all or a portion of which contains lodging rooms
which accommodate persons who are not members of the keeper's family, for
compensation pursuant to previous arrangement, but not open on a daily,
overnight or per meal basis to transient guests.
   (D)   LODGING ROOM. A room or suite of rooms rented as sleeping and living
quarters, but without cooking facilities and with or without an individual
bathroom. In a suite of rooms, each room which provides sleeping accommodations
shall be counted as one lodging room for the purpose of this chapter.
   (E)   LOT. A parcel or tract of land under single unit control.
   (F)   LOT AREA. A measure, in square feet, of the land area enclosed within
the lot lines of a single lot.
   (G)   LOT, CORNER. A lot of which at least two adjacent sides abut for their
full lengths upon streets; provided that, the interior angle at the
intersection of such two sides is less than 135 degrees. A lot abutting upon a
curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if the tangents to
the curve at its points of beginning within the lot or at the points of
intersection of the side lot lines with the street line intersect at an
interior angle of less than 135 degrees. The point of intersection of the
street lot lines is the corner. In the case of a corner lot with a curved
street line, the corner is the point on the street lot line nearest to the
point of intersection of the tangents above described.
   (H)   LOT COVERAGE. The part or percent of the lot occupied by impervious
surface, not including driveways but including parking pads.
   (I)   LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines.
   (J)   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot that is not a corner lot.
   (K)   LOT LINE. A property boundary line of any lot held in single or
separate ownership; except that, where any portion of the lot extends to the
abutting street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed to be the street or
alley line.
   (L)   LOT LINE, FRONT. That boundary of a lot which is along an existing or
dedicated street. The owner of a corner lot may select either street lot line
as the front lot line, provided that bulk regulations for all yards comply with
applicable standards.
   (M)   LOT LINE, INTERIOR. A lot line which does not abut a street.
   (N)   LOT LINE, REAR. The boundary of a lot which is most distant from and
is, or is most nearly parallel to the front lot line, and in the case of an
irregular triangular or gore-shaped lot, a line ten feet in length within the
lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.
   (O)   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or
a rear lot line.
   (P)   LOT OF RECORD. A single lot which is part of a subdivision, the map of
which has been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of DuPage
County, Illinois; or a single parcel of land, the deed of which has been
recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of DuPage County, Illinois.
   (Q)   LOT, REVERSED CORNER. A corner lot, the rear of which abuts upon the
side of another lot.
   (R)   LOT, THROUGH. A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately
parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot.
   (S)   LOT WIDTH. The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines
measured within the boundaries, or the minimum distance between the side lot
lines within the buildable area.
   (T)   LOT, ZONING.
      (1)   A single tract of land, located within a single block, which, at
the time of filing for a building permit, is designated by its owner or
developer as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit, under
single ownership or control, except as otherwise provided by law.
      (2)   A zoning lot shall satisfy this chapter with respect to area, size,
dimensions and frontage as required in the district in which the zoning lot is
located.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-2-13 DEFINITIONS - M.
   (A)   MACHINE AND EQUIPMENT RENTAL. Buildings or structures, and land used
for storing and renting machinery and equipment for construction, agriculture,
or similar uses.
   (B)   MANUFACTURING, HEAVY. Manufacturing or other enterprises with
significant external effects, or which pose significant risks due to the
involvement of explosives, radioactive materials, poisons, pesticides,
herbicides, or other hazardous materials in the manufacturing or other process.
   (C)   MANUFACTURING, LIGHT. Manufacturing or other enterprises with limited
external effects and which do not pose significant risks due to the involvement
of explosives, radioactive materials, poisons, pesticides, herbicides, or other
hazardous materials in the manufacturing or other process.
   (D)   MARQUEE or CANOPY. A roof-like structure of a permanent nature which
projects from the wall of a building and may overhang the public way, and is
designed and intended to protect pedestrians from adverse weather conditions.
   (E)   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment having a fixed place of
business where any person, firm, association or corporation engages in or
carries on, or permits to be engaged in or carried on, a business of providing
massages.
   (F)   MEDICAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is registered by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to perform necessary activities, including but not limited to
cultivation, packaging and distribution of medical cannabis, to provide only
medical cannabis dispensing organizations registered by the Illinois Department
of Financial and Professional Regulation with usable medical cannabis.
   (G)   MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSARY. A facility operated by an organization or
business that is registered by the Illinois Department of Financial and
Professional Regulation to acquire medical cannabis from a medical cannabis
cultivation center registered by the Illinois Department of Agriculture for the
purpose of dispensing cannabis to qualifying patients or caregivers registered
by the Illinois Department of Public Health.
   (H)   MEDICAL AND REHABILITATION FACILITY. A building or part thereof
designed or used for the diagnosis, treatment and rehabilitation of persons
with injuries or diseases. Such a facility shall also contain medical offices
of some or all of the doctors who treat patients at the facility. A MEDICAL AND
REHABILITATION FACILITY may also offer to non-patients a program to encourage
physical fitness and disease prevention through the use of exercise and
recreational techniques.
   (I)   MICROBREWERY. A brewery that produces less than 155,000 gallons or
3,690 barrels of beer per year. A microbrewery may also provide on-site
consumption of food and beverages produced on or off-site.
   (J)   MOBILE HOMES. Any trailer, as defined herein, used for residential
purposes, but not including sports or camping trailers.
   (K)   MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL. A building or area in which freight brought by
motor truck is assembled or stored for routing in intrastate or interstate
shipment by motor truck.
   (L)   MULTIPLE-UNIT DWELLING, BUILDING. A single dwelling containing three
or more dwelling units having joint entrances.
   (M)   MULTIPLE-UNIT DWELLING, COMPLEX. A group of dwellings each containing
three or more dwelling units having joint entrances.
   (N)   MULTI-TENANT SHOPPING CENTER. A group of retail and other commercial
establishments  that is planned, owned, and managed as a single development.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 2021-09-45, passed 9-20-2021; Ord.
2022-09-39, passed 9-6-2022; Ord. 2023-03-08, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 16-2-14 DEFINITIONS - N.
   (A)   NET FLOOR AREA. The horizontal area of a floor or several floors of a
building or structure; excluding those areas not directly devoted to the
principal use of the building or structure including those items listed in §
16-5-2(C)(l) and excluding those items listed in §
16-5-2(C)(2).
   (B)   NON-CONFORMING USE. Any building, structure or land occupied by a use
established at the time of the adoption of the ordinance or amendments thereto,
which does not conform after the passage of the ordinance or amendments thereto
with the use regulations of the ordinance.
   (C)   NOXIOUS MATTER. Material which is capable of causing injury to living
organisms by chemical reaction or is capable of causing detrimental effects on
the psychological, social or economic well-being of human beings.
   (D)   NURSERY. A building or portion thereof used for the daytime care of
preschool children.
   (E)   NURSERY, PLANT MATERIAL. A space, building or structure, or
combination thereof, for the growing of live trees, shrubs, evergreens or
plants offered for retail sale on the premises, including products used for
gardening or landscaping. The definition of NURSERY, within the meaning of this
chapter, does not include any space, building or structure used for the sale of
fruits, vegetables or Christmas trees.
   (F)   NURSING HOME. A facility that provides community-based residential
care for at least three unrelated adults (at least 80% of whom are 55 years of
age or older) who require constant nursing care to perform activities of daily
living (ADLs), including personal, supportive, and health-related services
available 24 hours per day, if needed, to meet the scheduled and unscheduled
needs of a resident.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-2-15 DEFINITIONS - O.
   (A)   OCTAVE BAND FILTER. An electrical frequency analyzer designed
according to standards formulated by the American Standards Association and
used in conjunction with a sound level meter to take measurements in specific
octave intervals.
   (B)   ODOR THRESHOLD. The minimum concentration in air of a gas, vapor, or
particulate matter that can be detected by the olfactory systems of a panel of
healthy observers.
   (C)   OFFICE, GENERAL. A building or portion of a building wherein
professional services are performed involving predominantly administrative,
professional, or clerical services.
   (D)   OFFICE, MEDICAL OR DENTAL. An office for health care providers
including but not limited to, dentists, physicians, counselors, and surgeons.
   (E)   OFF-STREET PARKING AREA OR LOT. Land which is improved and used or a
structure which is designated and used exclusively for the storage of passenger
motor vehicles, either for accessory off-street parking spaces when permitted
herein by district regulations.
   (F)   OUTDOOR ACTIVITY OR OPERATION. The subordinate use of a zoning lot for
sustained and continuous outdoor use customarily incidental to the primary use
of the zoning lot within an enclosed structure.
   (G)   OUTDOOR DISPLAY AND/OR SALE OF MERCHANDISE. The placement of goods for
sale or advertisement outside of a building or structure on the same zoning lot
and in conjunction with the primary use found on the lot.
   (H)   OUTDOOR RECREATION AND AMUSEMENT ESTABLISHMENT. Commercial
entertainment establishments whose primary activities are conducted outdoors,
including but not limited to archery ranges, swimming pools, skating rinks,
golf driving ranges, miniature golf courses, miniature railroads, merry-go-
rounds and other mechanical rides.
   (I)   OUTDOOR SPECIAL EXHIBITION, SHOW, OR SALES. The temporary placement of
goods for sale or advertisement outside of a building or structure on the same
zoning lot and not in conjunction with the primary use found on the lot.
   (J)   OUTDOOR STORAGE. The keeping, in an area open to the sky, of goods,
material, or merchandise, other than vehicles, recreational vehicles,
playground equipment, landscape decorations, or the like, in the same place for
more than 72 consecutive hours.
   (K)   OUTDOOR THEATER. An outdoor area used for dramatic, operatic, motion
pictures, or other  performance, for admission to the public.
   (L)   OUTDOOR VEHICLE STORAGE. The commercial storage, in an unenclosed
area, of any vehicles, recreational vehicles, and trailers, including vehicles
associated with vehicle sales and rental uses.
   (M)   OUTLINE LIGHTING. An arrangement of incandescent bulbs or electric
discharge tubing that is visible from the public right-of-way that outlines or
defines the perimeter of features of a building including but not limited to
the building's frame, shape, roof line, or window dimensions.
   (N)   OUTLOT RETAIL BUILDING. An area located within a shopping center as
defined in this code that shares a common parking lot with the other buildings
and establishments within said shopping center but which is separated from the
principal building and establishment by a parking area.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 2021-09-45, passed 9-20-2021)
§ 16-2-16 DEFINITIONS - P.
   (A)   PARKING AREA, PRIVATE. An open, hard-surfaced area, other than a
street or public way, designed, arranged and made available for the storage of
private passenger automobiles only, of occupants of the building or buildings
for which the parking area is developed and is accessory.
   (B)   PARKING AREA, PUBLIC. An open, hard-surfaced area, other than a street
or public way, intended to be used for the storage of passenger automobiles and
commercial vehicles under one and one-half tons capacity, and available to the
public, whether for compensation, free or as an accommodation to clients or
customers.
   (C)   PARKING AREA OR YARD, TRUCK. Any land used or intended to be used for
the storage, parking of trucks, trailers, tractors and including commercial
vehicles, while not loading or unloading, which exceeds one and one-half tons
in capacity.
   (D)   PARKING PAD. An off-street parking area adjacent to a driveway and/or
garage.
   (E)   PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE. Space within a public or private parking
area, exclusive of access drives or aisles, ramps, columns or office and work
areas.
   (F)   PARKING SPACE, ELECTRIC VEHICLE. A parking space for an electric
vehicle or plug-in hybrid vehicle.
   (G)   PARKWAY. The area, excluding the sidewalk, if any, between the
property line and the curb or, in the absence of a curb, between the property
line and the nearest edge of the street paving.
   (H)   PARTICULATE MATTER. Finely divided solid or liquid matter, other than
water, which is released in the atmosphere.
   (I)   PARTY WALL. A common wall which extends from its footing below grade
to the underside of the roof and divides buildings.
   (J)   PATIO. An uncovered floor, usually made of concrete, brick, or other
masonry material, which  is not elevated above the surface of the ground in any
manner.
   (K)   PATIO DOOR. A means of egress incorporating either a fixed panel and a
sliding panel, two hinged panels or any combination thereof, but including at
least one sliding or swinging panel.
   (L)   PAWN SHOP. An establishment that engages, in whole or in part, in the
business of loaning money on the security of pledges of personal property, or
deposits or conditional sales of personal property, or the purchase or sale of
personal property.
   (M)   PAY DAY LOAN STORE. See CHECK CASHING STORE.
   (N)   PERFORMANCE STANDARD. A criteria established to control smoke and
particulate matter, noise, odor, toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and
explosion hazards, glare or heat, or radiation hazards generated by or inherent
in uses of land or buildings.
   (O)   PERSON. Any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, municipal corporation or
political subdivision of the state, or a receiver, trustee,  conservator or
other representative appointed by order of any court.
   (P)   PERSON WITH A DISABILITY. Any individual whose disability:
      (1)   Is attributable to mental, intellectual or physical impairments or
a combination of mental, intellectual or physical impairments;
      (2)   Is likely to continue for a significant amount of time or
indefinitely;
      (3)   Results in functional limitations in three or more of the following
areas of major life activities:
         (a)   Self care;
         (b)   Receptive or expressive language;
         (c)   Learning;
         (d)   Mobility;
         (e)   Self direction;
         (f)   Capacity for independent living; and
         (g)   Economic self-sufficiency.
      (4)   Reflects the person's need for a combination and sequence of
special interdisciplinary or generic care, treatment or other services which
are of a life-long or extended duration.
   (Q)   PLACE OF ASSEMBLY. A non- commercial, not for profit facility utilized
by individuals or groups to accommodate public functions or events.
   (R)   PLACE OF WORSHIP. A building, together with its accessory buildings
and uses, where persons regularly assemble for religious purposes and related
social events and which building and accessory buildings and uses are
maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain religious
ceremonies and purposes.
   (S)   PLAN COMMISSION. The Plan Commission of the Village of Carol Stream,
Illinois.
   (T)   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT. A parcel or tract of land, initially under single
ownership or control, which contains two or more principal buildings and one or
more principal uses, planned and constructed as a unified development where
specific regulations of a given zoning district are modified through the
issuance of a special use permit.
   (U)   PORCH. A roofed-over structure, projecting out from the wall or walls
of a main structure and commonly open to the weather in part.
   (V)   PORTABLE OUTDOOR STORAGE DEVICE. Any item designed and used as
follows: a container which is delivered to a property, which is  filled with
household items or other nontrash materials, and which the container and its
contents are subsequently transported to another location.
   (W)   POST OFFICE. See GOVERNMENTAL USES.
   (X)   PRESCHOOL. See NURSERY.
   (Y)   PRIMARY USE. See PRINCIPAL USE.
   (Z)   PRINCIPAL USE. The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from
a subordinate or accessory use.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 2023-07-32, passed 7-17-2023)
§ 16-2-17 DEFINITIONS - Q.
[Reserve]
§ 16-2-18 DEFINITIONS - R.
   (A)   RADIATION HAZARDS. The deleterious and harmful effects of all ionizing
radiation, which shall include all radiation capable of producing ions in their
passage through matter. Such radiations shall include but are not limited to
the electromagnetic radiations such as x-rays and gamma rays and particulate
radiation such as electrons, beta particles, protons, neutrons and alpha
particles.
   (B)   RAINWATER COLLECTION SYSTEM. A system that gathers or catches
rainwater, typically from a rooftop, and stores it for later use. COLLECTION
SYSTEMS include rain barrels and cisterns.
   (C)   RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT. Recreational equipment shall be defined as
including the following.
      (1)   BOATCRAFT. Any unit that is used for water travel or pleasure.
      (2)   CAMPER TRAILER. A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis
or metal welded unit body with the superstructure made in part or in whole of
canvas and metal frame, not to exceed 18 feet in length.
      (3)   MOTORIZED HOME. A portable dwelling designed and constructed as an
integral part of a self-propelled vehicle.
      (4)   RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT TRAILER. A non-automotive vehicle designed
to be hauled by road to transport equipment such as boats, jet skis, and other
recreational equipment.
      (5)   TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis,
designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational or
vacation uses, permanently identified travel trailer; it shall have a body
width not exceeding eight feet and a body length not exceeding 32 feet.
   (D)   RECYCLING FACILITY. A facility or operation that receives, processes,
and transfers source-separated recyclable materials.
   (E)   REGIONAL RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. A place of worship with one or more of
the following accessory uses: convents, rectories, residences for individuals
and their families employed by the religious institution as their principal
occupation and whose duties are either pastorial, educational or custodial; day
care; pre-school; non-residential rehabilitative services; counseling;
recreational facilities; book stores; media production facilities; and
temporary over-night shelters for the homeless and victims of natural
emergencies. A REGIONAL RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION shall be located on a parcel of
land that is at least ten acres in size and shall be improved with a principal
structure of at least 50,000 square feet in gross floor area.
   (F)   REPAIR AND SERVICE, AUTOMOBILE. A facility that conducts light
automobile maintenance activities such as engine tune-ups, lubrication, and
minor repairs and shall not include premises where heavy automobile maintenance
activities, such as engine overhauls, automobile painting, and body work, are
conducted.
   (G)   RESEARCH LABORATORY. A building or group of buildings in which are
located facilities for  scientific research, investigation, testing or
experimentation, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products,
except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory.
   (H)   RESTAURANT, GENERAL. A business establishment in which meals or
refreshments may be purchased by the public, and in which greater than 50% of
gross sales are unrelated to alcoholic beverages.
   (I)   RETAIL SALES, ACCESSORY. Part of an establishment used primarily for
general retail sales as defined herein.
   (J)   RETAIL SALES, GENERAL. A commercial enterprise that provides goods
directly to the consumer, where such goods are available for immediate purchase
and removal from the premises by the purchaser. Commercial retail uses
otherwise listed in Table 3-11 shall not be considered a general retail sales
use.
   (K)   RINGELMANN CHART. The chart described in the United States Bureau of
Mines Information Circular 6888, on which are illustrated graduated shades of
gray for use in estimating the light obscuring capacity of smoke, smoke
density.
   (L)   RINGELMANN NUMBER. The number of the area on the Ringelmann Chart that
coincides most nearly with the visual density of emission of the light-
obscuring capacity of smoke.
   (M)   RIGHTS-OF-WAY. A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication,
prescription, or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a street, trail,
water line, sanitary sewer, and/or other public utilities or facilities.
   (N)   ROADWAY. The portion of a street which is used or intended to be used
for the travel of motor vehicles.
   (O)   ROOM. For the purpose of determining lot area requirements and density
in a multiple-unit  district, a living room and bedroom, equal to at least a
100 square feet in area. A room shall not include the area in kitchen, open
dining area, sanitary facilities, utility provisions, corridors, hallways and
storage. Plans presented showing one-, two- or three-bedroom units, and
including a den, library or other extra room shall count such extra room as a
bedroom for the purpose of computing density.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 2023-07-32, passed 7-17-2023)
§ 16-2-19 DEFINITIONS - S.
   (A)   SCHOOL. An institution for the teaching of children or adults
including public and private primary and secondary schools.
   (B)   SEED STORE. See GARDEN SUPPLY STORE.
   (C)   SELF STORAGE. A building or group of buildings consisting of
individual, self-contained units used for the storage of personal property
where individual owners or lessees control individual storage spaces.
   (D)   SENIOR COHOUSING. A residential development targeted to people aged 55
and over where residents have individual dwelling units but share communal
spaces, meals, and group activities.
   (E)   SERVICE WALK. A hard surface walkway for pedestrians located on
private property and internal to a site.
   (F)   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED MATERIAL. Any media which displays sexually
specified area(s) or specified sexual activities, as those terms are defined in
this
Article 2.
   (G)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED USE, ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment having as a
substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, and
other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section
devoted to the sale or display of such material.
   (H)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED USE, ADULT ENTERTAINMENT. Any exhibition of
sexually- oriented motion pictures, live performance, display or dance of any
type which has as a significant or substantial portion of such performance any
actual or simulated performance of specified sexual activities or exhibition
and viewing of specified anatomical areas, removal of articles of clothing or
appearing unclothed, pantomime, modeling, or any other personal service offered
customers.
   (I)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED USE, ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET. A public or
private establishment which features topless or nude dancers and/or waitresses,
strippers, male or female impersonators and/or similar entertainers.
   (J)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED USE, ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CENTER. An enclosed
building with the capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas for observation by patrons therein.
   (K)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED USE, ADULT GIFT SHOP. An establishment having as a
substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade pictures, photographs,
drawings, diagrams, paraphernalia, apparatus or other objects which are
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas or an establishment with a segment or section devoted for the sale or
display of such material.
   (L)   SEXUALLY ORIENTED USE, ADULT MOVIE THEATER. An enclosed building with
a capacity of 50 persons or more used primarily for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing
or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for
observation by patrons therein.
   (M)   SEXUALLY SPECIFIED AREAS.
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, the female breast below a point immediately above the areola to a point
immediately below the areola, said opaque cover covering the entire areola, or
anal area.
      (2)   The display of the human male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state, real or simulated, even if completely and opaquely covered.
   (N)   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Actual or simulated human genitals in a
state of sexual stimulation or arousal; acts or simulated acts of human
masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; acts or simulated acts of oral
sexual conduct; fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttock or female breast; or excretory functions as part of or in
connection with any activities set forth in this definition.
   (O)   SHED. A detached accessory structure used primarily for storage
purposes whose use is incidental and subordinate to that of the principal
building or structure.
   (P)   SIDEWALK. A paved walkway for pedestrians located in the public right-
of-way.
   (Q)   SIGHT TRIANGLE. The portion of a lot within the triangular area formed
by two measurements 25 feet in length from the point of intersection of two
street right-of-way lines forming a corner lot, or 25 feet in length from the
point of intersection of a street right-of-way line and the edge of an
intersecting driveway, or two intersecting private roadways.
   (R)   SIGN. Any object, device, display, structure, or part thereof,
situated outdoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or
attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business,
product, service, event, or location by any means, including words, letters,
figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images.
      (1)   SIGN, A-FRAME. See SIGN, SANDWICH BOARD.
      (2)   SIGN, ANIMATED. The presentation of pictorials and graphics on
signs displayed in a progression of frames which give the illusion of motion,
including but not limited to the illusion of moving objects, moving patterns or
bands of light, or expanding or contracting shapes.
      (3)   SIGN, AWNING. A business or identification sign attached directly
to an awning, or weather resistant paint directly affixed to the awning
material.
      (4)   SIGN, BILLBOARD. See SIGN, OFF PREMISES.
      (5)   SIGN, BLADE. See SIGN, PROJECTING.
      (6)   SIGN, BOX. A sign that is self- enclosed and which may be multi-
sided incorporating a rigid frame, which supports and retains removable sign
face panels and/or background constructed of plastic or similar translucent
material.
      (7)   SIGN, CANOPY. A sign attached directly to a canopy, or weather
resistant paint directly affixed to the canopy material.
      (8)   SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY. A sign or portion thereof designed to
accommodate frequent message changes composed of characters, letters, or
illustrations and that can be changed or rearranged manually without altering
the face or surface of such sign.
      (9)   SIGN COPY. Any graphic, word, numeral, symbol, insignia, text,
sample, model, device, or combination thereof on a sign.
      (10)   SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE BOARD. A sign or portion thereof designed
to accommodate frequent message changes composed of characters, letters, or
illustrations and that can be changed or rearranged electronically without
altering the face or surface of such sign.
      (11)   SIGN, FEATHER. A flexible or rigid pole to which one side of a
flexible fabric, generally in the shape of a feather or similar shape, is
attached, and which upon which temporary sign copy is displayed. Such banners
are also known and sold under names which include, but are not limited to,
"quill sign," "banana banner," "blade banner," "flutter banner," "flutter
flag," "bowflag," "teardrop banners," and others. The definition includes
functionally similar display devices.
      (12)   SIGN, GROUND MOUNTED. A temporary sign on a frame, pole, or other
support that is not attached to any building.
      (13)   SIGN, MONUMENT. A sign permanently affixed to the ground by means
of a base with a solid appearance that is as wide or wider than the sign face
and is appurtenant to a single-tenant building.
      (14)   SIGN, MOVING. Any sign or part of a sign that changes physical
position by any movement or rotation or that gives the visual impression of
such movement by use of lighting, or that exhibits intermittent or sequential
flashing of natural or artificial light or color effects by any means
whatsoever.
      (15)   SIGN, MULTI-TENANT MONUMENT. A sign permanently affixed to the
ground by means of a base with a solid appearance that is as wide or wider than
the sign face and is appurtenant to a multi-tenant building.
      (16)   SIGN, OFF PREMISES. A sign that constitutes a principal, separate,
or secondary use, as opposed to an accessory use, of the parcel on which it is
located.
      (17)   SIGN, ON-SITE TRAFFIC DIRECTIONAL SIGN. A sign that primarily
provides information for directing and guiding vehicular or pedestrian traffic
in order to protect public safety.
      (18)   SIGN, PERMANENT. Any sign which is not a temporary sign.
      (19)   SIGN, POLE. A sign with a supporting structure with a size less
than 25% of the total width of the sign with more than two feet of clear space
between the bottom of the face of the sign and the grade beneath the sign face.
      (20)   SIGN, PROJECTING. A small, pedestrian oriented sign that projects
perpendicular from a structure.
      (21)   SIGN, ROOF. A sign erected, constructed, painted, or placed upon
or over a roof or parapet wall of a building and which is wholly or partly
supported by the building or roof structure.
      (22)   SIGN, ROTATING. See SIGN, MOVING.
      (23)   SIGN, SANDWICH BOARD. A sign not secured or attached to the ground
or surface upon which it is located, but supported by its own frame, which is
typically in the shape of an A.
      (24)   SIGN, SNIPE. An off-premises sign that is tacked, nailed, posted,
pasted, glued, or otherwise attached to trees, poles, stakes, fences, or to
other objects.
      (25)   SIGN, TEMPORARY. A sign intended to be displayed for a limited
length of time.
      (26)   SIGN, TRAILER-TYPE PORTABLE. A portable sign mounted on a trailer
or similar.
      (27)   SIGN, WALL. A permanent sign attached directly to a building wall.
      (28)   SIGN, WALL MOUNTED BANNER. A temporary sign composed of
lightweight, flexible, non-rigid material that is affixed to a building wall.
      (29)   SIGN, WINDOW. A sign which is visible to persons in the public
right-of-way and which is placed within a building and within one foot of a
window.
      (30)   SIGN, YARD. A temporary sign printed on corrugated plastic or
similar material on a wire or plastic frame or similar support.
   (S)   SINGLE-UNIT ATTACHED. A dwelling designed to contain one dwelling unit
from lowest level to roof, with a private outside entrance, but not necessarily
occupying a private lot, and sharing a common wall adjoining dwelling units.
   (T)   SINGLE-UNIT DETACHED. A dwelling containing one dwelling unit only
which is surrounded on all sides by open space on the same lot.
   (U)   SMOKE. The visible discharge from a chimney, stack, vent, exhaust or
combustion process which is made up of particulate matter.
   (V)   SMOKING SHELTER. Any shelter in which smoking is permitted by a
business or property owner and is not an "enclosed area", as defined by the
Smoke-Free Illinois Act.
   (W)   SOLAR ENERGY COLLECTION SYSTEM. A device or combination of devices,
structure, or part of a device or structure that transforms direct solar energy
into thermal, chemical, or electrical energy and that contributes significantly
to a structure's energy supply.
   (X)   SOUND LEVEL. The intensity of sound of an operation or use as measured
in decibels.
   (Y)   SOUND LEVEL METER. An instrument standardized by the American
Standards Association for measurement of the intensity of sound.
   (Z)   SPECIALTY FOOD STORE. A retail establishment which primarily sells
food, but also may sell other convenience and household goods, and which
occupies less than or equal to 5,000 square feet of gross floor area.
   (AA)   STORY. The portion of a building, other than a cellar, included
between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or,
if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling
next above it. The floor of a story may have split levels; provided that, there
are not more than four feet difference in elevation between the different
levels of the floor. A basement shall be counted as a story and a mezzanine
floor shall be counted as a story when it covers one-third the area of the
floor next below it, or if the vertical distance from the floor next below it
to the floor next above it is 24 feet or more.
   (BB)   STORY, HALF. A partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the
wall plates on which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than
three feet above the floor of such story; except that, any partial story used
for residence purposes, other than for a janitor or caretaker or his or her
family, or by a family occupying the floor immediately below it, shall be
deemed a full story.
   (CC)   STREET, FRONTAGE. All of the property fronting on one side of a
street between two intersecting streets, or in the case of a dead-end street,
all of the property along one side of the street between an intersecting street
and the end of such dead-end street.
   (DD)   STRUCTURE. Any improvement upon land, the use of which requires a
permanent or temporary location on the ground or attachment to something having
a permanent or temporary location on the ground. This includes, but is not
limited to, signs, fences, driveways, pools, decks, sheds, buildings and tennis
courts.
   (EE)   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change in the supporting members of a
building such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial
change in the roof or in the exterior walls, excepting such repair or
replacement as may be required for the safety of the building.
   (FF)   STRUCTURE, PRINCIPAL. A non-accessory structure that houses or serves
as the principal use of the zoning lot on which it is located.
   (GG)   SUBSTANTIAL REHABILITATION. Repairs, replacements, and improvements
the cost of which exceeds 15% (exclusive of any soft costs) of the property's
replacement cost (fair market value) after completion of all repairs,
replacements, and improvements.
   (HH)   SWIMMING POOL. A structure, whether above or below grade level,
designed to hold water more than 24 inches deep to be used for recreational
purposes.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-2-20 DEFINITIONS - T.
   (A)   TATTOO PARLOR. An establishment whose principal business activity,
either in terms of operation or as offered to the public, is the practice of
one or more of the following: (1) placing of designs, letters, figures,
symbols, or other marks upon or under the skin of any person, using ink or
other substances that result in the permanent coloration of the skin by means
of the use of needles or other instruments designed to contact or puncture the
skin; (2) creation of an opening in the body of a person for the purpose of
inserting jewelry or other decoration.
   (B)   TAPROOM. A portion of a brewery, winery, or distillery establishment
or an establishment associated with a brewery, winery, or distillery where
beer, wine, or spirits made by the brewery, winery, or distillery are sold. A
taproom may also provide on-site consumption of food and beverages produced on
or off-site.
   (C)   TOTAL SENIOR LIFE CARE FACILITY.
      (1)   A housing development designated for retirement for individuals
having a minimum age of 55 years or couples wherein one spouse is 55 years or
older, containing one or more connected buildings with not less than 200
dwelling units and a common area containing dining, kitchen, meeting and
recreational facilities which may be located upon a single zoning lot. The
aforementioned development will provide a nursing home which will be located on
the site. The overall size of the development will not be less than 25 acres
and overall floor area ratio will not exceed 0.15. The density shall not be
greater than ten dwelling units per acre and for purposes of computing the
density, every four nursing beds shall constitute the equivalent of one
dwelling unit.
      (2)   Minimum floor area shall be as follows:
         (a)   Studio apartments: 435 square feet;
         (b)   One-bedroom apartments: 610 square feet;
         (c)   Two-bedroom apartments: 860 square feet;
         (d)   Three-bedroom apartments: 1,450 square feet
      (3)   The use may include ancillary retail shops, the use of which is
limited to the residents and their guests.
   (D)   TOXIC MATTER OR MATERIAL. Those materials which are capable of causing
injury to living organisms by chemical means.
   (E)   TRAILER.
      (1)   A vehicle with or without motive power used or adaptable for
living, sleeping, business or storage purposes, having no foundation other than
wheels, blocks, skids, jacks, horses or skirting, which does not meet the
Building Code requirements and has been or reasonably may be equipped with
wheels or other devices for transporting the structure from place to place.
      (2)   A permanent foundation shall not change its character nor shall the
erecting of additions to such trailer, unless the trailer itself and any
additions thereto conform to all village laws.
   (F)   TRAILER SALES AREA. An open area, other than a street, used for the
display or sale of new or used trailers, and where no repair work is done,
except for minor incidental repair of trailers to be displayed and sold on the
premises.
   (G)   TRAILER, SPORTS OR CAMPING. A trailer designed for camping or other
recreational purposes.
   (H)   TRAINING FACILITY. See UNION HALL.
   (I)   TRANSFER FACILITY, LANDSCAPE WASTE. A facility at which landscape
waste is deposited and loaded onto transfer trailers, to be transported off-
site for disposal or processing.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-2-21 DEFINITIONS - U.
   (A)   UNIVERSITY. See COLLEGE.
   (B)   UNION HALL. A building in which a trade union meets, conducts
training, hiring, or other business activities.
   (C)   URBAN FARM. See COMMUNITY GARDEN.
   (D)   USE, PRINCIPAL. The dominant use of land or buildings as distinguished
from a subordinate or accessory use.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-2-22 DEFINITIONS - V.
   (A)   VEHICLE, ELECTRIC. A vehicle that operates exclusively on electrical
energy from a charging station or other electrical energy source that is stored
in the vehicle’s battery for propulsion purposes.
   (B)   VEHICLE, HYBRID. An electric vehicle that contains an internal
combustion engine that allows power to be delivered to the drive wheels by an
electric motor and also generates motive power by the burning of liquid or
gaseous fuels.
   (C)   VEHICLE, INTERNAL COMBUSTION ENGINE. An engine that generates motive
power by the burning of liquid or gaseous fuels.
   (D)   VEHICLE SALES AND RENTAL. An open area, other than a street, used for
the display, sale or  rental of new or used automobiles or trailers, and where
repair work may be performed.
   (E)   VETERINARY CLINIC. See ANIMAL HOSPITAL.
   (F)   VIBRATION. The periodic displacement, measured in inches, of earth at
designated frequency-cycles per second.
   (G)   VIDEO GAMING CAFÉ. An establishment whose primary business activity is
video gaming, with incidental service of alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages
and food.
   (H)   VILLAGE BOARD. The President and Village Board of Trustees of the
Village of Carol Stream, Illinois.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 2022- 02-11, passed 2-22-2022; Ord.
2023-07-32, passed 7-17-2023)
§ 16-2-23 DEFINITIONS - W.
   (A)   WAREHOUSE, DISTRIBUTION. A facility where goods are received and
temporarily stored for delivery to the ultimate customer at remote locations.
   (B)   WAREHOUSE, MINI. See SELF STORAGE.
   (C)   WAREHOUSE, STORAGE. A facility where goods are received stored for
extended periods of time for delivery to the ultimate customer at remote
locations.
   (D)   WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY. A facility for the processing or storage,
treatment or disposal of waste, not including hauling or transport.
   (E)   WASTE TREATMENT. Any method, technique or process, including
neutralization, designed to change the physical, chemical or biological
character or composition of any waste so as to neutralize it or render it
nonhazardous, safer for transport, amenable for recovery, amenable for storage,
or reduced in volume. Such term includes any activity or processing designed to
change the physical form or chemical composition of hazardous waste so as to
render it nonhazardous.
   (F)   WHOLESALE. An establishment or place of business primarily engaged in
selling and/or distributing merchandise to retailers; to industrial,
commercial, institutional, or professional business users, or to other
wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or
selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies. This is not considered a
general commercial use.
   (G)   WINERY. An agricultural processing facility used for: (1) the
fermenting and processing of fruit juice into wine; or (2) the refermenting of
still wine into sparkling wine.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-2-24 DEFINITIONS - X.
[Reserve]
§ 16-2-25 DEFINITIONS - Y.
   (A)   YARD, ACTUAL. The actual yard is bounded by the applicable lot line(s)
and the actual building setback as established by the principal building or use
of land.
   (B)   YARD, COURT. A yard formed by the enclosure of space on more than two
sides by a building or buildings.
   (C)   YARD, FRONT. A yard which is bounded by the side lot lines, front lot
line and the front yard line, or the established setback line when 40% or more
of the lots fronting on one side of a street within a block are improved with
principal buildings or uses of land.
   (D)   YARD, INTERIOR SIDE. Aside yard which adjoins another lot or an alley
separating such side yard from another lot, and which is bounded by the rear
yard line, front yard line, side yard line and interior side lot line.
   (E)   YARD LINE. A line in a lot that is parallel to the lot line along
which the applicable yard extends and which is not nearer to such lot line at
any point than the required depth or width of the applicable yard otherwise
contained within this Zoning Code. Yard lines shall be created for each type of
yard for which a required depth or width is established within the Zoning Code.
A principal or accessory building, structure or other obstruction shall not
encroach into the area between any yard line and an adjacent lot line except
for such permitted obstructions in yards as are set forth in this chapter.
   (F)   YARD, REAR. A yard which is bounded by the interior side lot line(s),
required yard line adjoining a street (if applicable), rear lot line and the
rear yard line.
   (G)   YARD, REQUIRED. The required yard is bounded by the applicable lot
line(s) and required yard line(s). Unless noted otherwise, references to YARD
in the Zoning Code refer to the required yard.
   (H)   YARD, SIDE, ADJOINING A STREET (CORNER SIDE YARD). A yard which is
bounded by the front yard line, side yard line, side lot line adjoining a
street and rear lot line. A side yard adjoining a street shall extend across
the entire length of a lot from the front yard line to the rear lot line.
   (I)   YOUTH COUNSELING AND EDUCATION CENTER. An establishment providing
educational and vocational training and counseling services for persons with
disabilities, from preschool age through age 21, and their families, when
appropriate. Services include, but shall not be limited to: Support services,
counseling services and interdisciplinary services providing remedial speech,
motor and academic skills, life skills and social skills; speech, occupational,
and physical therapy, and rehabilitation and orientation and mobility services;
with the goal of returning the disabled person to general education classes in
the least restrictive environment, and career preparation.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 2025-03-10, passed 3-17-2025)
§ 16-2-26 DEFINITIONS - Z.
   (A)   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The Zoning Administrator is the Community
Development Director.
   (B)   ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS. The Zoning Board of Appeals of the Village of
Carol Stream, Illinois.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
ARTICLE 3: DISTRICT SPECIFIC STANDARDS
Section
   
16-3-1   Establishment of Zoning Districts
   
16-3-2   Zoning District Map and Boundaries
   
16-3-3   Zoning of annexed land
   
16-3-4   Residence Districts
   
16-3-5   Business Districts
   
16-3-6   Office, Service, and Industrial Districts
   
16-3-7   Overlay District
   
16-3-8   Control over bulk
   
16-3-9   Bulk and dimensional standards
   
16-3-10   Allowable use of land, buildings or structures
   
16-3-11   Permitted and special uses
§ 16-3-1 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS.
   For the purpose and provisions herein, the village is hereby organized into
the following districts:
   (A)   Residence Districts
      (1)   R-1 Estate Residence and Community Facilities District
      (2)   R-2 Traditional Residence District
      (3)   R-3 Suburban Residence District
      (4)   R-4 Multiunit Residence District
   (B)   Business Districts
      (1)   B-1 Town Center District
      (2)   B-2 Neighborhood Business District
      (3)   B-3 General Business District
   (C)   Office, Service, and Industrial Districts
      (1)   O-S Office and Service District
      (2)   I Industrial District
   (D)   Overlay Districts
      (1)   GAC Gary Avenue Corridor
      (2)   NAC North Avenue Corridor
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-3-2 ZONING DISTRICT MAP AND BOUNDARIES.
   (A)   Zoning District Map. The districts and their boundaries are as shown
upon a zoning district map entitled "Village of Carol Stream Official Zoning
Map" approved by the Mayor and Village Board. The Zoning District Map, properly
attested to, shall be kept on file with the Village Clerk.
   (B)   District boundaries. When uncertainty exists with respect to the
boundaries of the various districts shown on the zoning map and made a part of
this UDO, the following rules shall apply.
      (1)   District boundary lines shall be on the lines of railroads,
highways, streets or easements or the boundary lines of sections, quarter
sections, divisions of sections, tracts or lots, or such lines extended unless
otherwise indicated.
      (2)   In areas not subdivided into lots and blocks, whenever a district
is indicated as a strip adjacent and parallel to a street or highway, the depth
of such strips shall be in accordance with the dimensions shown on the maps
measured at right angles from the centerline of the street or highway, and the
length of frontage shall be in accordance with dimensions shown on the maps
from sections, quarter sections or division lines in centerlines of streets,
highways or railroad rights-of-way unless otherwise indicated.
      (3)   Where a lot held in one ownership and of record on the effective
date of this UDO is divided by a district boundary line, the entire lot shall
be construed to be within the less restricted district; provided that, this
shall not apply if it increases the frontage of the lot by more than 25 feet
required in the less restricted district.
   (C)   Zoning of streets, easements, public ways, waterways and railroad
rights-of-way. All streets, easements, public ways, waterways and railroad
rights-of-way, if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be
in the same zone as the property immediately abutting upon such streets,
easements, public ways, waterways and railroad rights-of-way. Where any of the
above rights-of-way serve as district boundaries, the zoning of such areas,
unless otherwise designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the
abutting property up to such centerline.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-3-3 ZONING OF ANNEXED LAND.
   Any area annexed to the village after the effective date of the adoption of
this UDO shall, upon such annexation, be automatically zoned R-1, being defined
as the most restrictive zone within this UDO, unless such area is zoned to a
different zoning district, approved by the Village Board in accordance with the
terms of an annexation agreement.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-3-4 RESIDENCE DISTRICTS.
   (A)   General purpose of Residence Districts. Residence zoning districts are
established, designed, and intended to provide a comfortable, healthy, safe,
and pleasant environment in which to live and to:
      (1)   Provide appropriately located areas for residential development
that are consistent with the Comprehensive Plan;
      (2)   Ensure adequate light, air, privacy, and open space for residents;
      (3)   Provide for a variety of neighborhoods with a range of housing
types with varying characters and patterns of development;
      (4)   Protect neighborhoods from the harmful effects of excessive noise,
traffic congestion, and other potential adverse impacts; and
      (5)   Provide amenities while protecting residents from incompatible uses
and activities.
   (B)   Estate Residence and Community Facilities District - R-1. (See
Figure 16-3-4(B))
      (1)   Purpose. The R-1 District is established to provide and preserve
areas for large lot single-unit detached dwellings as well as public amenities
and complementary uses and activities such as places of worship, schools, and
parks. The R-1 District shall be considered the highest restrictive district
under the provisions of this UDO.
      (2)   Dimensional standards.
Table 16-3-4 (B): R-1 District Dimensional Standards
A. Lot Standards (Minimum)
1. Lot Area                     20,000 square feet
2. Lot Width                    100 feet
B. Setbacks (Minimum)
1. Front Yard                   40 feet
2. Exterior Side Yard           25 feet
3. Interior Side Yard           10 feet
4. Rear Yard                    40 feet
C. Building Standards (Maximum)
1. Height (residential uses)    35 feet
2. Height (nonresidential uses) 45 feet
3. Lot Coverage                 30 percent(1)
(1)   See §
16-3-8(E)(3) for lot coverage exceptions for properties with single-unit
detached dwelling units.
 
R-l District Dimensional Standards
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4312.png]
   (C)   Traditional Residence District - R-2. (See
Figure 16-3-4(C))
      (1)   Purpose. The R-2 District is established to provide and preserve
areas for residential neighborhoods with single-unit detached dwellings on lots
comparable in size to original residential areas in the village.
      (2)   Dimensional standards.
Table 16-3-4 (C): R-2 District Dimensional Standards
A. Lot Standards (Minimum)
1. Lot Area           10,000 square feet
2. Lot Width          75 feet
B. Setbacks (Minimum)
1. Front Yard         25 feet
2. Exterior Side Yard 25 feet
3. Interior Side Yard 8 feet
4. Rear Yard          30 feet
C. Building Standards (Maximum)
1. Height             35 feet
2. Lot Coverage       30 percent(1)
(1)   See §
16-3-8(E)(3) for lot coverage exceptions for properties with single-unit
detached dwelling units.
R-2 District Dimensional Standards
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4314.png]
   (D)   Suburban Residence District - R-3. (See
Figure 16-3-4(D))
      (1)   Purpose. The R-3 District is established to provide and preserve
areas for residential neighborhoods with single-unit detached dwellings on lots
that are smaller in size than Traditional Neighborhood (R-2) District lots.
      (2)   Dimensional standards.
Table 16-3-4 (D): R-3 District Dimensional Standards
A. Lot Standards (Minimum)
1. Lot Area           7,500 square feet
2. Lot Width          60 feet
B. Setbacks (Minimum)
1. Front Yard         25 feet
2. Exterior Side Yard 25 feet
3. Interior Side Yard 7.5 feet
4. Rear Yard          30 feet
C. Building Standards (Maximum)
1. Height             35 feet
2. Lot Coverage       30 percent(1)
(1)   See §
16-3-8(E)(3) for lot coverage exceptions for properties with single-unit
detached dwelling units.
 
R-3 District Dimensional Standards
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4316.png]
   (E)   Multiunit Residence District - R-4. (See
Figure 16-3-4(E) )
      (1)   Purpose. The R-4 District is established to provide and preserve
areas for higher density single unit attached dwellings and multiunit
dwellings, such as condominiums, apartments, and senior housing developments in
a single building or complex setting.
      (2)   Dimensional standards.
Table 16-3-4 (E): R-4 District Dimensional Standards Single-Unit Attached (2
Units)
A. Lot Standards (Minimum)
1. Lot Area           10,000 square feet
2. Lot Width          75 feet
B. Setbacks (Minimum)
1. Front Yard         25 feet
2. Exterior Side Yard 25 feet
3. Interior Side Yard 7.5 feet
4. Rear Yard          30 feet
C. Building Standards (Maximum)
1. Height             35 feet
2. Lot Coverage       40 percent
 
Table 16-3-4 (E): R-4 District Dimensional Standards Single-Unit Attached (3+
Units)
D. Lot Standards (minimum)
1. Land Area per Unit 4,500 square feet
2. Lot Width per Unit 40 feet
E. Setbacks (Minimum)
1. Front Yard         25 feet
2. Exterior Side Yard 25 feet
3. Interior Side Yard 7.5 feet
4. Rear Yard          30 feet
F. Building Standards (Maximum)
1. Height             35 feet
2. Lot Coverage       50 percent
 
Table 16-3-4 (E): R-4 District Dimensional Standards Multiunit
G. Lot Standards (Minimum)
1. Land Area per Unit 4,300 square feet
2. Lot Width per Unit n/a
H. Setbacks (Minimum)
1. Front Yard         25 feet
2. Exterior Side Yard 25 feet
3. Interior Side Yard 7.5 feet
4. Rear Yard          30 feet
I. Building Standards (Maximum)
1. Height             35 feet
2. Lot Coverage       50 percent
 
R-4 District Dimensional Standards
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4318.png]
(Ord. 2021-05- 15, passed 5-3- 2021; Ord. 2021-09-45, passed 9-20-2021; Ord.
2022-09-39, passed 9-6-2022)
§ 16-3-5 BUSINESS DISTRICTS.
   (A)   General purpose of Business Districts. Business zoning districts are
established, designed, and intended to provide a comfortable, healthy, safe,
and pleasant environment in which to shop, dine, obtain various services, and
to:
      (1)   Accommodate retail, commercial, service, and mixed uses needed by
Carol Stream residents, businesses, visitors, and workers;
      (2)   Maintain and enhance the village's economic base and provide
shopping, entertainment, restaurant, service and other nonresidential uses
close to where people live and work;
      (3)   Create suitable environments for various types of business uses and
protect them from the adverse effects of incompatible uses;
      (4)   Allow flexibility to encourage redevelopment and improvements to
existing businesses; and
      (5)   Help ensure that the appearance and operational impacts of business
uses do not adversely affect the character of the areas in which they are
located.
   (B)   Town Center District - B-1. (See Figure 16-3-5(B))
      (1)   Purpose. The B-1 District is established to foster the growth and
development of the village's "Town Center". The intent of this district is to
provide for a variety of retail, office, service, residential, and cultural
amenities in a central setting. While visitors are likely to access the B- 1
district by vehicle, bicycle and pedestrian facilities and circulation within
the district are prioritized.
      (2)   Dimensional standards. Setbacks in the B-1 District shall be as
established through the Planned Development and Gary Avenue Corridor Review
Processes.
 
Table 16-3-5 (B): B-1 District Dimensional Standards
A. Lot Standards (Minimum)
1. Lot Area         n/a
2. Lot Width        20 feet
B. Building Standards (Maximum)
1. Height           50 feet
2. Floor Area Ratio 0.8
 
   (C)   Neighborhood Business District - B-2. (See
Figure 16-3-5(C))
      (1)   Purpose. The B-2 District is established to provide and preserve
areas that offer access to goods and services that residents and the general
public need on a day-to-day basis. The intent of this district is to provide
neighborhood-scale business uses without negatively impacting quality of life
due to noise, traffic, or other issues related to high intensity business uses.
      (2)   Dimensional standards.
Table 16-3-5 (C): B-2 District Dimensional Standards
A. Lot Standards (Minimum)
1. Lot Area           n/a
2. Lot Width          60 feet
B. Setbacks (Minimum)
1. Front Yard         25 feet
2. Exterior Side Yard 25 feet
3. Interior Side Yard 15 feet
4. Rear Yard          40 feet
C. Building Standards (Maximum)
1. Height             35 feet
2. Floor Area Ratio   0.6
 
B-2 District Dimensional Standards
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4320.png]
   (D)   General Business District - B-3. (See
Figure 16-3-5(D))
      (1)   Purpose. The B-3 District is established to provide and preserve
areas along highly visible and accessible road corridors that provide for a
broad range of retail, wholesale, and service uses. Because of the scale and
access requirements of uses in this district, they often cannot be compatibly
integrated within the Town Center or Neighborhood Business Districts.
Development at district boundaries must provide a compatible transition to uses
outside the district.
      (2)   Dimensional standards.
Table 16-3-5 (D): B-3 District Dimensional Standards
A. Lot Standards (Minimum)
1. Lot Area           n/a
2. Lot Width          60 feet
B. Setbacks (Minimum)
1. Front Yard         25 feet
2. Exterior Side Yard 25 feet
3. Interior Side Yard 15 feet
4. Rear Yard          40 feet
C. Building Standards (Maximum)
1. Height             40 feet
2. Floor Area Ratio   0.6
 
B-3 District Dimensional Standards
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4322.png]
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 2022-01-04, passed 1-3-2022)
§ 16-3-6 OFFICE, SERVICE, AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   General purpose of Office, Service, and Industrial Districts. Office,
service, and industrial zoning districts are established, designed, and
intended to provide a healthy and safe environment in which to work and to:
      (1)   Maintain and enhance the village's economic base and provide
employment opportunities;
      (2)   Preserve, protect, and promote employment-generating uses;
      (3)   Minimize potential negative impacts of office and industrial
development on adjacent business and residential areas; and
      (4)   Help ensure that the appearance and operational impacts of office,
service, and industrial developments do not adversely affect the character of
the areas in which they are located.
   (B)   Office and Service District - O-S. (See
Figure 16-3-6(B))
      (1)   Purpose. This district is established to provide and preserve areas
for a wide range of office and service uses including research and development,
total senior life care communities, office-flex, and large employment
facilities such as those in a planned office campus or headquarters
development. This district also accommodates limited supporting commercial uses
as a means to support daily needs for employees within the district.
      (2)   Dimensional standards.
Table 16-3-6 (B): O-S District Dimensional Standards
A. Lot Standards (Minimum)
1. Lot Area           n/a
2. Lot Width          60 feet
B. Setbacks (Minimum)
1. Front Yard         40 feet
2. Exterior Side Yard 40 feet
3. Interior Side Yard 10 feet
4. Rear Yard          40 feet
C. Building Standards (Maximum)
1. Height             45 feet
2. Floor Area Ratio   0.6
 
O-S District Dimensional Standards
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4324.png]
   (C)   Industrial District - I. (See
Figure 16-3-6(C))
      (1)   Purpose. This district is established to provide for industrial and
manufacturing uses which may be intensive in nature. This district is intended
to accommodate uses that require extensive exterior movement of trucks,
vehicles, goods, or other exterior operations. This district should not be
located adjacent to residence districts, and its contiguity to commercial and
business areas should, wherever possible, be avoided. Unless specifically
permitted, all business, processing, storage and all other activities and
operations shall be conducted completely within the principal building.
      (2)   Dimensional standards.
Table 16-3-6 (C): I District Dimensional Standards
A. Lot Standards (Minimum)
1. Lot Area           1 acre
2. Lot Width          75 feet
B. Setbacks (Minimum)
1. Front Yard         60 feet (1)
2. Exterior Side Yard 60 feet (1)
3. Interior Side Yard 10 feet
4. Rear Yard          20 feet
C. Building Standards (Maximum)
1. Height             50 feet
2. Floor Area Ratio   0.8
Note:
(1) If adjacent right-of-way is less than 80 feet wide, the minimum setback
shall be 40 feet.
 
I District Dimensional Standards
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4326.png]
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021 ; Ord. 2022-01-04, passed 1-3-2022)
§ 16-3-7 OVERLAY DISTRICT.
   (A)   All provisions of the UDO, to the extent that they do not conflict
with the standards delineated in this section, shall remain in full force and
effect for all properties subject to the provisions of this section.
   (B)   The standards found in this section shall be used by property owners,
developers, village staff members, the Plan Commission and the Village Board
during the design and review of development and redevelopment proposals within
the overlay districts. These standards and criteria complement and add to those
contained within the village's Comprehensive Plan, Gary Avenue Corridor Plan,
the UDO and other land use regulations. In the event of conflict between
regulatory ordinances, those contained in this section shall take precedence
over all others.
   (C)   Gary Avenue and North Avenue Corridor Overlay District - GAC and NAC.
(See
Figure 16-3-7(C))
      (1)   Purpose. The Gary Avenue and North Avenue Corridors and the
development within them are major factors influencing the visual and
environmental quality of the village. At full development, the Corridor will
contain the village's Town Center, other retail nodes, significant industrial
and employment concentrations, public institutions, recreational facilities and
residential development. Due to the intensity of these land uses, Gary Avenue
and North Avenue represent the heart of the village, as well as a prominent
image to those passing through the community. The purpose of the Gary Avenue
and North Avenue Corridors is to:
         (a)   Create a unified, harmonious and high-quality visual environment
throughout the Gary Avenue and North Avenue Corridors, thereby identifying them
as special areas with a unique identity within the village and the region;
         (b)   Promote high-quality design through improved development
standards within the Corridors. These standards, which govern site planning,
building design, and landscaping will enable the village to enhance what
otherwise might result in aesthetically and economically lower quality strip
development;
         (c)   Foster a distinctive and positive image for the village and for
the Gary Avenue and North Avenue Corridors which function as principal gateway
into the village; and
         (d)   Protect and enhance wetlands and other significant natural
resources through use of careful site design, protective easements, sensitive
alignment and design of roadways and utilities, incorporation of natural
features, landscaping and massing of trees.
      (2)   Dimensional standards. The dimensional standards of the underlying
zoning district shall apply unless otherwise specified in §
16-5-16.
16-3-7(C) Gary Avenue and North Avenue Corridor Overlay Districts
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4328.png]
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-3-8 CONTROL OVER BULK.
   (A)   Generally. Unless variations are granted pursuant to the variation
provisions of this UDO, or unless site development allowances are granted
through the Planned Development process as provided in
Article 16-7, all new buildings shall conform to the bulk regulations
established in this UDO for the district in which each building is located, and
no existing building shall be enlarged, reconstructed, structurally altered,
converted or relocated in such a manner as to conflict with the bulk
regulations in this UDO for the district in which such buildings shall be
located.
   (B)   Maintenance of yards, courts, and other open spaces. The maintenance
of yards, courts, and other open spaces and minimum lot area legally required
for a building shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of such building
or of the property on which it is located, as long as the building is in
existence. Furthermore, no legally required yards, courts or other open space
or minimum lot area allocated to any building shall, by virtue of change of
ownership or for any other reason, be used to satisfy yard, court, other open
space or minimum lot area requirements for any other building.
   (C)   Location of required open spaces. All yards, courts and other open
spaces allocated to a building or group of buildings shall be located on the
same zoning lot as such building or group of buildings.
   (D)   Required yard for existing buildings. No yards on or hereafter
provided for a building existing on the effective date of this UDO shall
subsequently be reduced below, or further reduced below if already less than
the minimum yard requirements of this UDO for equivalent new construction.
   (E)   Calculating dimensions.
      (1)   Yards.
         (a)   The required front yard setback shall be measured as the
shortest distance between the building and the front property line.
         (b)   The required side yard or rear yard setback shall be measured by
the shortest distance between the building and the lot line.
      (2)   The vertical distance measured from the sidewalk level or its
equivalent established grade opposite the middle of the front of the building
to the highest elevation of the roof in the case of a slant or flat roof; to
the deck line of a mansard roof; and to the mean height level between eaves and
ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof; provided that, where buildings are set
back from the street line, the height of the building may be measured from the
average elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of the building (see
Figure 16-3-8 (F)(2)).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4570.png]
   (3)   Lot coverage. The part or percent of the lot occupied by a combination
of building and accessory uses covering the lot area, not including driveways
but including parking pads (see Figures 16-3-8 (F)(3)). For properties zoned R-
1, R-2, and R-3 with single-unit detached dwelling units, not more than 30% of
the lot area may be occupied by buildings and structures, including accessory
buildings except when structural coverage includes lot area covered by a
swimming pool or by a deck which collects water or allows water to penetrate
into the ground underneath the deck and where the area underneath the deck is
covered with agricultural paper, cloth or other pervious sheeting, in which
case only the area of the swimming pool or deck shall be permitted to exceed
30% of the lot area up to a maximum of 35% of the lot area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4568.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4566.png]
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 2021-08-33, passed 8-2-2021; Ord. 2022-
09-39, passed 9-6-2022)
§ 16-3-9 BULK AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   The following Table of Bulk and Dimensional Standards addresses the
requirements applicable to the development or use of a lot in a given district.
Table 16-3-9: Bulk and Dimensional Standards
Standard R-1   R-1 (Non- R-2 R-3 R-4    R-4 (SUA3 R-4 (MU) B-1 B-2 B-3 O-S I
         (Res) Res)              (SUA2) +)
Table 16-3-9: Bulk and Dimensional Standards
         R-1    R-1                 R-4    R-4    R-4
Standard (Res)  (Non- R-2    R-3    (SUA2) (SUA3  (MU)   B-1  B-2  B-3  O-S  I
                Res)                       +)
A. Lot Standards (Minimum)
1. Lot   20,000       10,000 7,500  10,000 4,500  4,300                      1
Area     square n/a   square square square square square n/a  n/a  n/a  n/a  acre
         feet         feet   feet   feet   feet   feet
2. Lot   100    100   75     60     75     40     n/a    20   60   60   60   75
Width    feet   feet  feet   feet   feet   feet          feet feet feet feet feet
B. Setbacks (Minimum, unless otherwise specified)
1. Front 40     40    25     25     25     25     25          25   25   40   60
Yard     feet   feet  feet   feet   feet   feet   feet   (1)  feet feet feet feet
                                                                             (2)
2.                                                                           60
Exterior 25     25    25     25     25     25     25     (1)  25   25   40   feet
Side     feet   feet  feet   feet   feet   feet   feet        feet feet feet (2)
Yard
3.
Interior 10     10    8 feet 7.5    7.5    7.5    7.5    (1)  15   15   10   10
Side     feet   feet         feet   feet   feet   feet        feet feet feet feet
Yard
4. Rear  40     30    30     30     30     30     30     (1)  40   40   40   20
Yard     feet   feet  feet   feet   feet   feet   feet        feet feet feet feet
C. Building Standards (Maximum)
1. Floor
Area     n/a    0.6   n/a    n/a    n/a    n/a    n/a    0.8  0.6  0.6  0.6  0.8
Ratio
2.       35     45    35     35     35     35     35     50   35   40   45   50
Height   feet   feet  feet   feet   feet   feet   feet   feet feet feet feet feet
3. Lot   30%(3) n/a   30%(3) 30%(3) 40%    50%    50%    n/a  n/a  n/a  n/a  n/a
Coverage
(1) Setbacks in the B-1 District shall be as established through the Planned
Development and Gary Avenue Corridor Review Processes.
(2) If adjacent right-of-way is less than 80 feet wide, the minimum setback shall
be 40 feet.
(3) See Section 16-3-8 (E)(3) for lot coverage exceptions for properties with
single-unit detached dwelling units.
 
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 2022-09-39, passed 9-6-2022)
§ 16-3-10 ALLOWABLE USE OF LAND, BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES.
   The following uses of land, buildings, or structures are allowed in the
districts indicated, under the conditions specified as follows:
   (A)   Uses lawfully established and existing on the effective date of this
UDO, which conform to the provisions herein;
   (B)   Uses lawfully established and existing on the effective date of this
UDO, rendered non-conforming by the provisions herein shall be subject to the
regulations of
Article 16-10, "Non-conforming Lots, Buildings, Structures and Uses";
   (C)   Permitted uses as designated in this UDO and established after the
effective date of this UDO;
   (D)   Special uses as designated in this UDO and established after the
effective date of this UDO:
      (1)   A classification of special uses is established to provide for the
location of certain uses which are deemed desirable for the public welfare
within a given district or districts, but which might have a significant effect
upon nearby properties or upon the character and future development of the
district in which they are located; and
      (2)   Where a use exists on the effective date of this UDO and is
classified as a special use, it shall be considered to be a lawful special use.
Property granted such lawful special uses prior to the effective date of this
UDO shall continue to have such uses and the use of the property shall be
restricted to such special use and to such conditions under which the special
use was granted. Additions or alterations to existing buildings or land
improvements for expansion of lawful special uses shall be in accordance of
this UDO.
   (E)   Only one principal structure, along with permitted accessory uses,
shall be constructed upon a single subdivided lot or an unsubdivided parcel of
land unless approved as a planned development in accordance with
Article 16-7 of this UDO.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-3-11 PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted or special uses in the applicable
district as indicated in the following
Table 16-3-11: Permitted and Special Uses. No building or premise shall
hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure, or part thereof,
shall hereafter be erected, raised, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or
altered, except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the
district in which it is located.
   (A)   Permitted uses. Uses which are marked as "P" in the table shall be
allowed subject to all applicable regulations of this chapter; see
Table 16-3-11(E).
   (B)   Special uses. Uses which are marked as "S" in the table shall be
allowed upon the approval of a special use permit, see
Table 16-3-11(E).
   (C)   Prohibited uses. A blank space in
Table 16-3-11(E) indicates that a use type is not allowed in the respective
zoning district, unless it is otherwise expressly allowed by other regulations
of this UDO or by ordinance.
   (D)   Uses not listed. Uses that are not explicitly permitted under the
provisions of this UDO are expressly prohibited, unless such use shall be a
legal prior existing nonconforming use subject to the provisions of
Article 10.
Table 16-3-11(E): Permitted and Special Uses
Proposed Use Additional Regulations R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 B-1 B-2 B-3 O-S I
Table 16-3-11(E): Permitted and Special Uses
Proposed Use           Additional Regulations R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 B-1 B-2 B-3 O-S I
Parks, Open Space, and
Agriculture
Parks and Open Space,
Publicly Owned and
Operated, including                           P   P   P   P   P   S   S   S   P
Unlit Athletic Fields
and Courts
Parks and Open Space,
Privately Owned and                           S   S   S   S   S   S   S   S   S
Operated
Private Lit Athletic                                              S   S
Fields and Courts
Public Lit Athletic                           S   S   S   S
Fields and Courts
Golf Course                                   S   S   S   S
Cemeteries                                    S   S   S   S
Community Garden/Urban §                     P   P   P   P
Farm                   16-4-1
Residential
Single-Unit Detached                          P   P   P   P
Dwellings
Single-Unit Attached   §                                 P
Dwellings              16-4-2
Multiple Unit          §                                 P
Dwellings, Building    16-4-3
Multiple Unit          §                                 S
Dwellings, Complex     16-4-4
Multiple Unit
Dwellings, Above                                              P
Ground Floor as Part
of Mixed Use
Assisted Living
Facilities/Nursing                                        S               S
Homes
Senior Co-Housing                                         S
Total Senior Life Care                                                    S
Facilities
Group Community        §                     S   S   S   S
Residences             16-4-5
Family Community                              P   P   P   P
Residences
Temporary Lodging
Hotel                                                         S       S
Extended Stay Hotel    §                                     S       S
                       16-4-6
Education
Nurseries or                                  S           S       S   S   S
Preschools
Schools (elementary,                          S
middle, high)
Colleges and                                  S                       S   S
Universities
Employment Training                                                   S   S   S
and Vocational Center
General Commercial                                                P   P   S   S
Education
Youth Counseling and                                                  S
Education Center
Commercial Retail
Retail Sales, General                                         P   P   P   S
Retail Sales,          §                                                     P
Accessory              16-4-7
Grocery Stores                                                P   P   P
Specialty Food Stores                                         P   P   P
Multi-tenant Shopping                                         S   S   S
Center
Out Lot Retail         §                                             P
Building               16-4-8
Medical Cannabis                                                          S
Dispensary
Pawn Shop                                                         P   P
Gun Shop
Adult Use Cannabis     §
Dispensing             16-4-9                                         S   S
Organization
Adult Oriented Uses    §                                                     P
                       16-4-10
Commercial Services
Commercial Service,                                           P   P   P   S
General
Day Care Center        §                                         S   S   S
                       16-4-11
Banks                                                             P   P   P
Veterinary Clinic/                                                P   P
Animal Hospital
Kennel and Boarding    §                                             S       S
Facility, outdoor      16-4-12
Kennel and Boarding                           S                       P       P
Facility, indoor
Funeral Parlor                                                        P       S
Crematory                                                                     S
Self Service Laundry                                          P   P   P
Shop/Dry Cleaner
Blood Donation Centers                                                P
Tattoo Parlors
Check Cashing/Payday
Loan Stores
Massage Establishments §                                         S   S   S
                       16-4-27
Commercial Kitchen                                                        P   P
Eating and Drinking
Restaurant, General                                           P   P   P   P
Restaurant with Bar                                           S   S   S
Area
Microbrewery/Tasting
Room for Brewery,                                             S   S   S
Winery, Distillery
Video Gaming Café     §                                             P
                       16-4-28
Physical Health and
Entertainment
Health, Athletic,
Recreation, or                                                P   P   P       S
Amusement Facility,
Indoor
Health, Athletic,
Recreation, or                                                S       S       S
Amusement Facility,
Outdoor
Amphitheaters,
Bandshells, or Outdoor                                        P
Theaters
Art Gallery,                                                  P   P   P
Commercial
Archery/Gun Range
Auto Oriented
Businesses
Autobody Repair, all                                                  S       S
vehicles
Fuel Sales                                                    S       S
Repair and Service                                                    S       S
Car Wash                                                              S       S
Automobile and
Commercial Vehicle                                                    S
Fueling Plaza
Vehicle Sales and      §                                             P       S
Rental                 16-4-13
Outdoor Vehicle        §                                             S       S
Storage                16-4-18
Office
Contractor's Office                                                           P
and Shop
Offices, General                                              P   P   P   P   P
Offices, Above Ground
Floor as Part of Mixed                                        P   P
Use
Business Parks                                                            P   P
Medical or Dental                                             P   P   P   P
Offices
Industrial
Medical or Dental                                                         S   P
Laboratories
Research Laboratories                                                     S   P
Motor Freight Terminal                                                        S
Warehouse/Distribution                                                        P
Warehouse/Storage                                                             P
Light Manufacturing                                                           P
Heavy Manufacturing                                                           S
Food Processing                                                               P
Establishment
Brewery, Winery,                                                          S   S
Distillery
Medical Cannabis                                                              S
Cultivation
Wholesale Sales                                                       S   S   P
Nurseries,
Greenhouses/Garden                                                    P   S   P
Supply and Seed Stores
Machinery and
Equipment Sales and                                                           S
Rental
Union Hall/Training                                                       S   S
Facility
Recycling Facility                                                            S
Waste Management
Facilities
Mini Warehouses/Self                                                          S
Storage
Warehousing and
printing of books,
pamphlets and other
periodicals when                                                          P
carried out in
conjunction with an
adjacent office use
Public/Semi-Public
Places of Assembly                                                        S
Places of Worship                             S                           S
Regional Religious     §                                                 S
Institution            16-4-14
Governmental Uses/Post                        S               S           S   S
Offices
Medical Uses
Hospitals                                                             S   S
Acute Care Centers                                                    S   S
Medical and
Rehabilitation                                                        S   S
Facilities
Utility
Service and Utility
Uses, Public or                               S   S   S   S   S   S   S   S   S
Private
Building-Mounted Solar §
Energy Collection      16-5-9(A)              P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P
System
Free-Standing Solar    §
Energy Collection      16-5-9(B)              S   S   S   S   S   S   S   S   S
System, Primary
Free-Standing Solar    §
Energy Collection      16-5-9(C)              P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P
System, Accessory
Accessory Uses
Accessory Buildings    §
and Structures,        16-4-15                P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P
General
Home Occupations       §                     P   P   P   P
                       16-4-16
Drive Through          §                                     S   S   S   S
                       16-4-17
Outdoor Display and/or
Sales of Merchandise,                                                 S       S
Permanent
Outdoor Activities and §                     S                       S   S   P
Operations             16-4-18
Outdoor Storage        §                                                     S
                       16-4-18
Outdoor Dining,        §
without alcohol sales/ 16-4-19                                P   P   P
consumption
Outdoor Dining, with   §
alcohol sales/         16-4-19                                S   S   S
consumption
Donation Drop Boxes    §                     P                   P   P   P
                       16-4-20
Temporary Uses
Carnival               §                     P   P           P       P
                       16-4-21
Outdoor Special        §
Exhibition, Show or    16-4-22                P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P
Sales
Garage Sale            §                     P   P   P   P
                       16-4-23
Portable Outdoor       §                     P   P   P   P
Storage Device         16-4-24
Construction Related   §                     P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P
                       16-4-25
Outdoor Display/Sales  §
of Merchandise,        16-4-26                                P   P   P   P   P
Temporary
Outdoor Activities and                                        P   P   P   P   P
Operations, Temporary
Other Uses
Charging Station,      Section                P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P
Accessory              16-4-29
Charging Station,      Section                                S       S
Primary                16-4-29
Planned Development    Article                S   S   S   S   S   S   S   S   S
                       16-7
 
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 2021-08-33, passed 8-2-2021; Ord. 2021-
09-39, passed 9-7- 2021; Ord. 2021-09-45, passed 9-20-2021; Ord. 2022-01-04,
passed 1-3-2022; Ord. 2022-02-11, passed 2-22-2022; Ord. 2022-05-21, passed 5-
2-2022; Ord. 2023-01-01, passed 1-16-2023; Ord. 2023-03-08, passed 3-20-2023;
Ord. 2023-04-11, passed 4-3-2023; Ord. 2023-07-32, passed 7-17-2023; Ord. 2024-
06-30, passed 6-3-2024; Ord. 2025-03-10, passed 3-17-2025; Ord. 2025-08-31,
passed 8-4-2025)
ARTICLE 4: USE SPECIFIC STANDARDS
Section
   
16-4-1   Community gardening/urban farming
   
16-4-2   Single-unit attached dwellings
   
16-4-3   Multiple-unit dwelling, building
   
16-4-4   Multiple-unit dwelling, complex
   
16-4-5   Group community residences
   
16-4-6   Extended stay hotel
   
16-4-7   Retail sales, accessory
   
16-4-8   Out lot retail building
   
16-4-9   Adult use and medical cannabis dispensing organization
   
16-4-10   Adult oriented uses
   
16-4-11   Day care center
   
16-4-12   Kennel and boarding facility, outdoor
   
16-4-13   Vehicle sales and rental
   
16-4-14   Regional religious institution
   
16-4-15   Accessory buildings and structures, general
   
16-4-16   Home occupations
   
16-4-17   Drive through
   
16-4-18   Outdoor activities and operations, permanent, outdoor storage, and
outdoor vehicle storage in the Industrial District
   
16-4-19   Outdoor dining, with or without alcohol sales and consumption
   
16-4-20   Donation drop boxes
   
16-4-21   Carnival
   
16-4-22   Special exhibitions, shows or special events
   
16-4-23   Garage sales
   
16-4-24   Temporary portable outdoor storage devices
   
16-4-25   Sales or construction trailers, automobiles, recreational vehicles
   
16-4-26   Outdoor display and sale of merchandise, temporary
   
16-4-27   Massage establishments
   
16-4-28   Video gaming cafes
   
16-4-29   Electric vehicle charging stations
§ 16-4-1 COMMUNITY GARDENING/URBAN FARMING.
   (A)   Community gardening and urban farming shall be permitted provided
that, no keeping, propagation or culture of pigeons, poultry, rabbits, bees or
livestock is conducted; and, further provided that, no retail sales are
conducted from a store or stand erected or maintained on the premises.
   (B)   Gardens for the growing and cultivation of fruits and vegetables on
single-unit residential properties shall be no larger than 1,000 square feet,
or 10% of the area of the lot, whichever is less. Gardens for the growing and
cultivation of fruits and vegetables on single-unit residential properties may
be allowed in an interior side yard as long as there are no support structures
over 36 inches in height.
   (C)   Structures associated with the growing and cultivation of fruits and
vegetables in a rear yard of a single-unit residential property shall be no
taller than eight feet in height.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 2023-07-32, passed 7-17-2023)
§ 16-4-2 SINGLE-UNIT ATTACHED DWELLINGS.
   Single-unit attached dwellings shall meet the following provisions:
   (A)   Orientation. The main entrances to a single-unit attached dwelling
shall face the primary street. Garages are encouraged to face side yards or be
located in the rear of the primary structure. If garages face the front yard,
they shall be setback a minimum of three feet from the primary elevation of the
primary building. Accessory buildings and structures other than garages shall
be located as allowed in §
16-4-15.
   (B)   Parking. A minimum of one of the parking spaces, as required in §
16-5-2(C), shall be provided in an attached or detached garage.
   (C)   Quality materials. Exterior building materials shall be traditional,
time- and weather-tested materials and techniques such as but not limited to
masonry, stone veneer systems, stucco, precast panels with inlaid or stamped
brick texture. EIFS and vinyl materials shall be restricted to 20% of the
facade facing the front and exterior side yards and shall be utilized as accent
or trim material only.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 2023-03-08, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 16-4-3 MULTIPLE-UNIT DWELLING, BUILDING.
   Multiple-unit dwelling, building shall meet the following provisions:
   (A)   Orientation. The main entrance to a multiple-unit dwelling building
shall face the primary street.
   (B)   Location of parking. All off-street parking shall be located behind
buildings.
   (C)   Driveways. Curb cuts and site vehicular access shall be minimized in
frequency and width and shall not dominate the site plan or the property and
street frontage.
   (D)   Location of service, loading, and utility areas. Service areas,
dumpsters, utilities, and the required screening thereof shall not be readily
visible from a right-of-way.
   (E)   Walkways. Pedestrian access shall be provided to the building entries
and parking areas connecting to the public sidewalk at the street frontage when
one exists.
   (F)   Quality materials. Exterior building materials shall be traditional,
time- and weather-tested materials and techniques such as but not limited to
masonry, stone veneer systems, stucco, precast panels with inlaid or stamped
brick texture. EIFS and vinyl materials shall be restricted to 20% of the
facade facing the front and exterior side yards and shall be utilized as accent
or trim material only.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-4-4 MULTIPLE-UNIT DWELLING, COMPLEX.
   Multiple-unit dwelling, complex shall be permitted as a special use and
shall meet the following provisions:
   (A)   Site organization. Buildings shall be arranged, and site circulation
shall be designed to create a sense of a public realm by framing and defining
open spaces, street frontages, and amenities.
   (B)   Compact design. Buildings and other site improvements shall be
clustered to maximize stormwater absorption.
   (C)   Orientation. Buildings orientation shall reinforce site circulation
patterns, open space patterns, and connections to other buildings on site.
   (D)   Location of parking. Parking shall be integrated into the overall site
design to minimize impact, reduce the loss of trees, and to be visually
concealed from rights-of-way.
   (E)   Driveways. Curb cuts and site vehicular access shall be minimized in
frequency and width and shall not dominate the site plan or the property and
street frontage.
   (F)   Location of service, loading, and utility areas. Service areas,
dumpsters, utilities, and the required screening thereof shall not be readily
visible from a right-of-way.
   (G)   Walkways. Pedestrian access shall be provided to the building entries
and parking areas connecting to the public sidewalk at the street frontage when
one exists.
   (H)   Quality materials. Exterior building materials shall be traditional,
time- and weather-tested materials and techniques such as but not limited to
masonry, stone veneer systems, stucco, precast panels with inlaid or stamped
brick texture. EIFS and vinyl materials shall be restricted to 20% of the
facade facing the front and exterior side yards and shall be utilized as accent
or trim material only.
   (I)   Open spaces. A minimum of 15% of the site shall be developed as usable
open space and shall be sited to preserve natural site features and be
integrated with the buildings and site circulation to provide common outdoor
amenities and gathering places.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-4-5 GROUP COMMUNITY RESIDENCES.
   Group community residences, approved as a special use, shall not be located
less than 800 feet from any existing community residence, and shall meet the
following provisions:
   (A)   The cumulative effect of such uses would not alter the residential
character of the neighborhood; would not create an institutional setting; its
operation would not create an adverse effect on surrounding properties; and the
home shall to the extent possible, conform to the type and outward appearances
of the residences in the area in which it is located;
   (B)   If the state requires a license or certification for the proposed
community residence, the community residence has obtained the required state
license or certification, or the operator has received licensing or
certification required by the state to operate community residences;
   (C)   Applicant shall submit a statement of the exact nature of the home;
the qualifications of the agency that will operate the home; the number and
type of personnel who will be employed; and the number and nature of the
residents who will live in the home; and
   (D)   The home shall to the extent possible, conform to the type and outward
appearances of the residences in the area in which it is located.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 2022- 02-11, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 16-4-6 EXTENDED STAY HOTEL.
   Extended stay hotels shall be permitted as a special use and shall meet the
following provisions:
   (A)   Vehicles greater than 10,000 pounds shall only be permitted to park in
the rear of the property.
   (B)   No vehicle greater than 10,000 pounds shall be parked on the property
for more than 24 hours.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-4-7 RETAIL SALES, ACCESSORY.
   Accessory retail sales shall meet the following provisions:
   (A)   Accessory retail sales shall be limited to the sale of products
produced on site.
   (B)   Accessory retail sales shall not exceed 10% of the total gross floor
area of the building.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-4-8 OUT LOT RETAIL BUILDING.
   Out lot retail buildings shall meet the following provisions:
   (A)   Setback. Out lot retail buildings shall be setback a minimum of 15
feet from any right-of-way.
   (B)   Location of parking. All off-street parking shall be located behind
the building.
   (C)   Driveways. Curb cuts and site vehicular access shall be shared with
the primary structure.
   (D)   Location of service, loading, and utility areas. Service areas,
dumpsters, and utilities shall not be visible from a right-of-way. Required
screening shall be integrated into the architecture of the building.
   (E)   Walkways. Pedestrian access shall be provided to the building entries
and parking areas connecting to the public sidewalk at the street frontage when
one exists.
   (F)   Architecture. Out lot retail buildings shall provide 360 degree
architecture for all sides visible to the public. Three-hundred sixty degree
architecture incorporates facade elements, including for doors, windows,
exterior cladding, and all other exterior decorative elements and finishes on
all front, side, and rear elevations of the building.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-4-9 ADULT USE AND MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION.
   Adult use and medical cannabis dispensing organizations shall be permitted
as special uses and shall meet the following provisions:
   (A)   Submission requirements and criteria.
      (1)   An accurately dimensioned site plan indicating buildings, building
entrances, parking, sidewalks, adjacent streets and immediately surrounding
uses. The site plan shall include a statement that the location of the cannabis
dispensing organization is not in violation of the distance requirements set
forth in this section.
      (2)   A floor plan of the interior of the facility indicating the
principal uses on the floor plan, including retail areas and storage areas.
      (3)   A plan for disposal of any cannabis or byproducts.
      (4)   A plan for ventilation of the dispensing organization that
describes the ventilation systems that will be used to prevent any odor of
cannabis off the premises of the business.
      (5)   A security plan that includes facility access controls,
surveillance systems, on-site security personnel, and other security measures
required by state or local regulations. Security arrangements must deter and
prevent unauthorized entrance into areas containing cannabis or cannabis
products and the theft of cannabis or cannabis products, and ensure the safety
of employees and customers, as well as the surrounding area, and include no
less than the minimum security and lighting measures required by state law. The
security plan shall be reviewed and approved by the Chief of Police.
      (6)   A proposed plan of operations. The proposed plan of operations of
the dispensing organization must demonstrate the intent of the organization to
operate in full compliance with the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act and/or
Medical Cannabis Act, as applicable.
      (7)   A signage plan shall be submitted. The proposed signage plan shall
comply with the following standards. No sign shall contain any logo, name,
wording, statement or illustration that is:
         (a)   False or misleading;
         (b)   Promotes the overconsumption of cannabis;
         (c)   Displays cannabis;
         (d)   Shows someone under 21 consuming cannabis;
         (e)   Includes the image of the cannabis leaf or bud;
         (f)   Includes any image that is likely to appeal to minors; or
         (g)   Contains any slang or colloquial term for cannabis or cannabis
paraphernalia.
      (8)   A parking and/or traffic study may also be requested to determine
parking adequacy or traffic circulation.
      (9)   Exterior appearance. The exterior appearance of the building of a
dispensing organization shall be compatible with commercial structures already
constructed or under construction within the immediate neighborhood, to ensure
against blight, deterioration, or substantial diminishment or impairment of
property values in the vicinity.
      (10)   Performance standards. All uses shall provide evidence of
conformity to the performance standards for noise, vibration, smoke, dust,
odor, heat, glare, fire hazard and other objectionable influences established
by the State of Illinois and administered by the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, the United States of America and administered by the federal
environmental agency, and any ordinance of DuPage County or the Village of
Carol Stream.
      (11)   Location.
         (a)   A dispensing organization shall not be located within a 1,500
foot radius of any other dispensing organization located within or outside the
village, or be located within 100 feet of any place of worship, school,
hospital, home for aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their spouses or
children, or any military or naval station within or outside the village.
         (b)   A dispensing organization shall not contain a drive up service
window.
      (12)   Exterior lighting. Lighting shall illuminate the exterior of the
building and all entrances and exits to the facility. Exterior lighting shall
be one foot-candle and shall remain on until at least one hour after the
closing of the dispensing organization. In addition, all exterior lighting
shall be inwardly directed so that no direct lighting is cast off-premises.
      (13)   Entrance. A dispensing organization may have more than one means
of egress from the interior so as to meet building codes and public safety
concerns; however, it shall have a single secure public entrance and shall
implement appropriate security measures to deter and prevent the theft of
cannabis and unauthorized entrance into areas containing cannabis. The entrance
shall be located and maintained clear of any barriers, landscaping and similar
obstructions that may block the view so that the entrance and pedestrian access
is clearly visible from the public street, sidewalk and parking area.
      (14)   Cannabis paraphernalia and product display. No cannabis or
paraphernalia shall be displayed or kept in a dispensing organization so as to
be visible from outside the premises.
      (15)   On-site use prohibited. No cannabis shall be smoked, eaten or
otherwise consumed or ingested within any dispensing organization.
      (16)   Other standards.
         (a)   All dispensing organizations shall abide by all other applicable
state and village regulations and requirements. Facility may not conduct any
sales or distribution of cannabis other than as authorized by the Act, and
shall obtain and maintain at all times valid licensing, certification, and/or
accreditation by appropriate, local, state and national bodies charged with the
regulation of adult-use or medical cannabis business establishments and shall
adhere to all governing local, state and national codes and regulations.
         (b)   Principal use. The cannabis dispensing organization is allowed
as a principal use only and not allowed as an accessory use or temporary use as
defined within the Unified Development Ordinance.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 2023-01-01, passed 1-16-2023)
§ 16-4-10 ADULT ORIENTED USES.
   Adult oriented uses shall be permitted uses in the Industrial District and
shall meet the following provisions:
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish reasonable and
uniform regulations to regarding the location of sexually oriented businesses
in the municipality in order to minimize and control negative secondary effects
associated with sexually oriented businesses within the municipality thereby
promoting the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the municipality.
The provisions of this section have neither the purpose nor the effect of
imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative
materials or communication, including sexually oriented entertainment.
Similarly, it is not the purpose, nor effect of this section to restrict or
deny access by adults to sexually oriented entertainment protected by the First
Amendment, or to deny access by distributors and exhibitors of sexually
oriented entertainment to their intended market. Furthermore, it is not the
intent or effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution or
exhibition of entertainment that is obscene.
   (B)   Findings. Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects
of sexually oriented businesses the Village of Carol Stream finds the
following: Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful
and unhealthy activities.
      (1)   Sexual acts, including masturbation, oral sex and anal sex, occur
at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or
semi-private booths or rooms for viewing films, videos or live sexually
oriented entertainment. Such activities may result in spreading communicable
diseases such as syphilis, gonorrhea and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
      (2)   Studies conducted in other cities have demonstrated a correlation
between sexually oriented business and a decrease in the residential and
commercial property values that surround them, especially those properties
within 1,000 feet of such businesses.
      (3)   Studies conducted in other cities have demonstrated a correlation
between sexually oriented businesses and increased crime in the neighborhood,
including sex-related crimes like prostitution, obscenity and sexual assault.
This correlation is especially acute when more than one sexually oriented
business is located in a neighborhood, and when a sexually oriented business is
located near a public open space such as a park, cemetery or school.
      (4)   Studies conducted in other cities have demonstrated a correlation
between sexually oriented businesses and increased harassment and
propositioning of women, children and the elderly in the neighborhood.
      (5)   Studies conducted in other cities have demonstrated a correlation
between sexually oriented businesses and offensive material such as
pornographic magazines and used condoms being discarded in the surrounding
neighborhood, making them available to children.
      (6)   Location of sexually oriented businesses in a neighborhood can
create a "sex for sale" reputation in a neighborhood.
      (7)   The foregoing findings raise substantial governmental interests and
concerns.
      (8)   The municipality cannot entirely prohibit sexually oriented
businesses which are not obscene from locating within the municipality.
      (9)   The municipality can affect reasonable locational regulations to
which it believes will ameliorate these deleterious secondary effects
associated with sexually oriented businesses.
      (10)   Locating sexually oriented businesses in the Industrial Zone will
ameliorate these deleterious secondary effects associated with sexually
oriented business.
      (11)   Requiring sexually oriented businesses to be located 1,000 feet
from any other sexually oriented businesses will ameliorate these deleterious
secondary effects associated with sexually oriented businesses.
      (12)   Requiring sexually oriented businesses to be located 1,000 feet
from any school, day care center, cemetery, public park including any lineal
recreational area like a bike path, forest preserve, public housing, place of
religious worship, lot zoned for residential purposes and lot used for
residential purposes, complies with the requirements of state law 65 ILCS 5/11-
5-1.5, and will ameliorate these deleterious secondary effects associated with
sexually oriented businesses.
      (13)   North Avenue is the main thoroughfare in the municipality, and
more than any other location in the municipality reflects on the economic
status of the municipality.
      (14)   Accordingly, a decrease in the property values and an increase in
visible crime along North Avenue will affect the property values of the
municipality as a whole in a way that other locations would not.
      (15)   Preventing sexually oriented businesses from locating directly on,
or within 500 feet of North Avenue will help to conserve property values in the
municipality as a whole, while still providing an adequate number of sites and
acreage available for the location of sexually oriented businesses.
   (C)   Permitted use. Any other ordinance or section of any ordinance
notwithstanding, and subject to the setback requirements of §
16-3-11(B), sexually oriented businesses shall be a permitted use only in the I
Industrial District. Sexually oriented businesses shall not be a special use in
any district.
   (D)   Setback requirements. No sexually oriented business shall be located:
      (1)   Within 1,000 feet of the lot line of any other sexually oriented
business, and any school, day care center, cemetery, public park including any
lineal recreational area like a bike path, forest preserve, public housing,
place of religious worship, lot zoned for residential purposes and lot used for
residential purposes;
      (2)   Within 500 feet of the centerline of North Avenue, which 500 feet
shall be measured from the nearest lot line, or portion of the building in
which the sexually oriented business is located to the nearest point of the
centerline of North Avenue; and
      (3)   On a lot which physically touches North Avenue.
   (E)   Restriction on use. All sexually oriented businesses shall be
conducted entirely within a fully enclosed business. No sexually oriented
business shall be operated in any manner that permits the observation from
outside the building of any image, material or entertainment depicting or
describing excretory functions, specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas or any person in a state of nudity or semi-nudity, whether by
means of display, decoration, sign, window or any other means.
   (F)   Signage. No sexually oriented business shall advertise by way of
billboard, sign boards or sign, within 1,000 feet of any school, day care
center, cemetery, public park including any lineal recreational area like a
bike path, forest preserve, public housing and place of religious worship.
   (G)   Other regulations. The restrictions set forth in this article shall
supersede any other restrictions found in other ordinances or other sections of
any ordinance as applied to sexually oriented businesses, if the terms of the
restrictions are in conflict.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-4-11 DAY CARE CENTER.
   Day care centers shall be permitted as a special use and shall meet the
following provisions:
   (A)   Day care centers shall have a fenced-in yard area for outside play
activities, which includes a fence of no greater than five feet in height or as
permitted by §
16-5-9 or as required by the Illinois Department of Children and Family
Services.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-4-12 KENNEL AND BOARDING FACILITY, OUTDOOR.
   Kennel and boarding facilities shall be permitted as a special use and shall
meet the following provisions:
   (A)   Kennel.
      (1)   Kennels shall be limited to the raising, breeding, boarding, and
grooming of domestic dogs and cats.
      (2)   The minimum lot size for a kennel shall be two acres.
      (3)   Dogs kept on premises will not equal more than 15 per acre of land.
      (4)   Cats kept on premises will not equal more than 25 per acre of land.
      (5)   All runs shall be hard-surfaced, compacted fine stone or grassed
with drains provided every ten feet and connected to an approved sanitary
facility.
      (6)   No building, other structure or outside dog runs shall be located
within 150 feet of the lot line of a residential use.
      (7)   Dog runs shall not be used between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m.
      (8)   Methods shall be used to reduce the impact of noise on adjacent
properties, which may include the use of sound-barrier material such as "bark-
block" and/or other approved insulation.
   (B)   Boarding facilities.
      (1)   Dog runs shall be set back as far as possible from all residential
properties. In no case shall the minimum setback be less than 150 feet from the
lot line of a residential use.
      (2)   Methods shall be used to reduce the impact of noise on adjacent
properties, which may include the use of sound-barrier material such as "bark-
block" and/or other approved insulation.
      (3)   The animals shall be boarded in appropriate kennel units with
insulation to further abate noise.
      (4)   The facility shall have appropriate flushing drains and other
physical elements to properly dispose of cleaning waste from the boarding area.
      (5)   The boarding area must be air-conditioned and heated so that any
windows, doors or other openings can be closed at all times, with the exception
of ingress and egress into the area.
      (6)   The total area designated for boarding within the building shall
not exceed 75% of the gross floor area of the facility.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-4-13 VEHICLE SALES AND RENTAL.
   Vehicle sales and rental facilities are commercial enterprises with unique
characteristics which require the imposition of certain regulations intended to
promote the public health, safety, comfort, morals and convenience, by ensuring
that such uses are compatible with neighboring property and only minimally
impact the local roadway network. Vehicle sales and rental uses are allowed as
set forth in §
16-3-11(E) and shall meet the following provisions:
   (A)   Storage areas for vehicles for sale or rent shall not be located in
any parking space required to satisfy the Schedule of Parking Requirements as
set forth in §
16-5-2(C).
   (B)   Storage areas for vehicles for sale or rent shall be screened on all
sides facing a public right-of-way with the requirements for parking lot
perimeter landscape as detailed in §
16-5-6. The Community Development Director may approve alternate placement of
the required landscape material.
   (C)   Vehicle sales and rental facilities, when operated in the Industrial
District and approved as a special use, shall be subject to the following
additional provisions, unless such provisions are otherwise modified as part of
the special use approval process:
      (1)   Vehicles may not be stored or displayed within the required parking
setback as set forth in §
16-5-2(B)(4)(b).
      (2)   No more than one vehicle sales or rental facility shall be
permitted to operate within a multi-tenant building.
      (3)   Unlicensed vehicles awaiting sale may not be parked within a public
street right-of-way.
      (4)   Vehicles may not be parked or stored in a manner that blocks access
to drive aisles or parking spaces on adjacent property.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 2021-09-45, passed 9-20-2021; Ord.
2022-02-11, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 16-4-14 REGIONAL RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION.
   A regional religious institution shall be located on a parcel of land that
is at least ten acres in size and shall be improved with a principal structure
of at least 50,000 square feet in gross floor area.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-4-15 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES, GENERAL.
   Accessory buildings and structures shall be compatible with the principal
use and shall not be established prior to the establishment of the principal
use. Except as otherwise regulated herein, an accessory building or structure
hereafter established, erected, altered, enlarged or moved on a lot shall
conform with the following.
   (A)   Height. Detached garages shall not be more than one story, or 15 feet
in height, excluding flag poles. No residential accessory structure shall be
more than 13 feet in height.
   (B)   Location.
      (1)   An accessory building or structure shall be located a minimum of
five feet from the principal structure, unless otherwise permitted in this UDO.
      (2)   An accessory building or structure which is not located entirely in
the required rear yard must comply with the side yard setback requirements of
the primary structure and shall not be closer than five feet from any side
property line.
      (3)   All accessory buildings or structures located entirely in the
required rear yard shall not be closer than five feet from the property line
unless otherwise specified.
      (4)   No accessory building or structure or portion thereof shall be
located in the required front yard, exterior side yard, or interior side yard.
Exception: gazebos, outdoor fireplaces, playground equipment, sheds,
playhouses, greenhouses, storage buildings, swimming pools, hot tubs, patios,
decks and terraces which may be located within an exterior side yard, not less
than 15 feet from the lot line adjacent to the street, if the yard is enclosed
with an allowable fence a minimum of five feet in height.
      (5)   Where an accessory building or structure is structurally attached
to the principal structure, it shall comply with the setback requirements that
apply to the principal structure
Accessory Buildings and Structures, General
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4349.png]
   (C)   Number of detached storage structures or buildings. There shall be no
more than two detached storage structures or buildings per single-unit
residential property. Detached storage structures less than or equal to 64
square feet in area shall not require a building permit, may be located within
five feet of the principal structure, and shall comply with all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
   (D)   Smoking shelters. Smoking shelters shall be permitted as accessory or
detached structures on lots in any district. Such structures shall be further
regulated as follows.
      (1)   The smoking shelter must comply with all requirements of the
Village Building Code and Fire Code.
      (2)   The service and/or consumption of drinks or food in the smoking
shelter is strictly prohibited.
      (3)   The smoking shelter must be located in a rear yard or interior side
yard only, and must conform with the locational requirements for accessory
structures as set forth in this article.
      (4)   The smoking shelter must be constructed on a suitable, hard surface
and must be securely anchored.
      (5)   The floor area of the smoking shelter must be no larger than 150
square feet.
      (6)   The smoking shelter must be located no closer than 15 feet from any
entrance, exit, open window or ventilation intake that serves an enclosed area
in which smoking is prohibited.
      (7)   The smoking shelter must have at least one permanently clear
opening that is not less than 80 inches in height and 60 inches in width.
      (8)   The smoking shelter may utilize outdoor lighting and electrical
heating fixtures in accordance with the requirements of the Carol Stream
Electrical Code and Fire Code. The smoking shelter must not contain any other
electrical devices nor any mechanical devices, such as televisions or
generators.
      (9)   Temporary smoking shelters must meet the requirements of this
section, and also shall be subject to the regulations of §
16-8-3(A)(1)(f)(iv).
      (10)   Smoking shelters located within the Gary Avenue or North Avenue
Corridors must meet the requirements of §
16-5-14.
   (E)   Radio/broadband telecommunication poles, towers, and/or antenna. Radio
or broadband telecommunications poles, towers and antennas, not more than 55
feet in height above ground, shall be permitted as accessory or detached
structures on lots in any district. Such structures shall not be placed in a
position as to present a hazard to any utility lines. Such structures shall be
further regulated as follows.
      (1)   Antenna structures or parabolic dish antenna structures shall not
be located in any front or side yards adjoining a street and shall be
constructed and maintained in compliance with the manufacturer's
specifications.
      (2)   No parabolic dish antenna structure in excess of three feet in
diameter shall be mounted on or over, bracketed or guyed to any principal
building or structure.
      (3)   No dish antenna located upon a roof may exceed five feet in height
as measured vertically from the roof which supports it to the top of the
antenna or dish when positioned for operation.
      (4)   All portions of the dish antenna, in any orientation to the sky,
must meet the minimum side and rear yard building setback requirements for the
lot on which it is placed and shall be at least ten feet from any property line
with no part of any antenna, wire, cable or guy wire crossings or extending
over or beyond any property line.
      (5)   The location of a dish antenna in excess of three feet in diameter
for a roof mounted antenna or ten feet in diameter for a ground mounted antenna
in any Residential, Business or Industrial District shall be subject to the
granting of a variation by the Zoning Board of Appeals after a public hearing
thereon.
      (6)   The village shall assume no liability in case of personal injury or
property damage arising in connection with or as a result of the erection,
placement, or maintenance of any antenna.
      (7)   A minimum of 50% of the area around the dish must be planted in
landscape material which is at least one-half as tall as the overall height of
the dish antenna.
      (8)   The ground mounted dish antenna shall be as near to the rear of the
house on which it shares a lot as possible.
      (9)   No more than one dish antenna shall be allowed on a lot of one acre
or less.
   (F)   Residential rainwater collection systems.
      (1)   No more than four residential rainwater collection system storage
devices shall be allowed on a single-unit residential lot.
      (2)   Rainwater collection systems that are four feet in height or less,
or have a capacity of up to 55 gallons, may be located in all yards. Rainwater
collection systems taller than four feet in height, or with a capacity of more
than 55 gallons, must be located in the rear yard. Any structures and materials
used for mounting and connecting the rainwater collection system shall be as
unobtrusive as possible.
      (3)   Rainwater collection systems must be maintained in good working
order, and must be removed if they are no longer in use.
   (G)   Accessory Buildings and Structures in Business and Industrial
Districts. Site Plan Review shall be required prior to the installation of an
accessory building or structure in the Business and Industrial zoning
districts, and shall be subject to all applicable codes and ordinances and the
following provisions:
      (1)   Quality materials. Exterior building materials shall complement the
architecture of the primary structure, and be traditional, time- and weather-
tested materials and techniques such as but not limited to masonry, stone
veneer systems, stucco, precast panels with inlaid or stamped brick texture, or
comparable material.
      (2)   Accessory buildings and structures shall include landscape located
at the building foundation as required by §
16-5-6 of the UDO.
      (3)   Accessory buildings and structures shall not be located in required
parking or storage spaces.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 2021- 08-33, passed 8-2-2021; Ord.
2022-01-04, passed 1-13-2022; Ord. 2022-02-11, passed 2-22-2022; Ord. 2022-05-
21, passed 5-2-2022; Ord. 2022- 09-39, passed 9-6-2022; Ord. 2023-07-32, passed
7-17-2023; Ord. 2025-08-31, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 16-4-16 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   (A)   Intent and purpose.
      (1)   To protect residential areas from adverse impacts that are
sometimes associated with home occupations;
      (2)   Maintain and preserve the character of residential neighborhoods;
      (3)   Provide for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of all
village residents; and
      (4)   Afford all residents of the village a broad choice in the use of
their home to produce or supplement personal and family income in our ever
changing society.
   (B)   Performance Standards.
      (1)   Only lawful activities that involve the performance of a business
or occupation that is a permitted use or special use within the zoning
districts contained within this chapter may be conducted within a home
occupation. Exception: a person who possesses a valid federal firearms license
may carry out that business as a home occupation; provided that, all other
regulations of this section are complied with.
      (2)   It is conducted entirely within the dwelling by a member of the
housekeeping unit residing in the dwelling, and not more than one additional
non-resident assistant or employee on the premises.
      (3)   Home occupations shall not involve the use of any accessory
building, second structure or outside storage of materials or equipment.
      (4)   There is no display or activity that will indicate from the
exterior of the dwelling that it is being used in whole or in part for any use
other than a dwelling.
      (5)   There shall be no structural alterations or special construction
features inconsistent with a residential use. There shall be no separate
outside entrance provided solely for the occupation.
      (6)   The noise, dust, glare, odors, noxious fumes, vibrations or smoke
emanating from the premises should not exceed that which is normally produced
by a single-unit dwelling.
      (7)   Equipment which is necessary to the occupation may be used;
provided, it does not create visible or audible interference in radio or
television receivers or phones and it does not cause fluctuations in line
voltage off the premises.
      (8)   It does not generate significantly greater traffic volume than
normally expected in a residential area, except as outlined elsewhere in this
section, and deliveries to the occupation by the United States Postal Service,
UPS, Federal Express or any other licensed delivery service do not exceed what
would normally be expected in a residential area.
      (9)   The parking of customer's or client's vehicles should not create
safety hazards or unusual congestion. If the occupation is of the type that
customers or clients visit the premises frequently, there shall be no more than
four clients or customers in the dwelling unit or on the premises during any
period of 60 consecutive minutes. Motor vehicle traffic generated by the
occupation shall be prohibited from visiting the premises between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except for childcare operations. Motor vehicle
traffic associated with the occupation shall be limited to no more than four
vehicles during any period of 60 consecutive minutes. The number of additional
customers, clients or motor vehicles can be increased to not more than eight to
allow for the type of occupation that involves classes, demonstrations,
meetings, students, day care or other similar occupations.
      (10)   A day care facility may provide outdoor supervised recreation on
the property during reasonably limited periods.
      (11)   The use shall comply with all local, state or federal regulations
pertinent to the activity involved. The operation shall not be construed as an
exemption from any such regulations, including but not limited to any
regulation or requirement regarding licensing; storage of drugs,
pharmaceuticals, chemicals and the like; the disposal of any drugs,
pharmaceuticals, chemicals and the like.
      (12)   All persons engaging in home occupation activities for which a
federal firearms license is required shall store firearms either in locked
cases or in racks in which the firearms are securely locked to the racks.
Firearms ammunition shall only be stored in locked cases.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-4-17 DRIVE THROUGH.
   Drive through facilities shall be permitted as a special use and shall meet
the following provisions:
   (A)   General requirements.
      (1)   Drive-throughs shall be permitted a maximum of one menu board and
one pre-order board with a combined maximum area of 100 square feet per drive
through lane. Each menu board or pre-order board shall not exceed 60 square
feet in area and ten feet in height. Menu boards and pre-order boards may
utilize electronic message boards for 100% of the permitted menu board or pre-
order board area and must follow all regulations of §
16-6-9. Size, appearance and location of additional appurtenances associated
with the drive through use, including but not limited to clearance bars,
speaker boxes, pavement markings, and ordering canopies, shall be evaluated as
part of the review of the drive through use.
      (2)   Stacking spaces and lanes for drive- through stations shall not
impede on- and off-street traffic movement, are not to cross or pass through
off-street parking areas or drive aisles and are not to impede pedestrian
access to a public entrance of a building.
      (3)   Drive-through lanes are to be separated from off-street parking
areas. Individual lanes are to be striped, marked, or otherwise distinctly
delineated.
      (4)   Stacking spaces shall have a minimum depth of 20 feet. Stacking
lanes shall have the following minimum widths:
         (a)   One lane: 12 feet,
         (b)   Two or more lanes: ten feet per lane.
General Requirements for Drive-Through Facilities
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4351.png]
   (B)   Requirements by use.
Table 16-4-13(B) Drive Through Stacking Space Requirements
Use Minimum Stack Measure From
Table 16-4-13(B) Drive Through Stacking Space Requirements
Use                      Minimum Stack     Measure From
Automated Teller Machine 2 per machine     teller machine
Bank Teller Lane         2 per lane        teller or window
Restaurant               6 per order box   order box (1)
Carwash Stall, Automatic 5 per stall       stall entrance
Carwash Stall, Manual    2 per stall       stall entrance
Oil Change Shop          2 per service bay service bay entrance
Pharmacy                 4 per lane        machine or window
(1) Four of the required stackingspaces are to be located between the order-
box and pick up window, including the stacking space at the order box.
 
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 2023-03-08, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 16-4-18 OUTDOOR ACTIVITIES AND OPERATIONS, PERMANENT, OUTDOOR STORAGE, AND
OUTDOOR VEHICLE STORAGE IN THE INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
   Outdoor activities and operations, outdoor storage, and outdoor vehicle
storage, excluding storage for vehicle sales and rental uses shall be subject
to the following provisions:
   (A)   Screening of outdoor activities and operations, outdoor storage, and
outdoor vehicle storage in the I District.
      (1)   Outdoor activities and operations, outdoor storage, and outdoor
vehicle storage shall not be visible from:
         (a)   Adjacent non-industrial property;
         (b)   The right-of-way of the following roadways:
            I.   Gary Avenue;
            II.   North Avenue;
            III.   East Lies Road; and
            IV.   Schmale Road.
      (2)   The following minimum screening requirements shall apply to outdoor
activities and operations, outdoor storage, and outdoor vehicle storage
adjacent to or visible from areas identified in §
16-4-18(A)(1).
         (a)   A solid wall or fence not less than six feet and not more than
eight feet in height along all property frontages identified in §
16-4-18(A)(1).
         (b)   A landscape strip not less than five feet wide located in front
of the wall or fence. The required landscape materials shall conform to all
requirements for transition area landscape found in §
16-5-5.
      (3)   The following minimum screening requirements shall apply to outdoor
activities and operations, outdoor storage, and outdoor vehicle storage not
adjacent to or visible from areas identified in §
16-4-18(A)(1):
         (a)   A fence, which conforms to all fence material requirements
detail in §
16-5-8 and is not less than six and not more than eight feet in height.
         (b)   A landscape strip not less than five feet wide located in front
of the fence wall. The required landscape materials shall conform to all
requirements for transition area landscape found in §
16-5-6.
      (4)   General screening requirements.
         (a)   No screening wall or fence shall be located within a required
front yard.
         (b)   Screening walls and fences shall be architecturally compatible
with the primary structure.
   (B)   Screening of outdoor activities and operations in the B-1, B-2, B-3,
and O-S Districts.
      (1)   Outdoor activities and operations shall not be visible from:
         (a)   Any public right-of-way; or
         (b)   Any residential property.
      (2)   The following minimum screening requirements shall apply to outdoor
activities and adjacent to or visible from areas identified in §
16-4-18(B)(1):
         (a)   A solid wall or fence not less than six feet and not more than
eight feet in height along all property frontages identified in §
16-4-18(B)(1).
         (b)   A landscape strip not less than five feet wide located in front
of the wall or fence. The required landscape materials shall conform to all
requirements for transition area landscape found in §
16-5-6.
      (3)   The following minimum screening requirements shall apply to outdoor
activities and operations not adjacent to or visible from areas identified in §
16-4-18(B)(1).
         (a)   A fence, which conforms to all fence material requirements
detail in §
16-5-8 and is not less than six and not more than eight feet in height.
         (b)   A landscape strip not less than five feet wide located in front
of the masonry wall. The required landscape materials shall conform to all
requirements for transition area landscape found in §
16-5-6.
   (C)   Residential districts. Outdoor activities and operations shall be
permitted for nonresidential uses in residential districts only and shall meet
all provisions included in §
16-4-18(B).
   (D)   Surfacing. Areas for permanent outdoor activities and operations, and
outdoor vehicle storage in the Industrial District, shall be surfaced with an
approved hard surface material. Partially paved or unpaved outdoor storage
areas shall be prohibited.
   (E)   Shipping containers. Shipping containers not located on a truck or
located on a truck which is kept in the same parking or loading area for more
than 30 days shall be considered an outdoor operation and shall be subject to
all of the provisions for outdoor activities and operations as found in this
section, or as approved in adherence with all applicable regulations for
accessory uses or construction uses.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 2021-08-33, passed 8-2-2021; Ord. 2021-
09-45, passed 9-20-2021; Ord. 2022-05-21, passed 5-2-2022; Ord. 2022-09-39,
passed 9-6-2022; Ord. 2023-07-32, passed 7-17-2023; Ord. 2024-06-30, passed 6-
3-2024)
§ 16-4-19 OUTDOOR DINING, WITH OR WITHOUT ALCOHOL SALES AND CONSUMPTION.
   Outdoor dining without alcohol sales shall be subject to approval by the
Community Development Director, or his or her designee. Outdoor dining with
alcohol sales shall be subject to approval through the special use permitting
process.
   (A)   The seating area shall be ancillary to a restaurant or food service
business.
   (B)   The seating area shall only be located on a paved pedestrian access
area, sidewalk or other hard-surfaced area adjacent to the tenant space.
   (C)   The seating area shall have a safety barrier for protection from
vehicular impact.
   (D)   The seating area must be located outside of required parking setbacks,
parking spaces and landscape islands.
   (E)   If alcohol is sold in the outdoor dining area, the seating area must
be separated from adjacent roadways, parking areas, or on-site circulation
areas with a fence the height of which shall be a minimum of three feet and a
maximum of four feet.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-4-20 DONATION DROP BOXES.
   Donation drop boxes are permitted as accessory structures in the R-l, B-2,
B-3 and O-S Zoning Districts or on properties primarily occupied by an
educational, religious, governmental or charitable use. The boxes shall only be
placed with the property owner's permission and on properties that contain an
existing and operating permitted or special use. Donation drop boxes shall be
further regulated as follows.
   (A)   No more than two donation drop boxes are allowed on a zoning lot less
than two acres in size. No more than three boxes are allowed on a zoning lot
equal to or greater than two acres in size.
   (B)   All donation drop boxes on any given lot shall be located immediately
adjacent to one another.
   (C)   Each box shall not exceed seven feet in height and 25 square feet in
ground area.
   (D)   Boxes shall be located on an asphalt or concrete paved surface.
   (E)   Boxes shall not be located in a driveway or drive aisle and shall not
reduce the width of paved clear space for the passage of pedestrians to less
than five feet. Boxes shall not be located in such a way as to disrupt the flow
of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
   (F)   Boxes shall not be located nearer than 40 feet from an adjoining lot
in a Residential Zoning District.
   (G)   Boxes shall not be located nearer than 20 feet from the right-of-way
line of any street other than Gary Avenue or North Avenue.
   (H)   Boxes shall not be located nearer than 30 feet from the right-of-way
line of Gary Avenue or North Avenue.
   (I)   Boxes shall not be located nearer than five feet from a fire hydrant
or fire protection system connection.
   (J)   Boxes shall not occupy or otherwise inhibit the use of any parking
spaces required to meet the parking space requirements for the uses on the
property.
   (K)   Donation drop boxes are permitted to be located within the Gary Avenue
or North Avenue Corridors Overlay Districts and are not subject to the review
and approval procedures specified in §
16-5-14. However, donation drop boxes located within the Gary Avenue Corridor
or North Avenue Corridor Overlay Districts shall be located so as not to be
visible from any public ways, or shall be screened from view so as not to be
visible from public ways with materials identical to or strongly similar to
building materials or by heavy landscaping that will be effective in winter.
   (L)   A notice must be permanently affixed to each box in a highly visible
location prohibiting the placement of items outside of the box. The name and 24
hour telephone number of the owner/operator must be permanently affixed to each
box.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-4-21 CARNIVAL.
   As regulated in §
10-2-12 of the Village of Carol Stream Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-4-22 SPECIAL EXHIBITIONS, SHOWS OR SPECIAL EVENTS.
   Special exhibitions, shows, or special events shall be subject to the
following provisions:
   (A)   The Community Development Director, in granting a temporary use
permit, shall establish the period during which the temporary use may take
place and its hours of operation.
   (B)   Except for vehicular parking, no portion of an exhibition, show or
special event which takes place in whole or in part outdoors shall be located
nearer than 50 feet from the nearest lot line of a lot in a residential use.
   (C)   No exhibition, show or special event which takes place in whole or in
part outdoors shall, without written authorization from the office of the
Community Development Director, place its facilities upon any required parking
areas. Required parking spaces shall mean the minimum number of parking spaces
required to be provided for the principal use.
   (D)   No special exhibition, show or special event which is scheduled to
last more than one day shall be granted a temporary use permit until the Chief
of Police, or his/her designee, approves a parking plan submitted by the
applicant. The Chief of Police, or his/her designee, shall review the plan to
make certain that adequate provision has been made for the safe ingress and
egress of vehicles to the site and to and from parking areas, the marking of
parking areas and maneuvering lanes and lighting for evening events.
   (E)   Temporary signs and attention-getting devices, which may otherwise be
prohibited in Article 6, such as pennants, streamers, balloons, inflatable
shapes or vehicle signs, may be authorized with the approval of a temporary use
permit. Detailed information regarding the type, number, placement and duration
of proposed temporary signs and attention-getting devices must be included with
the temporary use permit application, and shall be subject to the following
provisions:
      (1)   Temporary signs or attention getting devices must be properly
anchored or secured and must be maintained in good condition; and
      (2)   Temporary signs or attention getting devices installed in
association with a grand opening event may remain in place for a maximum of 30
days.
   (F)   The Community Development Director may determine that the outdoor
special exhibition, show, or special event requires review and approval by the
Village Board.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 2021-09-45, passed 9-20-2021)
§ 16-4-23 GARAGE SALES.
   Garage sales shall be permitted in residential zoning districts subject to
the following provisions:
   (A)   Number of garage sales per year.
      (1)   A residential property may conduct a maximum of three single-home
garage sales per calendar year.
      (2)   A residential property may participate in a maximum of three multi-
home garage sales per calendar year.
      (3)   Multi-home and single-home garage sales shall be considered in
aggregate.
   (B)   An individual or multi-home garage sale may not exceed four days in
duration.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-4-24 TEMPORARY PORTABLE OUTDOOR STORAGE DEVICES.
   Portable outdoor storage devices are permitted temporary uses in residential
zoning districts, subject to the following provisions:
   (A)   Size. No portable outdoor storage device shall be greater than 20 feet
in length, eight feet in width, or eight feet in height.
   (B)   Placement. The temporary portable outdoor storage unit cannot encroach
on village property, village right-of-way, the driveway approach, neighboring
property, sidewalk, or be placed in the street. The unit must be sited on
asphalt, concrete, or hard paved surface between the front property line and
the rear building line of the principal structure.
   (C)   Duration. Temporary portable outdoor storage devices may be placed in
a residential district for no more than 30 days in any consecutive 12 month
period. Extensions beyond the 30 day limit may be granted by the Community
Development Director upon receipt of a written request demonstrating
justifiable cause.
   (D)   Number of devices. A maximum of two portable outdoor storage devices
shall be permitted concurrently per lot.
Placement of Temporary Portable Outdoor Storage Units
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4353.png]
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-4-25 SALES OR CONSTRUCTION TRAILERS, AUTOMOBILES, RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   Sales and construction trailers. Trailers shall not be permitted in
any district as accessory buildings, except when a permit has been issued by
the Community Development Director for a temporary sales or construction office
or storage uses incidental to and only for the period of time of construction
of a building development; provided, such trailers are located on the same or
contiguous lots as the building development.
   (B)   Recreational vehicles. In residential districts, licensed and operable
recreational equipment and trailers shall be subject to the following
provisions:
      (1)   Shall be located on a driveway (in accordance with §
16-5-4) within 15 feet of the garage or principal building if there is no
garage;
      (2)   Shall not encroach on village property, village right-of-way, or
neighboring property; and
      (3)   Shall be limited to occasional use of not more than seven days out
of a 30 day period as sleeping quarters. No connections or use for living
quarters is allowed as set forth below:
         (a)   Connection to sewer;
         (b)   Connection to water for other than filling or maintenance
purposes;
         (c)   Cooking with equipment; and
         (d)   Use of sanitation facilities within equipment.
      (4)   Storage, on a seasonal basis, of licensed and operable recreational
equipment is permitted in a side yard (not adjoining a street), or a rear yard
on a non-paved surface; provided that the landscaping or other surface material
is not damaged and ruts are not created or permitted to remain.
   (C)   Disrepair, rehabilitation, or abandonment. Any person who owns or
controls automobiles, trailers, or recreational vehicles or equipment of any
kind or type in disrepair, rehabilitation, abandonment or otherwise creating a
hazard or eyesore shall not be allowed to park or store, or cause or permit to
be parked or stored, any such vehicle on any residentially zoned property other
than in completely enclosed buildings.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-4-26 OUTDOOR DISPLAY AND SALE OF MERCHANDISE, TEMPORARY.
   Temporary outdoor display and sale of merchandise shall be permitted and
shall meet the following provisions:
   (A)   General outdoor display/sale of merchandise.
      (1)   Temporary outdoor display or sale of merchandise shall be located
on the same zoning lot, and in conjunction with the primary use found on the
lot.
      (2)   Temporary outdoor display and sale of merchandise shall occur:
         (a)   On the sidewalk area at the foundation of the primary use, but
not within a five-foot wide pedestrian walkway or
         (b)   In a portion of the parking lot proximate to such business,
subject to approval by the Community Development Director and provided that no
more than 20% of required parking spaces be utilized.
   (B)   Outdoor display and sale of propane tanks. The outdoor display and
sale of propane tanks shall be accessory to the principal permitted use on the
zoning lot and subject to the following provisions:
      (1)   The propane tank storage facility shall be located immediately
adjacent to the principal building or structure, and shall be limited to a
maximum of 20 square feet in ground area;
      (2)   The location on site and appearance shall be subject to review and
approval by the Community Development Director, or his or her designee, in
order to minimize the visual impact of the propane cages from the public right-
of-way;
      (3)   The placement of a propane cage on a sidewalk shall comply with the
Illinois Accessibility Code;
      (4)   The propane facility shall comply with all applicable codes and
regulations as determined by the Community Development Department and the Carol
Stream Fire Protection District, and shall require a building permit.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-4-27 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS.
   Massage establishments shall be permitted as a special use and shall meet
the following provisions:
   (A)   Massage establishments shall be subject to the regulations of
Chapter 10 Article 13 (Massage Establishments) of the Code of Ordinances.
   (B)   A massage establishment operating as a principal use shall be located
on the ground floor of the subject building.
   (C)   The public entrance to establishments offering massage therapy in
private rooms shall be clearly visible from the street or main public parking
area, unless such establishment was licensed prior to the passage of this
section.
   (D)   Features of the massage establishment, such as the floor plan,
transparency of the front reception area, hours of operation, and staffing
levels, which are specifically included in the approved license for the
business, shall not be modified without first obtaining prior approval. The
Community Development Director shall review such proposed changes, referring
the business to a public meeting or public hearing as needed.
(Ord. 2021-09-45, passed 9-20-2021)
§ 16-4-28 VIDEO GAMING CAFES.
   Video gaming cafes are allowed as set forth in §
16-3-11(E) and shall meet the following provisions:
   (A)   Although a permitted use in the B-3 District, a video gaming café may
not operate prior to the approval of a Class VC liquor license by the Village
Board in compliance with §
11-2-7(Q) of the Village of Carol Stream Code of Ordinances.
   (B)   Alcoholic beverages served at video gaming cafes shall be limited to
beer and wine.
   (C)   The interior floor area of any video gaming café must measure a
minimum of 1,200 square feet.
   (D)   Table seating capacity in the dining area must be provided for a
minimum of 20 persons, and food and beverages must be served to the customer's
table by wait staff or servers.
   (E)   The video gaming café must provide a variety of non-alcoholic
beverages and a minimum of 20 food items, hot and cold, which shall be made
available during all hours of operation.
   (F)   No video gaming café shall be established within 1,500 feet, as
measured from the public entrance to the café, to any other Class VC licensed
video gaming café.
(Ord. 2022-02-11, passed 2-22-2022; Ord. 2022-09-39, passed 9-6-2022)
§ 16-4-29 ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS.
   Electric vehicle charging stations shall meet the following provisions:
   (A)   Parking regulations.
      (1)   Parking spaces devoted to the charging of electric vehicles shall
count toward the minimum number of required off-street parking spaces.
      (2)   Electric vehicle charging station spaces may only be used for
parking and charging electric or hybrid vehicles.
      (3)   Electric vehicle charging station spaces shall be identified with
signage indicating the intended use of the parking space.
   (B)   Signage and advertising. Advertising shall not be allowed on an
electric vehicle charging station.
   (C)   Other provisions.
      (1)   Protection. Barrier curbing, steel bollards, or other adequate
protection shall be used to protect charging station equipment.
      (2)   Accessibility. Charging station equipment shall be located so as
not to interfere with accessibility requirements of the Illinois Accessibility
Code and other applicable accessibility standards.
      (3)   Maintenance. Charging station equipment, bollards, and parking
stalls shall be maintained by the property owner. Charging stations no longer
in use shall be immediately removed.
      (4)   Location. Charging equipment is encouraged near landscaped areas.
      (5)   Usage fees. Owners of charging equipment shall not be prohibited
from collecting a fee for the use of a charging station. Fees shall be
displayed on the charging station.
(Ord. 2023-07-32, passed 7-17-2023)
ARTICLE 5: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Section
   
16-5-1   Performance standards
   
16-5-2   Off-street parking and loading
   
16-5-3   Outdoor lighting
   
16-5-4   Driveways
   
16-5-5   Fire lanes
   
16-5-6   Landscape
   
16-5-7   Screening
   
16-5-8   Fences
   
16-5-9   Solar energy collection systems
   
16-5-10   Permitted yard obstructions
   
16-5-11   Streets
   
16-5-12   Sidewalks and shared use paths
   
16-5-13   Stormwater and floodplain regulations
   
16-5-14   Sanitary sewers and water distribution systems
   
16-5-15   Off-site improvements and oversize design
   
16-5-16   GAC and NAC Overlay Districts
§ 16-5-1 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   Any use established in the Village of Carol Stream shall be operated in such
a manner as to comply with applicable performance standards as hereinafter set
forth governing noise, smoke, particulate matter, toxic or noxious matter,
odors, fire and explosive hazards, vibration, radiation or glare or heat for
the district in which such use shall be located; and no use already established
on the effective date of this chapter shall be so altered or modified as to
conflict with, or further conflict with, applicable performance standards for
the district in which such use is located. Failure to comply with such
applicable performance standards shall constitute a nuisance.
   (A)   Noise. No activity or use shall be conducted in a manner that
generates a level of sound, as measured on another property, greater than that
allowed by federal, state, county, and local regulations. These limits shall
not apply to construction noises, noises emanating from safety signals or
warning devices, noises not directly under the control of the owner or occupant
of the property, and transient noises from moving sources, such as motor
vehicles, railroads, and aircraft.
   (B)   Vibration. No activity or use shall be conducted in a manner that
generates earthborn vibration that can be detected at any point off the lot on
which the use is located.
   (C)   Dust and air pollution. Dust and air pollution carried by the wind
from sources such as storage areas, yards, parking areas, equipment, and the
like, within lot boundaries, shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate
landscaping, screening, paving, wetting, or other acceptable means.
   (D)   Hazardous, radioactive, and toxic materials. No activity or use shall
produce hazardous, radioactive, or toxic material without prior notice to the
village. Notice shall be given to the Community Development Director at least
30 days before the operation is commenced. The transport, handling, storage,
discharge, clean up, and disposal of all hazardous, radioactive, or toxic
materials, including waste, shall comply with applicable federal, state,
county, and local regulations.
   (E)   Odor. No activity or use shall be conducted in a manner that generates
odors of such intensity and character as to be harmful to the health, welfare,
or comfort of the public. Any such use shall be stopped or modified so as to
remove the odor.
   (F)   Fire and explosion hazards. Materials that present potential fire and
explosion hazards shall be transported, stored, and used only in conformance
with all applicable federal, state, county, and local regulations.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-5-2 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   (A)   General provisions; parking and loading.
      (1)   Scope of regulations. The off-street parking and loading provisions
of this chapter shall apply as follows.
         (a)   Accessory off-street parking and off-street loading facilities
shall be provided as required by the regulations of this section for all
buildings and structures erected and all uses of land established in each
district after the effective date of this chapter. When the intensity of use of
any building, structure, or premises shall be increased through addition of
dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity or other units of
measurement specified herein for required parking or loading facilities,
parking and loading facilities as required herein shall be provided for such
increase in intensity of use.
         (b)   Whenever the existing use of a building or structure shall
hereafter be changed to a new use, parking or loading facilities shall be
provided as required for such new use. However, if the building or structure
was erected prior to the effective date of this chapter, additional parking or
loading facilities are mandatory only in the amount by which the requirements
for the new use would exceed those for the existing use if the latter were
subject to the parking and loading provisions herein.
      (2)   Existing parking and loading facilities. Accessory off-street
parking and/or loading facilities in existence on the effective date of this
chapter and located on the same lot as the building or use served shall not
hereafter be reduced below the requirements of this chapter for a similar new
building or use.
      (3)   Damage or destruction. For any conforming or nonconforming building
or use in existence on the effective date of this chapter and which is
reconstructed, reestablished or repaired as allowed by this UDO, which
subsequently is damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion or other
cause, and which is reconstructed, reestablished or repaired, off-street
parking and loading facilities equivalent to any maintained at the time of such
damage or destruction shall be restored or continued in operation. The Zoning
Board of Appeals may vary the requirement where it would be impossible or
economically unfeasible to provide the amount of required parking on or near
the site, and where the continuance of the non-conformance will not unduly
interfere with adjoining uses. However, in no case shall it be necessary to
restore or maintain parking or loading facilities in excess of those required
by this chapter for equivalent new uses or construction.
      (4)   Control of off-site parking facilities. When required parking
facilities are provided on land other than the zoning lot on which the building
or use served by such facilities is located, they shall be and remain in the
same possession or ownership as the zoning lot occupied by the building or use
to which the parking facilities are necessary. No such off-site parking
facilities shall be authorized and no occupancy permit shall be issued where
the plans call for parking other than on the same zoning lot until and unless
the Zoning Board of Appeals has reviewed the plans and heard the applicant and
made findings that the common ownership or possession of the zoning lot and
site of the parking facilities are reasonably certain to continue and that the
off-site parking facilities will be maintained at all times during the life of
the proposed use or buildings. If, for any reason, the parking required by this
chapter and provided off-site shall no longer be available and replacement
parking is not provided, the owner and occupant of the structure for which
parking has been diminished shall reduce the size of the use within one year
after the date the parking is lost to make the use conform to the then
available parking.
   (B)   Additional regulations; parking. Off-street parking facilities shall
be provided in accordance with additional regulations hereinafter set forth.
      (1)   Use of parking facilities. Off-street parking facilities required
for uses in accordance with division (C) below shall be used solely for the
parking of motor vehicles of patrons, occupants or employees of the principal
use or building. Spaces needed to meet the minimum number of parking spaces
required under division (C) below may not be used for the regular storage or
parking of vehicles, equipment or materials associated with the principal use
on the property. The parking or storage of vehicles, equipment or materials
associated with the principal use on the property on any surplus parking
spaces, beyond the number of spaces required under division (C) below, may only
be done in accordance with provisions contained elsewhere in this code.
Vehicles exceeding the size of the vehicle parking space dimensions, as set
forth in division (B)(5)(d), may not park in such spaces. Off-street parking
facilities accessory to residential use and developed in any residential
district in accordance with the requirements of this section shall be used
solely for the parking of passenger automobiles owned by occupants of the
dwelling structures to which such facilities are accessory or by guests of such
occupants, unless otherwise permitted in division (B)(2) below. Under no
circumstances shall any person use or allow to be used a required parking
facility accessory to residential structures for the storage of trucks or other
commercial vehicles or for the parking of automobiles belonging to the
employees, owners, tenants, visitors or customers of business or manufacturing
establishments, or for the parking or storage of licensed or unlicensed
construction equipment or vehicles.
      (2)   Shared parking facilities.
         (a)   Purpose. Shared parking is encouraged as a means of conserving
land resources, reducing stormwater runoff, reducing the heat island effect
caused by large paved areas, and improving community appearance.
         (b)   Authorization. Shared parking facilities for off-street parking
of two or more buildings or uses may be approved by the Village Board subject
to compliance with this section.
         (c)   Location. Shared parking facilities shall be located within 300
linear feet of the primary entrance of the main residential building and within
500 linear feet of the primary entrance of the main nonresidential building.
         (d)   General requirements.
            I.   The number of parking spaces provided shall not be less than
the sum of the separate requirements for each such building or use. Where a mix
of two or more land uses creates staggered peak periods of parking demand,
shared parking agreements that have the effect of reducing the total amount of
required parking may be approved.
            II.   Required accessible parking spaces for persons with
disabilities may not be shared and shall be located on-site.
            III.   Adjacent lots that are subject to a shared parking agreement
shall be interconnected by the provision of a cross-access easement for
vehicular and pedestrian passage.
         (e)   Shared parking for uses with different hours of operation.
            I.   For purposes of this section, the following uses are
considered daytime uses:
               i.   Office uses;
               ii.   Commercial service uses;
               iii.   Commercial retail uses;
               iv.   Industrial uses;
               v.   Other similar primarily daytime uses, as determined by the
Village Board.
            II.   For purposes of this section, the following uses are
considered evening or weekend uses:
               i.   Physical health and entertainment uses;
               ii.   Public/semi-public uses;
               iii.   Eating and drinking uses; and
               iv.   Other similar primarily nighttime or weekend uses, as
determined by the Village Board.
         (f)   Shared parking study. The applicant(s) shall demonstrate,
through a shared parking study, that there is no substantial conflict in the
peak periods of parking demand of the uses for which shared parking is
proposed. The shared parking analysis shall include, at minimum, the size and
type of the proposed development, the composition of tenants, the anticipated
rate of parking turnover and the anticipated hourly and peak parking and
traffic loads for all uses that will be sharing parking spaces. If existing
land uses are to be included in the shared parking agreement, the study shall
also include parking counts that document parking occupancy during weekday,
weekend, daytime, and evening periods of peak and off-peak parking demand.
         (g)   Agreement. The applicant(s) shall provide a copy of the executed
shared parking agreement prior to the Village Board's authorization of a shared
parking facility permit.
            I.   Shared parking agreements shall have a term of not less than
five years, including any renewals at the option of the lessee.
            II.   Authorization of the shared parking facility will continue in
effect only as long as the agreement, binding on all parties, remains in force.
Should the agreement cease to be in force, parking must be provided as
otherwise required by this section.
      (3)   Design and maintenance (See
Figure 16-5-2(B)(3)).
         (a)   Open and enclosed parking spaces. Accessory parking spaces may
be open to the sky, enclosed or semi-enclosed in a building or structure.
Enclosed parking spaces shall have a vertical clearance of at least seven feet.
         (b)   Surfacing. Except as otherwise provided in this UDO, all open
parking spaces and access thereto shall be improved with all-weather material,
in accordance with specifications approved by the Engineering Services
Director.
         (c)   Temporary parking lots. The Village Board may grant approval for
the construction of a temporary parking lot. Such temporary parking lot shall
be located outside of all required landscape areas and constructed of such
material including, but not limited to, gravel, which shall be approved by the
Engineering Services Director as providing a firm base to vehicles, and such
temporary parking lot shall be adequately drained. A permit to maintain a
temporary parking lot shall be granted only under those circumstances which
would make the construction of a permanent parking lot an economic hardship
upon the applicant. Temporary parking lot permits shall be valid for a maximum
of 18 months, and shall not be renewable.
         (d)   Barrier protection. Bollards or other means of protection shall
be installed by the developer, business owner, or property owner when deemed
necessary by the Community Development Director or Village Board in instances
when the relationship between parking spaces and the building or pedestrian
facilities requires additional protection.
         (e)   Minimum parking area dimension requirements. Plans for the
layout of off-street parking facilities shall be in accordance with the
following requirements.
         (f)   Striping. Striping between spaces shall be in the form of a four
inch hair-pin/looped line, 16 inches apart, and shall be white or yellow in
color.
Table 16-5-2(B)(5)(d) Minimum Parking Area Dimension Requirements
        Minimum       Minimum     Minimum       Minimum Parking Minimum Parking
Parking Parking Space Maneuvering Parking Space Tier Width -    Tier Width -
Pattern Width         Lane        Length**      Exterior Tier   Interior Tier
        A             B           C             D               E
Table 16-5-2(B)(5)(d) Minimum Parking Area Dimension Requirements
           Minimum     Minimum       Minimum       Minimum       Minimum
Parking    Parking     Maneuvering   Parking Space Parking Tier  Parking Tier
Pattern    Space Width Lane          Length**      Width -       Width -
                                                   Exterior Tier Interior Tier
           A           B             C             D             E
0 degrees              12 feet (one-
(parallel  8 feet      way)          23 feet       NA            NA
parking)               24 feet (two-
                       way)
                       12 feet (one-
30 degrees 9.5 feet*   way)          18 feet       17.25 feet    12.75 feet
                       24 feet (two-
                       way)
                       12 feet (one-
45 degrees 9.5 feet*   way)          18 feet       19.5 feet     15.75 feet
                       24 feet (two-
                       way)
                       15 feet (one-
60 degrees 9.5 feet*   way)          18 feet       20.5 feet     17.75 feet
                       30 feet (two-
                       way)
                       12 feet (one-
90 degrees 9.5 feet*   way)          18 feet       18 feet       18 feet
                       24 feet (two-
                       way)
* = Employee parking space widths may be reduced to nine feet when approved by
the Community Development Director upon the submission of employee parking
counts or other parking data by the property owner
** = Six-inch bumper overhang may be used to reduce applicable space length
when approved by the Community Development Director.
 
Dimensional Standards for Parking Spaces and Aisles
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4361.png]
         (f)   Striping. Striping between spaces shall be in the form of a four
inch hair-pin/looped line, 16 inches apart.
      (4)   Location of accessory off-street parking facilities. Required
parking spaces shall not be located within the public right-of-way. The
location of off-street parking spaces in relation to the use served shall be as
prescribed hereinafter. All distances specified shall be walking distances
between such parking spaces and a main entrance to the use served.
         (a)   For uses in residential districts.
            I.   Parking spaces serving multiunit and non-residential uses
shall be located on the same zoning lot as the use served.
            II.   Parking spaces serving multiunit uses shall not be located
more than 30 feet from a convenient entrance to the building. Parking lots
shall be so designed so at least one parking space per dwelling unit is within
150 feet of a building entrance.
            III.   Parking spaces serving multiunit and non-residential uses
shall not be located:
               i.   nearer than 40 feet from an adjoining single-unit
residential lot, nor
               ii.   less than 20 feet from a street right-of-way line.
               iii.   No on-site roadway or parking lot pavement of any type
shall be located within ten feet from a street right-of-way line, except for
approved entry drives.
            IV.   No commercial vehicles bearing a class designation other than
A or B under the provisions of Illinois State Statutes shall be parked or
stored on any residential premises classified as a residential district, except
when making a delivery or rendering a service at such premises.
            V.   Unless in compliance with §
16-5-2(B)(4)(a)(IV), no construction equipment or vehicles, or service
equipment or vehicles, shall be parked or stored in a residential district,
unless such equipment or vehicle is being used for the purpose of construction,
alteration, excavation, service or repair of a property within a residential
district. In the event that such equipment or vehicle is not being used in the
construction, alteration, excavation, service or repair of property in a
residential district, such equipment or vehicle shall not be parked or stored
overnight unless it is parked or stored at least 500 feet from an occupied
residence. Maintenance equipment may be stored in a garage in multiunit
properties. Equipment and/or materials used solely for on-site snow plowing may
be stored on the premises where such equipment and/or materials will be used
during the period from November 1 through March 31 each season.
         (b)   For uses in non-residential districts.
            I.   All required parking spaces shall be located within 500 feet
of the use served. However, no parking spaces accessory to a use in a business
district shall be located in a residential district, except that private, free,
off-street parking accessory to business district uses and municipal parking
lots may be allowed by special use permit in accordance with
Article 16-8, within 200 feet of the site served and adjacent to any business
district.
            II.   Parking spaces shall not be located:
               i.   nearer than 40 feet from an adjoining lot in a residence
district, nor
               ii.   less than 20 feet from a street right-of-way line.
               iii.   No on-site roadway or parking lot pavement of any type
shall be located within ten feet of a street right-of-way line, except for
approved entry drives.
            III.   Landbanking of required parking spaces as greenspace may be
permitted when approved as a variation, provided the owner of the property
demonstrates through employee counts that the total number of parking spaces
required using the square footage parking requirements outlined herein are not
necessary and there is sufficient usable land area available on the subject
property to provide the required parking spaces if deemed necessary by the
village in the future.
            IV.   Equipment and/or materials used solely for on-site snow
plowing, which may include covered salt or de-icing material, may be stored on
the premises where such equipment and/or materials will be used during the
period from November 1 through March 31 each season.
   (C)   Schedule of parking requirements. The requirements listed in
Table 16-5-2 (C) shall be the minimum requirement for off-street parking spaces
for the associated use(s). In making determination of required parking, the
Community Development Director shall consider the component parts of the
development including varying standards for individual uses. Speculative
industrial buildings shall provide parking in accordance with the ratio for
general office uses for a minimum of 5% of the net floor area of the building.
Unless otherwise approved by the Community Development Director, the maximum
permitted number of accessory off-street parking spaces shall be an additional
20% beyond the minimum requirement. Unless otherwise indicated, the number of
required off-street parking spaces shall be determined by the net floor area of
the use. The net floor area shall be the sum of the net horizontal floor area
of the several floors of a building as measured from the exterior faces of the
exterior walls.
      (1)   The net floor area of a building shall include:
         (a)   Basements, when used for other than storage;
         (b)   Penthouse, excluding mechanical penthouses;
         (c)   Attic space having headroom of seven feet six inches or more;
         (d)   Interior balconies and mezzanines;
         (e)   Enclosed porches; and
         (f)   Floor area devoted to warehouse storage areas.
      (2)   The net floor area (NFA) of a building shall not include:
         (a)   Floor space occupied by mechanical, telephone and electrical
equipment, including mechanical penthouses, coolers, freezers and refrigeration
units, and similar equipment;
         (b)   Stairwells, escalators and elevator shafts;
         (c)   Storage areas, not to include warehouses;
         (d)   Attic space having headroom of less than seven feet six inches;
         (e)   Public/private restrooms;
         (f)   Interior off-street parking and loading;
         (g)   Basements, or portions thereof used for storage;
         (h)   Conference rooms;
         (i)   Lunchrooms;
         (j)   Entrance lobbies; and
         (k)   Interior covered common areas designed primarily for pedestrian
circulation.
Table 16-5-2(C): Schedule of Parking Requirements
Use Required Spaces
Table 16-5-2(C): Schedule of Parking Requirements
Use                                     Required Spaces
Parks, Open Space, and Agriculture
Parks and Open Space, Publicly Owned
and Operated, including Unlit Athletic   
Fields and Courts                        
Parks and Open Space, Privately Owned    
and Operated                             
Private Lit Athletic Fields and Courts   
Public Lit Athletic Fields and Courts    
Golf Course                              
Cemeteries                               
                                         
Community Gardening/Urban Farming       As determined by the Plan Commission


Residential*
Single-Unit Detached Dwellings           
Single-Unit Attached Dwellings          2 / Dwelling Unit

Multiple Unit Dwellings, Building       1.5 / Dwelling Unit for studios, 1-
Multiple Unit Dwellings, Complex        bedroom, and 2-bedroom dwellings;
Multiple Unit Dwellings, Above Ground   2 / Dwelling Unit for 3-bedroom and
Floor as Part of Mixed Use              larger dwellings

Assisted Living Facilities/Nursing      0.5 / Dwelling Unit
Homes
Senior Co-Housing                       1.25 / Dwelling Unit
Total Senior Life Care Facilities        
Group Community Residences, >8 Persons   
                                         
                                         
Family Community Residences, <8 Persons  
                                        As determined by the Plan Commission

* Guest parking shall be provided at a rate of one guest space per every 20
required parking spaces for single-unit attached dwellings and multiple unit
dwellings.
Temporary Lodging
Lodging and Rooming Houses               
Hotel                                    
Extended Stay Hotel                     1 / occupiable room

Education
Nurseries or Preschools                 0.5 / 250 NFA
Schools (elementary, middle)            1.5 / average number of employees
                                        1 / faculty member and other full time
Schools (high)                          employee, plus 1 / 7 students based on
                                        maximum design capacity
Colleges and Universities               1.5 / average number of employees, and
                                        0.5 / average number of students
Employment Training and Vocational
Center                                   
General Commercial Education             
Youth Counseling and Education Center   1 / 250 NFA

Commercial Retail
Retail Sales, General                    
Retail Sales, Accessory                  
Grocery Stores                           
Specialty Food Stores                    
Multitenant Shopping Center              
Out Lot Retail Building                  
Medical Cannabis Dispensary              
Pawn Shop                                
Adult Use Cannabis Dispensing            
Organization                             
                                         
                                         
Adult Oriented Uses                      
                                         
                                        1 / 250 NFA

Commercial Service
Commercial Service, General              
Day Care Center                          
Banks                                    
Veterinary Clinic/Animal Hospital        
Kennel and Boarding Facility             
Funeral Parlor                           
Crematory                                
Self Service Laundry Shop/Dry Cleaners   
Blood Donation Centers                   
Tattoo Parlors                           
Check Cashing/Payday Loan Stores         
Massage Establishments                   
                                         
Commercial Kitchen                       
                                        1 / 250 NFA

Eating and Drinking
Restaurant, Fast Casual                  
Restaurant, Quality                      
Restaurant, High Turnover Sit Down      4 / 250 NFA

Restaurant, with Drive-Through          2.5 / 250 NFA
Restaurant, Coffee/Tea Shop
Restaurant, Takeout                     2/250 NFA
Video Gaming Café
Tasting Room for Microbrewery, Brewery, 3 / 250 NFA
Winery, Distillery
Physical Health and Entertainment
Health, Athletic, Recreation, or        1.5 / 250 NFA
Amusement Facility, Indoor
Health, Athletic, Recreation, or        9.5 / acre
Amusement Facility, Outdoor
Amphitheaters, Bandshells, or Outdoor   0.5 / every seat
Theaters
Art Gallery, Commercial                 0.5 / 250 NFA
Auto Oriented Businesses
Autobody Repair, all vehicles           0.5 / 250 NFA, plus 1 / service bay
Fuel Sales                              1 / employee, plus 1 / accessory use
Repair and Service                      0.5 / 250 NFA, plus 1 / service bay
Car Wash                                1 / employee
Automobile and Commercial Vehicle       2 / 250 NFA
Fueling Plaza
Vehicle Sales and Rental                0.5 / 250 NFA
Outdoor Vehicle Storage                 0.25 / 250 NFA
Office
Offices, General                         
Offices, Above Ground Floor as Part of   
Mixed Use                                
Business Parks                           
Medical or Dental Offices               1 / 250 NFA

Industrial
Medical or Dental Laboratories          1 / 250 NFA
Research Laboratories
Motor Freight Terminal                   
Warehouse/Distribution                   
Warehouse/Storage                       1 / 1,500 NFA

Light Manufacturing                      
Heavy Manufacturing                      
Food Processing Establishment           1 /600 NFA

Brewery, Winery, Distillery (production
only)                                    
Medical Cannabis Cultivation             
Wholesale Sales                          
Nurseries, Greenhouses/Garden Supply     
and Seed Stores                          
Machinery and Equipment Sales and        
Rental                                   
Waste Management Facilities             1 / 1,500 NFA

Union Hall/Training Facility            1 / seat in auditorium or meeting space
Mini Warehouses/Self Storage            4/100 storage units
Public/Semi-Public
Places of Assembly                       
Places of Worship                        
Regional Religious Institution          1 / every 3 seats

Governmental Uses/Post Offices          As determined by the Plan Commission
Medical Uses
Hospitals                                
Acute Care Centers                       
Medical and Rehabilitation Facilities   2.5 / 250 NFA

Utility
Service and Utility Uses, Public or     0.5 / 250 NFA
Private
Free-Standing Solar Energy Collection   0.5 / 250 NFA
System, Primary
Accessory Uses
Outdoor Display/Sales of Merchandise,
Permanent                                
Outdoor Activities and Operations,       
Permanent                                
Outdoor Dining, without alcohol sales/   
consumption                             0.5 / 250 NFA
Outdoor Dining, with alcohol sales/
consumption
 
   (D)   Pedestrian circulation standards.
      (1)   Off-street parking areas shall include pedestrian circulation
systems to ensure the safety of pedestrians, bicyclists, and motorists.
      (2)   The on-site pedestrian circulation system must connect all
buildings on the site to one another and provide connections to required
vehicle and bicycle parking spaces.
      (3)   The on-site pedestrian circulation system must connect building
entrances to adjacent public rights-of-way along direct routes that do not
require significant out-of-direction travel if sidewalks or pedestrian paths
exist along the public right-of-way.
      (4)   The on-site pedestrian circulation system shall provide at least
one connection to adjacent properties along a shared street frontage.
Connections must provide access to existing walkways on adjacent properties, or
to the likely future location of walkways on those properties. The Director of
Engineering Services may waive this requirement upon determining that no
walkway exists, a future walkway is unlikely to exist, or such connection would
create a safety hazard.
   (E)   Bicycle parking requirements.
      (1)   Purpose. This section is established to ensure the provision of
bicycle parking facilities in furtherance of a safe, complete, and efficient
network of streets, bicycle-pedestrian facilities and other infrastructure to
serve users in any surface transportation mode.
      (2)   Location.
         (a)   Required bicycle parking shall be provided on the same lot as
the use for which it is intended to serve.
         (b)   Bicycle racks shall be located such that they are highly
visible, with adequate lighting, from the street and/or building entrance(s)
from where bicyclists approach.
         (c)   The location of bicycle parking shall not conflict with
pedestrian and/or motor vehicle circulation.
         (d)   Bicycle parking shall be sited within 50 feet of a building's
main entrance. If provided indoors, bicycle parking shall be located within a
common area designated for secure bicycle storage.
         (e)   Bicycle parking adjacent to a pedestrian walkway shall be sited
to ensure that a minimum five foot walkway clearance is maintained.
      (3)   Design criteria.
         (a)   Bicycle parking facilities shall be of high quality.
         (b)   Bicycle racks shall be installed on a hard surface area. The
hard surface surrounding each bicycle rack shall measure at least six feet by
six feet in size.
         (c)   Each bicycle rack shall provide parking for at least two
bicycles.
         (d)   Racks shall allow for the bicycle frame and at least one wheel
to be locked to the racks.
         (e)   The bicycle rack shall allow for the use of cable and U-shaped
locks.
         (f)   Installation of bicycle parking facilities shall conform to the
manufacturer's requirements.
      (4)   Dimensional standards. (See
Figure 16-5-2(E)(4))
         (a)   Each bicycle parking space shall be a minimum six feet in
length.
         (b)   Each bicycle parking space shall be located at least three feet
in all directions from any obstruction, including but not limited to other
bicycle racks, walls, doors, posts, columns, or landscaping.
         (c)   A minimum vertical clearance of seven feet shall be maintained
above all bicycle parking facilities.
Bicycle Parking Spot Dimensions (16-5-2(E)(4))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4363.png]
      (5)   Required bicycle parking.
         (a)   Exemption. The bicycle parking requirements of this section
shall apply to all uses other than the following:
            I.   Single-unit detached uses;
            II.   Single-unit attached uses;
            III.   Any auto-oriented business use;
         (b)   When the required amount of bicycle parking is two spaces or
less, the use shall provide a minimum of two spaces in a bicycle parking
facility.
         (c)   Unless otherwise specified herein, bicycle parking shall be
provided at the ratio specified in
Table 16-5-2(E): Bicycle Parking Requirements.
 
Table 16-5-2(E): Bicycle Parking Requirements
Use             Required Spaces
Residential     0-5 Dwelling Units - none required
                >5 Dwelling Units - 10% of required vehicle parking
Non-Residential 2.5% of required vehicle parking
 
   (F)   Off-street loading requirements. On the same premises with every
building erected and occupied for any nonresidential use involving the receipt
or distribution of vehicles, materials, or merchandise, there shall be provided
and maintained adequate space for standing, turning, loading, and unloading
services in a manner that does not interfere with required parking, pedestrian
walkways, and with the public use of streets and alleys.
      (1)   Location.
         (a)   All required loading berths shall be located on the same zoning
lot as the use served.
         (b)   No loading berth for vehicles over two tons capacity shall be
located closer than 50 feet to any property in a residential district unless
completely enclosed by building walls or a uniformly painted solid fence or
wall, or any combination thereof, not less than six feet high.
         (c)   No permitted or required loading berth shall be located within
25 feet of the nearest point of intersection of any two streets.
         (d)   All loading and unloading docks where the public access road to
such docks has a right-of-way width of less than 80 feet shall be located at
least 65 feet behind the property line.
         (e)   No loading or unloading docks shall be located in any front yard
or exterior side yard where that street has a right-of-way width of 80 feet or
greater.
      (2)   Access.
         (a)   Each required off-street loading berth shall be designed with
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or easement in a manner which
will least interfere with traffic movements.
         (b)   Every loading berth shall be provided with sufficient
maneuvering space to accommodate the largest vehicle likely to serve the lot.
         (c)   The loading berth access design for lots located on major
streets shall allow vehicles to access and exit the loading space without
having to make any backing movement on or onto the public street.
         (d)   For the purposes of this section of the UDOe, major streets are
as follows:
            I.   Army Trail Road
            II.   Kuhn Road
            III.   County Farm Road
            IV.   Lies Road
            V.   Fair Oaks Road
            VI.   Morton Road
            VII.   Fullerton Avenue
            VIII.   North Avenue
            IX.   Gary Avenue
            X.   Schmale Road
            XI.   Kehoe Boulevard
            XII.   St. Charles Road
            XIII.   Kimberly Drive
      (3)   Utilization. Space allocated to any off-street loading berth shall
not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the requirements for any off-street
parking space.
(Ord. 2021-05-16, passed 5-3-2021 ;Ord. 2021-09-45, passed 9-20-2021; Ord.
2022-01-04, passed 1-13-2022; Ord. 2022-02-11, passed 2-22-2022; Ord. 2022-05-
21, passed 5-2-2022; Ord. 2023-03-08, passed 3-20-2023; Ord. 2024-06-30, passed
6-3-2024; Ord. 2025-03-10, passed 3-17-2025; Ord. 2025-08-31, passed 8-4- 2025)
§ 16-5-3 OUTDOOR LIGHTING.
   (A)   Lighting of off-street areas.
      (1)   Purpose: The purpose of the outdoor lighting standards is:
         (a)   To provide for and control lighting in outdoor public places
where public health, safety and welfare are potential concerns.
         (b)   To protect pedestrians, cyclists and motorists from the
excessive illumination of non- vehicular light sources.
         (c)   To reduce the distribution of stray light upon neighboring
properties and protect neighbors, the environment and the night sky from
nuisance illumination and light trespass from improperly selected or poorly
placed, aimed, applied, maintained or shielded light sources.
         (d)   To promote conservation of energy through energy-efficient
lighting design and operation.
         (e)   To protect and retain the intended visual character of the
various venues of the village and to maintain and improve nighttime aesthetics,
including preservation of the night sky.
      (2)   Applicability: All properties shall comply with the provisions of
this section; however, the requirement to install lighting for parking lots
serving the public at educational and religious institutions or public agencies
may be waived by the Engineering Services Director, upon receipt of a written
request demonstrating justifiable cause.
      (3)   Conformance: Any existing luminaire or lighting installation used
for outdoor lighting in any zoning district on the effective date of this
chapter that does not comply with the requirements of this section shall be
considered a nonconforming use. Existing nonconforming luminaires or light
installations legally installed and operative before the effective date of this
chapter are exempt from compliance with the requirements of this section,
unless such fixtures are deemed a safety hazard by the Community Development
Director or his/her designee.
      (4)   Illumination standards:
         (a)   Light intensity and uniformity. Outdoor lighting on any pavement
shall meet the requirements of
Table 16-5-3(A)(4)(a) for light level as measured in the plane of the
illuminated surface. Maximum to minimum light levels shall not exceed 1:15.
 
Table 16-5-3(A)(4)(a) Light Intensity and Uniformity
                    Maximum Average Minimum Average Light Minimum Light Level
Use                 Light Level     Level (footcandles)   (footcandles)
                    (footcandles)
Multi-Unit          3.50            1.20                  0.10
Residential
Commercial          8.00            2.00                  0.15
Industrial          5.00            1.60                  0.10
Fuel Station Canopy 45.00           30.00                 10.0
 
         (b)   Light spillage. Except for street lighting, light emitted from
outdoor lighting on any zoning lot shall not cause the light level along any
property line, as measured at the height of five feet above grade in a plane at
any angle of inclination to exceed the following limits:
 
Table 16-5-3(A)(4)(b) Light Spillage
Adjacent Use            Maximum Light Level (footcandles)
Single-Unit Residential 0.1
Multi-Unit Residential  0.2
Commercial              2.0
Industrial              5.0
Institutional           5.0
 
         (c)   Installation height.
 
Table 16-5-3(A)(4)(c) Installation Height
Use         Maximum Height (feet)
Residential 25
Commercial  30
Industrial  35
 
         (d)   Prohibited lighting. The following outdoor lighting applications
are prohibited in all districts:
            I.   Lighting that could be confused for a traffic control device.
            II.   Laser source lights or any similar high-intensity light
except for those used in emergencies by police or fire personnel.
            III.   Blinking, flashing, moving, scintillating, flickering,
changing intensity and changing colors light fixtures not otherwise permitted
by this UDO.
            IV.   Any lighting fixture or device that is operated in such a
manner as to constitute a hazard, nuisance or danger to persons or to safe
vehicular operation, as determined by the Director of Community Development or
his/her assigned designee.
         (e)   Exempt outdoor lighting.
            I.   All lighting required by federal, state, county or municipal
agencies.
            II.   Temporary seasonal displays, using multiple low wattage bulbs
(approximately 15 lumens or less), provided they do not constitute a fire
hazard, create a nuisance, and are maintained in a safe condition.
            III.   Portable lighting temporarily used for maintenance or repair
that is not deemed by the village to create a hazard or nuisance.
            IV.   Lighting approved by the village for temporary events such as
carnivals, gala, picnics, fairs, etc. or through temporary use permits.
            V.   Emergency lighting used by police, fire-fighting, emergency
management or medical personnel at their discretion as long as the emergency
exists.
            VI.   Temporary lighting required for road construction or other
public improvements.
            VII.   Lighting for schools, parks and playing fields.
         (f)   Lighting system design. Energy-efficient lighting and operation
shall be considered in the design of a lighting system. The preferred lighting
source is light emitting diodes (LED). It is encouraged that lighting fixtures
are chosen and installed in a manner in which they minimize light pollution and
glare to keep the nighttime skies dark.
      (5)   Procedures.
         (a)   Plan submission. For subdivision and land-improvement permit
applications where outdoor lighting is required or proposed, all lighting
plans, lighting installations or other requests for approval of lighting
fixtures pursuant to this section shall be submitted in duplicate, in writing
to, and a permit shall be obtained from, the Director of Engineering Services
or his/her designative representative prior to installation. Plans or written
requests shall include but not be limited to:
            I.   A site plan complete with all structures, parking spaces,
building entrances, traffic areas (both vehicular and pedestrian), vegetation
that might interfere with lighting, and all adjacent uses. The site plan shall
show, by location, and identify each existing and proposed luminaire and shall
specify its installed height, pole foundation details, and mounting methods.
            II.   Iso-footcandle plots for individual lighting installations,
or ten feet by ten feet illuminance grid plots for multi-fixture lighting
installations, which demonstrate compliance with all applicable requirements,
set forth within this chapter. The plots shall indicate the location of each
existing and proposed luminaire, the installed height of said luminaires, and
the overall light levels in footcandles on the entire paved surface and at the
property lines.
            III.   A summary table identifying the average, maximum and minimum
light levels for all paved areas. The table shall also include the maximum
lighting level at the property line.
            IV.   A description of each luminaire identified in the site plan,
including the manufacturer, model number, a photograph or catalog cut,
photometric data verifying any compliance requirements specified within this
chapter, light output in initial lumens, shielding or illumination reduction
devices, lamp type, and on/off control devices.
   (B)   Street lighting.
      (1)   Street lighting required. Street lighting shall be installed by the
developer of all developments, regardless of size, within the corporate limits
or planning jurisdiction of the village for the illumination of all roadways
within dedicated rights-of-way or along private roadways required to serve the
development. The street light system consists of the poles, mast arms,
luminaires, wires and all other materials and work necessary to complete the
street lighting installation.
      (2)   Design standards and specifications. All required street lighting
and appurtenances shall be designed, installed and located in accordance with
the Manual of Design Standards and Construction Specifications of the
Engineering Services Department.
   (C)   Lighting for residential uses.
      (1)   Luminaire location. All privately owned luminaires must be erected
only on the private property intended to be illuminated.
      (2)   Light direction. Light from luminaires on residential property
shall be directed in such a manner as to limit light spillage off of the lot
upon which they are installed so as to reduce the impact on neighboring
properties.
      (3)   Maximum light intensity. All luminaires shall not emit light
resulting in greater than 0.1 foot candles measured at the property line at a
height of five feet above grade in a plane at any angle of inclination.
      (4)   Light color temperature. All luminaires shall be under 4,000
Kelvin.
      (5)   Shut-off controls. Automatic shut-off controls are encouraged to
conserve energy and minimize non-essential light.
      (6)   Maximum building luminaire height. A luminaire attached to the
house may not be installed higher than the roof line.
      (7)   Maximum yard light pole height. A luminaire may not be installed on
a pole which is higher than eight feet from the established grade.
      (8)   Maximum recreational light pole height. A luminaire installed on a
pole may be erected up to 18 feet from the established grade, but not higher
than the building height of the residential dwelling, provided it is installed
in conjunction with an outdoor recreational amenity requiring illumination,
including, but not limited to, tennis courts and basketball courts.
Recreational light pole luminaires must be designed to shield and direct all
light onto the recreational amenity. Any luminaire used to illuminate a
recreational amenity may only be used during active use of the recreational
amenity.
      (9)   Recreational light pole illumination hours. Recreational light
poles shall not be lit between 10 p.m. and 7 a.m.
      (10)   Right-of-way illumination. To promote safety in the ordinary and
intended use of rights-of-way these regulations shall not apply to any
luminaires owned and operated by a state or local highway authority for the
purpose of illuminating the right-of-way.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-5-4 DRIVEWAYS (SEE FIGURE 16-5-4(A)).
   (A)   Criteria for single-unit residential driveways. A driveway (improved
with a hard-surfaced, all weather, dustless material) from the property line to
legal, on-site parking shall be provided. Driveways shall not be included in
the calculation of lot coverage. The location and width of the driveway shall
be in conformance with the following criteria.
      (1)   Limit of one. No more than one driveway and one curb cut shall be
permitted for each single-unit residential lot, except in the case of a
circular driveway in conformance with the standards and requirements as
provided herein.
      (2)   Configuration. The driveway shall be essentially perpendicular to
the street pavement and the principal structure to the extent possible, shall
lead to legal parking such as a garage, carport or parking pad, and shall not
extend across the front of the principal structure by more than three feet. The
driveway may widen from the width at the property line as specified in §
16-5-4(A)(4) below to the maximum allowable width as specified below; provided,
it does not widen at a rate greater than one foot of width for each one foot of
length.
         (a)   For a property improved with a home having a one car wide
garage, or a home that originally was built with a one car wide garage and for
which home the garage has been converted to living space, or for a home with no
attached garage, the driveway may widen to a maximum width of 20 feet, subject
to all other design criteria in this section.
         (b)   For a property improved with a home having a two car wide garage
or a home that was originally built with a two car garage, and for which home
the garage has been converted to living space, the driveway may widen to a
maximum width of 30 feet, subject to all other design criteria in this section.
      (3)   Location. The driveway shall be set back a minimum of one foot from
any side property line.
      (4)   Width at the property line. Driveway width shall not exceed
requirements as set forth herein.
         (a)   Leading to one or two parking spaces or a one- or two-car
garage, or a combination of a parking space and a one-car garage, the maximum
driveway width is 20 feet.
         (b)   Leading to three parking spaces or a three-car garage, or a
combination of a parking space and a two-car garage, the maximum driveway width
is 30 feet; provided, the width of the lot is no less than 80 feet, as measured
at the building line. Leading to greater than three parking spaces or greater
than a three-car garage, the maximum width is 30 feet, as measured at the
property line; provided, the width of the lot is no less than 80 feet, as
measured at the building line. The driveway may widen to the combined width of
the parking spaces and garage, even if greater than 30 feet, provided it does
not widen at a rate greater than one foot of width for each one foot of length.
Single-Unit Residential Driveways (16-5-4(A))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4367.png]
      (5)   Driveway approaches. Driveway approaches shall be regulated by
Manual of Design Standards and Construction Specifications of the Engineering
Services Department.
      (6)   Parking pad. (See
Figure 16-5-4(A)(6))
         (a)   Limit of one. A single-unit residential driveway may be extended
beyond the front elevation of the garage to include a parking pad.
         (b)   Configuration. The parking pad shall have a maximum length of 20
feet, as measured from the front facade line of the garage.
         (c)   Location. The parking pad shall be set back a minimum of one
foot from any side property line.
         (d)   Lot coverage. A parking pad shall count toward lot coverage.
Parking Pad (16-5-4(A)(6))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4365.png]
      (7)   Circular driveways.
         (a)   Location. A lot having a width of 90 feet or more, measured at
the front lot line, and in which the circular driveway is to be located, may
have a circular driveway with two curb cuts located in the front yard.
         (b)   Driveway width. The access driveway leading most directly to the
garage or parking area shall not exceed 20 feet in width, and the secondary
access driveway shall not exceed ten feet in width, measured at the property
line.
   (B)   Criteria for multifamily and nonresidential driveways. A driveway
(improved with a hard-surfaced, all weather, dustless material) from the
property line to legal, on-site parking shall be provided. The driveway shall
be a maximum width of 24 feet, unless otherwise approved by the Engineering
Services Director. One way driveways shall be a minimum width of 20 feet. Two
way driveways shall be a minimum width of 24 feet.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-5-5 FIRE LANES.
   Fire lanes shall be provided as required by the village's adopted Fire Code.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-5-6 LANDSCAPE.
   (A)   Planting types. (See
Figure 16-5-6(A))
      (1)   Canopy trees: A hard wood plant having not less than a two and one-
half inch caliper which reaches a mature height of not less than 20 feet and a
mature spread of not less than 15 feet.
      (2)   Ornamental trees: A hard wood plant having not less than a one and
one-half inch caliper and normally reaches a mature height of at least 15 feet
and usually has one main stem or trunk and many branches. Several species may
appear to have several stems or trunks.
      (3)   Evergreen trees: A tree having foliage that persists and remains
green throughout the year and has a height of not less than six feet at
installation and maturing to a height of not less than 20 feet.
      (4)   Shrub: A perennial plant (deciduous or evergreen) of low to medium
height characterized by multiple stems and branches continuous from its base
and having a height of not less than two feet and normally maturing to a height
of not more than five feet.
      (5)   Ground cover: Plants, other than turf grass, normally reaching an
average maximum height of not more than 18 inches at maturity.
         (a)   Native vegetation: Grasses and forbs that are native to, or
adapted to, the State of Illinois, and that are commonly found in meadow and
prairie plant communities, not including noxious weeds.
Planting Types (16-5-6(A))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4369.png]
 
   (B)   Required on-site landscape areas. (See
Figure 16-5-6(B)) Landscape improvements required by this section shall apply
to all non-single unit development and consist of living plants in a
combination of trees, shrubs, and/or ground cover. Unless otherwise stated in
this section, all size specifications for plant materials shall be based upon
the time of planting. When caliper is specified for tree planting, the caliper
of the tree trunk shall be measured at 12 inches above the ground level. Any
plant materials used to meet the requirements of this section shall not include
any plant material included in the Illinois Noxious Weed Law (505 ILCS 100) or
generally considered to be an invasive species within the Chicago Metropolitan
Area. The Morton Arboretum's Northern Illinois Tree Species List is the
village's recommended species list. The following graphic illustrates the
location of the landscape and screening requirements detailed in this section.
Required On-Site Landscape Areas (16-5-6(B))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4387.png]
      (1)   Parking lot perimeter area. (See
Figure 16-5-6(B)(1)) All parking lots shall include landscape improvements
located on the perimeter of parking areas as required by this section.
Landscape improvements required by this section shall be in addition to
landscape improvements required under other sections of this chapter. It is the
objective of this section to provide screening between parking areas and street
right-of-way.
         (a)   Applicability. The parking lot perimeter landscape regulations
of this section apply to the following:
            I.   The construction of any new surface parking lot or vehicular
use area that is adjacent to street right-of-way; and
            II.   The expansion of any existing surface parking lot or
vehicular use area that is adjacent to street right-of-way.
         (b)   Exemptions. Installation of parking lot perimeter landscape is
not required when the parking lot or vehicular use area is not visible from
adjacent street right-of-way.
         (c)   Requirements. Perimeter landscape is required for all parking
lots and shall be established along the edge of the parking lot with a minimum
depth of seven feet as measured from the back of curb, to accommodate vehicle
bumper overhang and ensure planting areas that are adequate in size.
            I.   The landscape improvement shall run the full length of the
parking lot and shall be located between the property line and the edge of the
parking lot. Landscaped areas outside of shrub, native vegetation, and tree
masses shall be planted in live groundcover. The landscaped area shall be
improved as follows:
               i.   One shrub or native grass the height of which shall not be
less than three feet nor greater than four feet, shall be planted for every
three feet of landscape area length, spaced linearly to adequately screen
vehicle bumpers (ideally creating a solid hedge row).
               ii.   Alternatively, a low pedestrian wall or fence the height
of which provides effective screening to a maximum height of three feet may be
used in conjunction with required landscaping. Plant materials shall be
installed between the sidewalk and the fence or wall to provide a softening
effect.
Parking Lot Perimeter Area (16-5-6(B)(1))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4371.png]
      (2)   Parking lot interior area. (See
Figure 16-5-6(B)(2)) All parking lots shall include landscape and trees located
within the parking area as required by this section. Trees and landscape
required by this section shall be in addition to trees and landscape required
under other sections of this chapter. It is the objective of this section to
provide shade within parking areas, break up large expanses of parking lot
pavement, and provide a safe pedestrian environment.
         (a)   Applicability. The parking lot interior landscape regulations of
this section apply to the following:
            I.   The construction of any new surface parking lot containing ten
or more parking spaces; and
            II.   The expansion of any existing surface parking lot if the
expansion would result in ten or more new parking spaces, in which case the
requirements of this section apply only to the expanded area.
         (b)   Requirements. For parking lots consisting of 15 or more spaces,
interior parking lot landscape shall be required. For parking lots consisting
of fewer than 15 spaces, all rows of parking shall be terminated by a parking
lot island or landscape area.
         (c)   Amount. One parking lot island shall be provided between every
15 parking spaces. Parking lot island locations may be varied based on specific
site requirements or design scheme, but the total number of islands shall be no
less than the amount required one island for every 15 spaces. However, all rows
of parking spaces shall be terminated by a parking lot island or landscape
area.
         (d)   Size and planting of parking lot islands. Parking lot islands
shall be the same dimension as the parking stall. Double rows of parking shall
provide parking lot islands that are the same dimension as the double row. A
minimum of one canopy tree shall be provided for every parking lot island or
landscaped area. If the island extends the width of a double row, then two
canopy trees shall be provided.
         (e)   Design of planting areas. Parking lot islands or landscape areas
shall be at least 144 square feet in area and at least six inches above the
surface of the parking lot and protected with concrete curbing, except where
designed as part of a post-construction best management practice. Such islands
and landscape areas shall be properly drained and irrigated as appropriate to
the site conditions to ensure survivability, except where designed as part of a
post-construction best management practice.
         (f)   Type of landscape material. Canopy trees shall be the primary
plant materials used in parking lot islands and landscaped areas. Ornamental
trees, evergreen trees, shrubs, native grasses, groundcover, and other plant
materials may be used to supplement the canopy tree plantings but shall not
create visibility concerns for automobiles and pedestrians.
         (g)   Groundcover. A minimum of 75% of every parking lot island shall
be planted in groundcover.
Parking Lot Interior Area (16-5-6(B)(2))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4373.png]
 
Typical Parking Lot Landscape Island (Double Row) (16-5-6(B)(2))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4375.png]
 
      (3)   Building foundation area. (See
Figure 16-5-6(B)(3)) All multiunit residential, non-residential, or mixed use
development, with the exception of food processing facilities, shall include
landscape located at the building foundation as required by this section.
Landscape required by this section shall be in addition to landscape required
under other sections of this chapter. It is the objective of this section to
provide a softening effect at the base of buildings.
         (a)   A multiunit residential, non-residential, or mixed use
development is required to maintain a building foundation area at the front and
exterior side yards of five feet at a minimum.
         (b)   Foundation plantings shall be designed to supplement buffer yard
plantings to frame important views, while visually softening long expanses of
walls. Foundation plantings shall correspond to the windows and materials of
the building.
         (c)   Foundation plantings shall be installed across 80% of the length
of the facade of the building, except where walkways and driveways are located.
         (d)   A minimum four foot-wide hedge row shall be planted with one
shrub or native grass every three feet on center, spaced linearly. Foundation
plantings may also include trees, additional shrubs and native grasses, and
groundcover.
Building Foundation Area (16-5-6(B)(3))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4377.png]
 
      (4)   Transition area. (See
Figure 16-5-6(B)(4)(b)) Transition area landscape shall be required along
interior property lines of all multiunit residential, non-residential, or mixed
use development. It is not expected that the transition area will totally
screen such uses but rather minimize land use conflicts and enhance aesthetics
over time as landscaping matures. Landscape required by this section shall be
in addition to landscape required under other sections of this chapter. It is
the objective of the transition area to minimize possible conflicts between
land uses.
         (a)   Applicability.
            I.   The construction or installation of any new primary building
or primary use; and
            II.   The expansion of any existing primary building or primary use
that results in an increase in gross floor area or site area improvements by
more than 5% or 1,000 square feet, whichever is greater. In the case of
expansions that trigger compliance with transition area requirements,
transition area landscaping is required only in proportion to the degree of
expansion. The Community Development Director is authorized to allow the
transition area to be established adjacent to the area of expansion or to
disperse transition area landscaping along the entire site transition area.
            III.   Primary buildings or uses in the B-1 District shall not be
required to install transition area landscape along interior side yards except
for those that abut a lot not zoned in the B-1 District.
         (b)   Transition area types. Four transition area types are
established in recognition of the different contexts that may exist, as shown
in
Table 16-5-5(B)(4)(b). Transition yards may include a combination of elements
including setback distances for separation, planting types, solid fencing,
groundcover, and turf.
Table 16-5-5(B)(4)(b): Transition Area Types
Specification Type A Type B Type C Type D
Table 16-5-5(B)(4)(b): Transition Area Types
Specification                   Type A   Type B   Type C Type D
I) Min. Yard Width (1)          5 ft.    8 ft.    10 ft. 15 ft.
II) Min. Fence/Wall Height (II) optional optional 6 ft.  6 ft.
Min. Number of Landscape Elements (per 100 lineal feet)
III) Ornamental (III)           optional 3        4      5
IV) Canopy/Evergreen (IV)       4        3        4      5
V) Shrubs/Native Grasses        optional optional 20     30
(1) Required yard setbacks may be utilized for transition area landscape.
 
Transition Area - Type A (16-5-6(B)(4)(b))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4379.png]
 
Transition Area - Type B (16-5-6(B)(4)(b))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4381.png]
 
Transition Area - Type C (16-5-6(B)(4)(b))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4383.png]
 
Transition Area - Type D (16-5-6(B)(4)(b))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4385.png]
 
         (c)   Application of transition area types. Transition areas shall be
provided based on the table below, except where adjacent uses are of a similar
nature, scale, and intensity. As per
Table 16-5-5(B)(4)(c), the type of required transition yard is dependent upon
the land use type of the subject lot and the land use type of the adjacent lot
(s).
Table 16-5-5(B)(4)(c): Application of Transition Area Types
         Adjacent Lot Land Use
Subject  Open Space  Single-Unit Multiunit                         Public /
Lot Land /           Residential Residential Commercial Industrial Semi-Public
Use      Agriculture
Table 16-5-5(B)(4)(c): Application of Transition Area Types
            Adjacent Lot Land Use
Subject Lot Open Space  Single-Unit Multiunit                         Public /
Land Use    /           Residential Residential Commercial Industrial Semi-
            Agriculture                                               Public
Open Space/ N/A         N/A         N/A         N/A        N/A        N/A
Agriculture
Single-Unit N/A         N/A         N/A         N/A        N/A        N/A
Residential
Multiunit   Type A      Type B      N/A         Type C     Type D     Type B
Residential
Commercial  Type B      Type D      Type B      N/A        Type C     Type B
Industrial  Type D      Type D      Type D      Type C     N/A        Type C
Public/     Type B      Type C      Type B      Type B     Type C     N/A
Semi-Public
 
   (C)   Required right-of-way landscape area.
      (1)   All unpaved areas within the street right-of-way shall be seeded or
sodded. A developer shall be required to plant a minimum of one canopy tree per
every 40 feet of lineal lot frontage within the village parkway adjacent to the
subject lot. Required trees shall be planted in accordance with the standards
set forth in the Village's Urban Forestry Management Plan and as approved by
the Public Works Director.
   (D)   Species diversity requirements.
      (1)   A minimum of 50% of the landscape elements utilized on a lot that
is less than one-half acre shall be drought and salt tolerant species.
      (2)   A minimum of 60% of the landscape elements utilized on a lot that
is between one-half and five acres shall be drought and salt tolerant species.
Total landscape elements, excluding turf, shall not be comprised of more than
30% of any single species, 50% of any genus, nor 70% of any family.
      (3)   A minimum of 75% of the landscape elements utilized on a lot that
is greater than five acres shall be drought and salt tolerant species. Total
landscape elements, excluding turf, shall not be comprised of more than 5% of
any single species, 10% of any genus, nor 20% of any family.
   (E)   Tree preservation. Preservation of existing quality plant material
within a new development or redevelopment site is encouraged. Such preserved
plant material can fulfill a portion of the landscape requirements set forth
herein. Should the developer propose to maintain existing high-quality
landscape materials to count toward satisfying certain landscape requirements
of the UDO, the Community Development Director may, upon receipt of a landscape
preservation plan, waive certain landscape requirements if mature, high-quality
plant material on a lot are proposed to be preserved. If, upon inspection at
the conclusion of the development, any plant material identified for
preservation has been removed, damaged, or is otherwise in declining condition,
that plant material must be replaced.
   (F)   Installation and maintenance of landscape areas.
      (1)   Immediately upon planting, all landscape shall conform to the
American Standard for Nurserymen, published by the American Association of
Nurserymen, Inc., as revised from time to time.
      (2)   A guaranty, in the form of a letter of credit or performance bond,
approved by the Village Attorney and the Community Development Director, or a
cash deposit made with the Village Treasurer for 20% of the total cost estimate
of landscaping for the construction in January 1 dollars for the current year,
shall be provided by the applicant for all required landscape improvements.
Such guaranty shall be executed before building permits are issued. The 20%
landscaping deposit will be held in escrow for a period of 18 months past the
time of planting and will be refunded on approval of the village, unless
extended by the village per §
16-8-4(O)(10)(c).
      (3)   Dead plant materials shall be replaced within 60 days upon
notification from the village, taking into consideration the season of the
year, and shall be of the same quantity and quality as initially approved. If
the particular project is constructed in more than one phase, the 60-day
timeframe shall apply to each individual phase.
      (4)   All landscape areas shall be maintained in a healthy and weed-free
condition. The ground surface of landscape areas shall be covered with
regularly maintained turf or other types of pervious groundcover or mulch.
      (5)   Any required landscaped area, greater than 150 square feet in area,
shall be provided with an underground irrigation system or be provided with a
portable water supply within 50 feet of said landscaped areas and no irrigation
system shall be required for native plantings associated with stormwater
management facilities. No part of an irrigation system may be installed in
village right-of-way.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 2022-05-21, passed 5-2-2022; Ord. 2023-
07-32, passed 7-17-2023; Ord. 2025-08-31, passed 8-4- 2025)
§ 16-5-7 SCREENING (SEE FIGURE 16-5-7(A)).
   (A)   Trash and recycling receptacles. The following requirements shall
apply to all multiunit residential, non-residential, and mixed use development.
      (1)   Trash and recycling receptacles shall be screened on three sides
with a solid, opaque material with a minimum height of six feet and a maximum
height of eight feet. The use of materials that are not solid, such as slats in
chain-link, shall only be used in the Industrial District.
      (2)   Materials used for screening shall complement the architecture of
the primary structure.
      (3)   Materials and elevations for enclosures that are attached to
buildings shall be integrated into the primary structure.
      (4)   Enclosures attached to buildings shall comply with applicable fire
and building codes.
      (5)   Enclosure openings shall be gated with an opaque material.
      (6)   Enclosure openings shall be kept closed at all times except for
when the receptacle is being accessed by a service truck or person authorized
to place refuse in the enclosure.
      (7)   Property owners shall be responsible for ensuring that trash and
recycling receptacles are placed in the enclosure at all times other than when
it is being emptied by a service truck.
      (8)   Access drives shall be constructed of material and thickness to
accommodate truck loading. Year-round accessibility to the enclosure area for
service trucks shall be maintained by the property owner or tenant.
      (9)   Enclosures shall be of an adequate size to accommodate the expected
number of containers. It is recommended that the enclosure be designed to be
expandable to accommodate additional containers in the future.
      (10)   Enclosure structures shall be designed to protect the walls from
damage by containers. Such protection may be provided by use of barrier
curbing, reinforced masonry walls, bollards, or other similar means.
      (11)   Trash and recycling receptacle enclosures shall not occupy
required parking spaces.
Trash and Recycling Receptacle Screening (16-5-7(A))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4389.png]
 
   (B)   Service yards, loading docks, and truck-parking areas. The following
requirements shall apply to all multiunit residential, commercial, and mixed
use development and shall be equally effective throughout the year.
      (1)   Service yards, loading docks, and truck-parking areas that are
visible from any public right of adjacent residential property shall be
completely screened from public view.
      (2)   Materials used for screening shall be opaque masonry walls, wood or
wood composite board on board fence, landscape hedging, berming, or a
combination thereof.
      (3)   The height of screening materials shall not exceed eight feet with
the exception of landscape materials.
   (C)   Ground and wall mounted mechanical units and process equipment. (See
Figure 16-5-7(C)) The following requirements shall apply to all ground-mounted
mechanical units, including but not limited to generators, air-conditioning
condensers, heat pumps, ventilation units, computer cooling equipment, storage
silos, tanks etc., and any related utility structures and equipment.
      (1)   Locating mechanical units within the principal building is strongly
encouraged in order to minimize exterior visual impacts. Ground/wall mounted
mechanical units and process equipment are prohibited within the front or
exterior side yard, regardless of whether screening is provided, unless
operationally necessary and approved by the Community Development Director.
      (2)   Ground/wall mounted mechanical units and process equipment that are
visible from any public right-of-way or adjacent residential property shall be
screened from public view.
      (3)   Materials used for screening shall be designed to be
architecturally integrated with the building and established so that the area
or element being screened is no more than 20% visible through the screen.
      (4)   Chain-link fence or slats in chain-link fence shall not be used to
meet this requirement.
Ground Mounted Mechanical Unit Screening (16-5-7(C))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4391.png]
 
   (D)   Roof mounted mechanical units. (See
Figure 16-5-7(D)) The following requirements shall apply to all roof mounted
mechanical units, including but not limited to air-conditioning condensers,
heat pumps, ventilation units, computer cooling equipment, etc., and any
related utility structures and equipment which service multiunit residential,
non-residential, or mixed use developments.
      (1)   Locating mechanical units within the principal building is strongly
encouraged in order to minimize exterior visual impacts.
      (2)   Roof mounted mechanical units that are visible from any public
right-of-way or adjacent residential property shall be completely screened from
public view.
      (3)   Materials used for screening shall be architecturally integrated
with the building in the form of a parapet wall and shall be continuous,
permanent, and sound attenuating.
      (4)   Screening shall be required when new equipment is installed and
shall be provided around both new and existing roof mounted mechanical units in
order to provide visual continuity. Normal maintenance of roof mounted
mechanical units shall not trigger the screening requirements.
      (5)   Additional screening may be required due to topographic differences
in the adjoining properties.
Roof Mounted Mechanical Unit Screening (16-5-7(D))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4393.png]
 
   (E)   Drive through. (See
Figure 16-5-7(E)) The following requirements shall apply to all drive throughs
regardless of the use to which it is accessory.
      (1)   Drive aisles of drive throughs must be effectively screened from
view along the public right-of-way and at the edges of sites adjacent to
residential properties to minimize the impact of exterior site lighting,
headlight glare and any menu intercom displays.
      (2)   Screening must be approved during the special use permitting
process, shall be a minimum of six feet in width, and must consist of:
         (a)   An opaque masonry wall or solid fence of high quality material
and design with a minimum height of four feet and a maximum height of six feet;
and
         (b)   Shrubs or native grasses installed every three feet along the
exterior of the wall or fence to provide a softening effect.
Drive Through Screening (16-5-7(E))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4395.png]
 
   (F)   Above-ground service facilities. The following requirements shall
govern the landscaping surrounding above-ground service facilities.
      (1)   A service facility shall be landscaped/screened with a variety of
plant materials that effectively screen the view of the service facility from
adjacent property and public rights-of-way on a year-round basis. In some
cases, such as a service facility sited on a wooded lot, natural growth around
the property perimeter may be a sufficient buffer. Appropriate care and
maintenance of plant material shall be provided to keep such growth alive and
in good condition. Diseased or dead plant material shall be replaced. All trees
shall be maintained until established. All trees not in a vigorous growing
condition after one growing season shall be replaced at the beginning of the
next planting season.
      (2)   In locations where the visual impact of the service facility would
be and is likely to remain minimal for the foreseeable future, the landscaping
requirement may be reduced or waived.
      (3)    The property owner and the service entity shall be jointly and
severally liable for the landscaping and screening obligations set forth in
this section.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-5-8 FENCES.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of a fence is to provide privacy, security,
weather control, aesthetic appearance, boundary definitions, utility (snow
fences) and the like for residential, commercial, industrial, public and semi-
public land uses within the corporate area of the village.
   (B)   Permit required to erect or alter fence. Unless otherwise provided, no
fence or dog run shall be erected or altered until a permit has been secured
from the village by the person desiring to erect or alter the fence or dog run
as detailed in
Article 8. A permit shall be required for alterations to an existing fence if
the alteration impacts 25% or more of the fence sections or posts.
   (C)   General provisions.
      (1)   Location. All fences permitted in this section shall be located:
         (a)   Wholly within property lines;
         (b)   A minimum of one foot from any public sidewalk;
         (c)   A minimum of ten feet from the curb;
         (d)   Outside of a sight triangle;
         (e)   A minimum of 18 inches from an underground utility access
structure; drainage structure; telephone, electric, cable television or gas
pedestal or in any manner that would interfere with the maintenance for these
utilities;
         (f)   In a manner which does not block access to underground utility
access structures or fire hydrants;
         (g)   A minimum of two inches above finished grade if located in a
drainage swale or a drainage easement; and
         (h)   In a manner which does not inhibit the function of storm
drainage structures.
      (2)   Construction standards. Fences shall be designed and constructed to
resist a horizontal wind pressure of not less than 35 pounds per square foot,
in addition to all other forces to which they may be subjected. Fences that are
leaning at an angle of 15 degrees or greater when measured from vertical are
considered dangerous and shall be unlawful.
      (3)   Maintenance. Fences shall be maintained in accordance with the
adopted Property Maintenance Code of the village. Replacement of up to 25% of
the fence shall be permitted without a permit.
   (D)   Fences on lots with residential or institutional uses. (See
Figure 16-5-8(D)) Fences on lots with single-unit detached or single-unit
attached uses shall meet the requirements for each fence area as illustrated in
Figure 16-5-8 (D) below. Barbed wire, razor wire, or makeshift materials such
as plywood shall be prohibited on lots with single-unit detached or single-unit
attached uses. All fences shall be erected so that the posts and all other
supporting members face inward toward the owner's property. The Community
Development Director may waive any regulations to fences for institutional uses
in order to protect public safety and welfare.
      (1)   Fences in front yards.
         (a)   Height. The maximum height of a fence in front yards shall be
three feet.
         (b)   Extension. Fences in front yards shall not extend more than one-
third of the length of any street frontage.
         (c)   Materials. Fences in front yards shall be of non-sight barrier
construction and have a minimum opacity of 50%. Fence materials utilized in
front yards shall complement fence materials utilized in other yards. Permitted
fence materials in front yards shall be only those materials which are designed
and intended for use in fence installations and shall be limited to:
            I.   Vegetation;
            II.   Wood, chemically treated or naturally resistant to decay;
            III.   Wood composites;
            IV.   Aluminum;
            V.   Vinyl/PVC;
            VI.   Wrought iron; and
            VII.   As approved by the Community Development Director.
      (2)   Fences in exterior side, interior side, and/or rear yards.
         (a)   Height. The maximum height of a fence in exterior side, interior
side, and rear yards shall be five feet, except for fences abutting a major
street in §
16-5-2(F)(2)(d) which shall be six feet in height.
         (b)   Materials.
            I.   Fence materials utilized in exterior side yards, interior side
yards, and rear yards shall complement fence materials utilized in other yards.
Permitted fence materials in exterior, interior side and rear yards shall be
only those materials which are designed and intended for use in fence
installations and shall be limited to:
               i.    Masonry;
               ii.    Wood, chemically treated or naturally resistant to decay;
               iii.    Wood composites;
               iv.    Aluminum;
               v.    Vinyl/PVC;
               vi.    Wrought iron;
               vii.    Coated chain link; and
               viii.   As approved by the Community Development Director.
         (c)   Location.
            I.   Fences in exterior side yards shall be located no closer to
the front yard than the established rear face of the primary building on the
lot unless a building entrance is located on the exterior side yard facade in
which case the fence may extend three feet past the entrance.
            II.   Fences in interior side yards and rear yards shall be located
no closer to the front yard than the established front face of the primary
building on the lot or the primary building on the adjacent lot.
      (3)   Fences in exterior side and rear yards of through lots.
         (a)   Height. The maximum height of fences in rear yards of through
lots must be five feet, except for fences on through lots which back up to a
major street as defined in §
16-5-2(F)(2)(d), in which case the fence must be six feet in height. The
maximum height of a fence in exterior side yards of through lots must be five
feet.
         (b)   Location. Fences in exterior side and rear yards of through lots
shall be located in line with the fences of adjacent properties. In the case of
a corner lot in which the rear lot line of the rear yard abuts the side lot
line of the front yard of an adjacent residential interior lot, a structural
fence may be erected in the side yard adjoining a street within the area
between the rear lot line and the rear of the dwelling unit, provided the fence
is placed no nearer to the right-of-way/property line than the required setback
for a side yard adjoining a street for the zoning district or planned
development, as applicable, in which the lot is located. If the only rear
access door to the house is located facing the side yard adjoining a street,
the fence may extend along the side of the house to a point not more than three
feet past the access door and may encroach no more than five feet into this
required setback. The fence setback shall increase back to the required setback
at a point no greater than five feet past the rear of the dwelling unit into
the rear yard.
Fence Yards (16-5-8(D))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4399.png]
 
      (4)    Exemptions for residential properties.
         (a)    In the case of a corner lot in which the rear lot line of the
rear yard abuts the side lot line of the rear yard of an adjacent interior
through lot (
Figure 16-5-8 (D)(4)(i)), a fence may be erected in the side yard adjoining a
street within the area between the rear lot line and the rear of the dwelling
unit. If the only rear access door to the house is located facing the side yard
adjoining a street, the fence may extend along the side of the house to a point
not more than three feet past the access door.
Figure 16-5-8(D)(4)(i)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4586.png]
         (b)   In the case of a corner lot in which the rear lot line of the
rear yard abuts the rear lot line of the rear yard of an adjacent corner lot (
Figure 16-5-8 (D)(4)(ii)), a fence may be erected in the side yard adjoining a
street within the area between the rear lot line and the rear of the dwelling
unit. If the only rear access door to the house is located facing the side yard
adjoining a street, the fence may extend along the side of the house to a point
not more than three feet past the access door.
Figure 16-5-8(D)(4)(ii)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4584.png]
         (c)   In the case of a corner lot in which the rear lot line of the
rear yard abuts a public right-of-way, or a lot line of any lot, public or
private, other than a single-family residential lot (
Figure 16-5-8 (D)(4)(iii)), a fence may be erected in the side yard adjoining a
street within the area between the rear property line and the rear of the
dwelling unit. If the only rear access door to the house is located facing the
side yard adjoining a street, the fence may extend along the side of the house
to a point not more than three feet past the access door.
Figure 16-5-8(D)(4)(iii)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4582.png]
         (d)   In the case of a corner lot in which the rear lot line of the
rear yard abuts the side lot line of the front yard of an adjacent residential
interior lot (
Figure 16-5-8 (D)(4)(iv)), a fence may be erected in the side yard adjoining a
street within the area between the rear lot line and the rear of the dwelling
unit, provided the fence is placed no nearer to the right-of-way/property line
than the required setback for a side yard adjoining a street for the zoning
district or planned development, as applicable, in which the lot is located. If
the only rear access door to the house is located facing the side yard
adjoining a street, the fence may extend along the side of the house to a point
not more than three feet past the access door and may encroach no more than
five feet into this required setback. The fence setback shall increase back to
the required setback at a point no greater than five feet past the rear of the
dwelling unit into the rear yard.
Figure 16-5-8(D)(4)(iv)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4580.png]
         (e)   Privacy fence for patios or decks. The height of a privacy fence
erected adjacent to a patio or deck shall not exceed six feet measured from the
top of the patio or deck.
         (f)   Residential use adjacent to a business or industrial use. A
fence may be erected at a height not to exceed seven feet adjacent and parallel
to a rear or side yard lot line of a property in a residential zoning district
which separates such property from a property in a business or industrial
zoning district, or from a property being used for a nonconforming use which is
permitted in only a business or industrial district.
         (g)   Residential use adjacent to railroad right-of-way. A fence may
be erected at a height not to exceed seven feet adjacent and parallel to a rear
or side yard lot line of a property in a residential zoning district along a
railroad right-of-way.
         (h)   Single-unit residential use adjacent to multiple-unit use. A
fence may be erected at a height not to exceed six feet along a rear or side
yard lot line of a property in a single-unit residential district which abuts a
multiple-unit district property line. Attached single-units do not constitute a
multiple-unit use.
         (i)   Single-unit residential use adjacent to a utility use. A fence
may be erected at a height equal to six feet along a rear or side yard lot line
of a property in a single-unit residential district which abuts a lot line of a
parcel of property improved with a major utility structure and is not used for
dwelling purposes.
         (j)   Single-unit residential use adjacent to a non-residential use. A
fence may be erected at a height not to exceed six feet along a rear or side
yard lot line of a property in a single-unit residential district which abuts a
lot line of a property improved with a habitable building or structure that is
not used for dwelling purposes (such as schools, churches, community centers,
public buildings, etc.).
         (k)   Single-unit residential use adjacent to a public or private
recreational use. A fence may be erected at a height not to exceed six feet
along a rear or side yard line of a property in a single-unit residential
district which abuts a lot line of a property that is not used for dwelling
purposes and is improved with, and has a principal use of, a public or private
recreational use such as, but not limited to, a swimming pool, tennis courts,
basketball courts, golf course, driving range, or mini-golf facility.
         (l)   Single-unit residential use adjacent to public park and/or
stormwater management facilities. A fence may be erected at a height not to
exceed six feet along a rear or side yard lot line of a property in a single
unit residential district which abuts a lot line of a property that is not used
for dwelling purposes and is specifically dedicated for park uses or stormwater
detention/retention use, or a combination thereof. This shall not include land
used solely for pathways, sidewalks or other pedestrian or bicycle paths.
   (E)   Fences on lots with business uses.
      (1)   Height. The maximum height of fences on a lot with business uses
shall not exceed seven feet.
      (2)   Location. Fences on lots with business uses shall be limited to the
rear yard and interior side yard only.
      (3)   Materials. Permitted fence materials on lots with business uses
shall be only those materials which are designed and intended for use in fence
installations and shall be limited to:
         (a)   Masonry;
         (b)   Wood, chemically treated or naturally resistant to decay;
         (c)   Wood composites;
         (d)   Aluminum;
         (e)   Vinyl/PVC;
         (f)   Wrought iron;
         (g)   Coated chain link; and
         (h)   As approved by the Community Development Director.
   (F)   Fences on lots with industrial uses.
      (1)   Height. The maximum height of fences on a lot with industrial uses
shall not exceed eight feet.
      (2)   Location. Fences on lots with industrial uses shall be limited to
the rear yard and interior side yard, except that a fence may be permitted in
the front and exterior side yard if the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The fence is deemed operationally necessary for security,
screening, or other functional requirements of the operation;
         (b)   The fence must be set back at least five feet from the property
lines;
         (c)   The fence does not obstruct required sight distances for
vehicles or pedestrians;
         (d)   Any materials, equipment, storage, or vehicles located behind
the fence shall be effectively screened from the street right-of-way to prevent
visibility from adjacent streets, subject to approval by the Community
Development Director.
      (3)   Materials. Permitted fence materials on lots with industrial uses
shall be only those materials which are designed and intended for use in fence
installations and shall be limited to:
         (a)   Masonry;
         (b)   Wood, chemically treated or naturally resistant to decay;
         (c)   Wood composites;
         (d)   Aluminum;
         (e)   Vinyl/PVC;
         (f)   Wrought iron;
         (g)   Coated chain link; and
         (h)   As approved by the Community Development Director.
      (4)   Barbed wire. Barbed wire may be utilized and shall be limited to a
maximum height of one foot, and a maximum of three strands of wire. The barbed
wire shall not be included in the determination of fence height.
   (G)   Dog runs.
      (1)   There shall be no maximum area for a dog run, except under the
following circumstances:
         (a)   Any dog run with any type of a cover over the top shall be
limited to a maximum area of 100 square feet.
         (b)   A dog run constructed to a height greater than five feet in
accordance with §
16-5-9(G)(4) shall be limited to a maximum area of 100 square feet.
      (2)   Dog runs shall be permitted in the buildable area of the rear yard
only.
      (3)   Dog runs shall not be permitted in any side yard or front yard.
      (4)   The maximum height of a dog run shall be six feet.
      (5)   A dog run constructed for the purpose of providing a secure
enclosure for a dangerous, vicious or ferocious dog shall conform with the
requirements of §
9-3-11 of the Village Code.
   (H)   Swimming pools. All swimming pools, hydromassage, spa and hot tubs
shall meet all applicable Building and Property Maintenance Codes adopted by
the village with respect to fence and safety barrier requirements.
   (I)   Tennis courts. Tennis courts may be totally enclosed with an open-type
fence. The height of the fence shall not exceed 12 feet.
   (J)   Other athletic facilities. All other fence-type enclosures for
athletic facilities shall be approved by the Plan Commission, after a review of
a site plan of the proposed improvement and the surrounding area.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 2021- 08-33, passed 8-2-2021; Ord.
2022-01-04, passed 1-13-2022; Ord. 2022-03-16, passed 3-21-2022; Ord. 2022-05-
21, passed 5-2-2022; Ord. 2022-09-39, passed 9-6-2022; Ord. 2024-06-30, passed
6-3-2024; Ord. 2025-08-31, passed 8-4- 2025)
§ 16-5-9 SOLAR ENERGY COLLECTION SYSTEMS (SEE FIGURE 16-5-9(A)).
   Solar energy collection systems are permitted as an accessory use within all
zoning districts with the following conditions:
   (A)   Building-mounted systems.
      (1)   Location. Building mounted systems may be located on any roof face
of principal or accessory structures. Systems should be flush mounted when
possible.
      (2)   Measuring height. Height is measured from the roof surface on which
the system is mounted to the highest edge of the system.
      (3)   Maximum height. Systems on residential structures shall not extend
beyond 12 inches parallel to the roof surface of a pitched roof or flat roof.
Systems on nonresidential structures shall not extend beyond 36 inches parallel
to the roof surface of a pitched roof or flat roof. Systems on all structures
shall not extend above the highest peak of a pitched roof.
      (4)   Architectural integration. All materials used for racking, mounts,
mounting clamps, and flashings, shall be of a color consistent with the color
of the roof surface to minimize visibility. Equipment associated with the
building-mounted system is prohibited on the front or exterior side of a
building, unless operationally necessary and approved by the Community
Development Director, and shall be a color consistent with the color of the
building.
Building-Mounted Solar Energy System (16-5-9(A))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4401.png]
 
   (B)   Free-standing systems, primary use.
      (1)   Quantity. An unlimited quantity of panels is permitted.
      (2)   Maximum height. Maximum height shall be five feet in height,
measured from the grade at the base of the pole to the highest edge of the
system.
      (3)   Clearance. Minimum clearance between the lowest point of the system
and the surface on which the system is mounted is 12 inches.
      (4)   Setbacks. All parts of the freestanding system shall be set back
ten feet from the side and rear lot lines and shall not be located in a public
utility easement.
   (C)   Free-standing systems, accessory use. (See
Figure 16-5-9(C))
      (1)   Location. Systems are permitted in the rear yard only.
      (2)   Quantity. An unlimited quantity of panels is permitted on all
zoning lots with the exception of any residential zoning lot 30,000 square feet
or less in size, which are limited to a total of 100 square feet in area of
panels.
      (3)   Maximum height. Maximum height shall be five feet in height,
measured from the grade at the base of the pole to the highest edge of the
system.
      (4)   Clearance. Minimum clearance between the lowest point of the system
and the surface on which the system is mounted is 12 inches.
      (5)   Setbacks. All parts of the freestanding system shall be set back
ten feet from the side and rear lot lines and shall not be located in a public
utility easement.
Free-Standing Solar Energy Collection System (16-5-9(C))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4403.png]
 
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 2024-06-30, passed 6-3-2024)
§ 16-5-10 PERMITTED YARD OBSTRUCTIONS (SEE FIGURE 16-5-10(B)).
   (A)   All obstructions must conform to the standards set forth in all
applicable village ordinances and codes, including, but not limited to, the
Building, Fire, Electrical, and Swimming and Spa Codes.
   (B)   On corner lots, within that part of a yard, courtyard or other open
area located with a triangular area of 25 feet from the point of intersection
of the two street rights-of-way lines forming the corner lot, no buildings,
structures or landscape materials herein permitted as obstructions in front
yards or exterior side yards shall be erected, altered or planted which have a
height more than 30 inches above the crown of the street, except that landscape
materials planted in this area shall be maintained in a manner that trees shall
not have branches lower than eight feet and shrubs shall not be higher than 30
inches at maturity.
Sight Triangle (16-5-10(B))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4405.png]
 
   (C)   Yard obstructions, as herein defined, shall be permitted in accordance
with the following standards as contained in
Table 16-5-10(C): Permitted Yard Obstructions, except where such obstructions
would encroach upon the required sight triangle on corner lots or upon
easements, or adversely affect drainage. Unless regulated in the following
table, yard obstructions for properties containing uses other than single-unit
residential shall be permitted in accordance with the regulations set forth
elsewhere in this chapter.
Table 16-5-10(C): Permitted Yard Obstructions
Use                       Additional   Front Exterior Side Side Rear Courtyard
                          Requirements
1  Above-ground service   §           X                   X    X
   facilities.            16-5-6(F)
   Air conditioning
   equipment, which shall §
2  project no more than 4 16-5-7             X             X    X    X
   feet into a required
   yard.
3  Arbors or trellises.                X     X             X    X    X
   Architectural
   features, including
   ordinary projections
   of sills, belt
4  courses, cornices and               X     X             X    X    X
   ornamental features,
   which shall project no
   more than 18 inches
   into a required yard.
   Automobile service
   station fuel pump
   islands, canopies, and
5  air and vacuum                      X     X             X    X    X
   stations provided they
   shall be set back at
   least 35 feet from the
   lot line.
   Awnings or canopies,
   which shall project no
6  more than 3 feet into               X     X             X    X    X
   a required yard or
   courtyard.
   Balconies, which shall
7  project no more than 4              X     X                  X    X
   feet into a required
   yard.
   Chimneys, attached,
   which shall project no
8  more than 24 inches                 X     X             X    X    X
   into a required yard
   or courtyard.
   Clotheslines and
9  laundry-drying                                          X    X
   equipment.
   Eaves and gutters on a
   principal building or
   attached accessory
   building, projecting
   no more than 4 feet
   into a required front
10 yard, required                      X     X             X    X    X
   exterior side yard or
   required rear yard,
   and projecting no more
   than 24 inches into a
   required side yard or
   courtyard.
11 Fallout shelters,                                            X
   attached or detached.
   Flagpoles, which shall
   have a maximum height
   of 25 feet in
   residential districts
12 and shall not exceed                X     X             X    X    X
   the maximum height
   permitted in
   nonresidential
   districts.
13 Garages, detached.     §                                    X
                          16-4-15
14 Gazebos.               §                 X                  X
                          16-4-15
   Growing of farm and    §
15 garden crops in the    16-4-1                           X    X
   open.
   Lawn furniture, such
   as benches, sun dials,
16 bird baths and similar              X     X             X    X    X
   architectural
   features.
17 Ornamental light                    X     X             X    X    X
   standards.
18 Outdoor fireplaces.    §                 X                  X
                          16-4-15
   Patios, decks and
   terraces, open
   (unroofed). Open
   terraces, decks and
   patios are only
   permitted to be
   located in the
   interior side yard of  §
19 a dwelling unit to     16-4-15                          X    X    X
   serve a patio door
   facing the interior
   side yard. Such open
   decks, patios and
   terraces shall project
   no more than 4 feet
   into the required side
   yard.
   Patios, decks and
   terraces, open
   (unroofed), elevated
   greater than 4 feet
   above the average
20 level of the adjoining                                       X    X
   ground. Such elevated
   open decks, patios and
   terraces shall project
   no more than 10 feet
   into a required yard.
21 Playground equipment.  §                 X             X    X
                          16-4-15
   Porches, open, shall
   be permitted to
   project no more than 4
22 feet into the required              X     X
   front yard or the
   required side yard
   adjoining a street.
23 Rainwater collection   §           X     X             X    X    X
   system                 16-4-15
   Seasonal decorations
24 and lighting, which                 X     X             X    X    X
   may be displayed for a
   maximum of 45 days.
   Service walks, allowed
   on residential
   properties without a
   building permit where
   they are no wider than
   4 feet at any point
   and set back a minimum
   of 1 foot from any
   side or rear property
   line. When located
   parallel to a
   driveway, a service
   walk may be located
   adjacent to the
25 driveway and shall not              X     X             X    X    X
   be considered part of
   the driveway for the
   purpose of determining
   driveway width,
   provided that the
   service walk is of a
   different surface
   material or design
   from the driveway.
   Service walks shall
   not be located within
   the public right-of-
   way, except to connect
   to a public sidewalk.
   Sheds, playhouses,
26 greenhouses, and       §                 X             X    X
   similar storage        16-4-15
   buildings.
   Steps, open, subject
   to the following:
   Necessary for access
   to a principal or
   accessory building, or
   necessary as access to
27 the lot from the                    X     X             X    X    X
   street, or located in
   gardens or terraces.
   The steps shall
   project no more than 4
   feet into a required
   side yard.
   Swimming pools,
   detached single-unit.
   Swimming pools located
   on properties other    §
28 than detached single-  16-4-15            X                  X
   unit shall be approved
   in accordance with
   Art. 16-7, Planned
   Development.
   Hot tubs, detached
   single-unit. Hot tubs
   located on properties
29 other than detached    §                 X                  X
   single-unit shall be   16-4-15
   approved in accordance
   with Art. 16-7,
   Planned Development.
   Tennis courts,
   basketball courts or
   other recreational
   facilities, detached
   single-unit. Such
   recreational
30 facilities located on                                        X
   properties other than
   detached single-unit
   shall be approved in
   accordance with Art.
   16-7 Planned
   Development.
   Windows which project
31 no more than 3 feet                 X     X             X    X    X
   into a required yard.
32 Wheelchair Ramps                    X     X             X    X    X
 
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 2021- 08-33, passed 8-2-2021; Ord.
2023-07-32, passed 7-17-2023; Ord. 2025-08-31, passed 8-4-2025)
§ 16-5-11 STREETS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose is to balance the needs of all types of
vehicular, non-motorized and pedestrian traffic and to ensure the safe and
efficient movement of all modes of travel.
   (B)   Applicability. Developments within all zoning districts proposing new
public streets shall be designed per the standards set forth in the Manual of
Design Standards and Construction. All developments adjacent to existing public
streets shall be required to improve adjacent existing streets to comply with
the standards set forth in this section. The Engineering Services Director may
waive this requirement for developments adjacent to existing public streets, or
in lieu of the developer installing the improvements, require a monetary
contribution to the village for future public improvements.
   (C)   Standards. Developers shall be responsible for the design and
construction of street improvements that will be publicly owned. Improvements
shall include but may not be limited to street pavement, curbs and gutters,
sidewalk and shared use paths, stormwater management systems, street lighting,
parkway landscaping and trees, street name signs, traffic control signs,
traffic signals, pavement striping and markings and other safety-related
appurtenances.
   (D)   Street improvements. Street improvements shall be designed and
installed per the standards set forth in the Unified Development Ordinance, the
village's Manual of Design Standards and Construction Specifications of the
Engineering Services Department, and the Illinois Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, latest edition.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-5-12 SIDEWALKS AND SHARED USE PATHS.
   Each lot or parcel of land to be developed shall have a public sidewalk
located within the dedicated right-of-way or an easement and shall be placed
one foot from the property line of abutting lots and along such line as
extended at intersections. If extenuating circumstances prevent sidewalk
construction in the dedicated right-of-way, sidewalk easements shall be granted
to the village.
   (A)   The Engineering Services Director may waive sidewalk requirements upon
determining that a sidewalk cannot be installed based on the current width of
the right-of-way or that it would create a safety hazard.
   (B)   Shared use paths shall be provided when shown in the Comprehensive
Plan and considered when an existing path is within a quarter-mile of the
subdivision boundary. Shared use paths may be required in lieu of sidewalks on
collector or arterial streets.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-5-13 STORMWATER AND FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Adoption of Flood Insurance Rate Map and Flood Insurance Study. The
Flood Insurance Rate Map ("FIRM") and the Flood Insurance Study ("FIS")
approved by the Federal Emergency Management Agency on February 1, 2019 and
adopted by DuPage County, effective August 1, 2019, is hereby adopted by
reference as the FIRM and FIS for the Village of Carol Stream.
   (B)   Adoption of various provisions of the DuPage County Countywide
Stormwater and Floodplain Ordinance. The DuPage County Countywide Stormwater
and Floodplain Ordinance ("DuPage County Ordinance") as contained in Section
15-1-1 et seq. of the DuPage County Code, as amended and approved by the DuPage
County Board effective May 14, 2019, are hereby adopted by reference.
   (C)   Local amendments to the DuPage County Ordinance. The following
sections of the DuPage County Ordinance, as effective within the corporate
boundaries of the village, are hereby amended as follows:
      (1)   Appendix A, Definitions of the DuPage County Ordinance is hereby
amended by revising the language for "Substantial Improvement" as follows:
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a building, during a ten (10) year period,
the cost of which improvement equals or exceeds, individually or in the
aggregate, fifty (50) percent of the fair market value of the building,
determined from the equalized assessed value of the building, before the start
of construction of the improvement or, if the building has been damaged, before
the damage occurred. The term "cost of improvement" includes the value of
volunteer labor and donated materials. The term "cost of improvement" does not,
however, include either (1) any development for improvement of a building to
correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications that have been identified by the local code enforcement official
and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions or (2) any
alteration of a historic building that will not preclude the building's
continued designation as a historic building.
   (D)   Adoption of general certifications. The general certifications,
adopted from time to time by the DuPage County Board in accordance with Section
15-32 of the DuPage County Ordinance, are hereby adopted by reference. The full
text of each general certification is available from the DuPage County
Stormwater Management's website.
   (E)   Minor and major stormwater systems. Minor stormwater systems and major
stormwater systems, as defined in the DuPage County Ordinance, shall be
designed in accordance with the Illinois Department of Transportation's
Drainage Manual, and the materials, installation, and testing shall be in
accordance with the Standard Specifications for Water & Sewer Construction in
Illinois, 8th Edition, except when modified by either this article or by the
village's Manual of Design Standards and Construction Specifications of the
Engineering Services Department.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-5-14 SANITARY SEWERS AND WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Sanitary sewer system. All development shall provide for the
collection of sanitary sewage discharges in accordance with all federal, state
and local regulations; specifically, Chapter 13 Water and Sewer Regulations of
this Code.
      (1)   Sewage systems shall be connected to either the village's combined
waterworks and sewerage system or Wheaton Sanitary Sewer District's sanitary
sewer system. The particular system, and any variations, shall be done in
accordance with the Chicago Metropolitan Agency for Planning's Facility
Planning Area Procedures Manual and Amendment Application.
      (2)   Any proposed connection or extension of the sanitary sewer system
of the Wheaton Sanitary District shall obtain a permit from the same before
approval is provided by the Village Engineer.
      (3)   Any proposed connection or extension of a sanitary sewer system
shall obtain a permit in accordance with 35 Ill. Adm. Code 309.202 before
approval is provided by the Engineering Services Director.
      (4)   The design, materials, installation, and testing of any proposed
connection or extension to the village's sanitary sewer system shall be in
accordance with the 35 Ill. Adm. Code 370 and the Standard Specifications for
Water & Sewer Construction in Illinois, 8th Edition (SSWSC), except when
modified by the following requirements and the village's Manual of Design
Standards and Construction Specifications of the Engineering Services
Department.
      (5)   All sewers that will be privately maintained shall be covered by
the village's "Onsite Utility Maintenance, Right of Entry and Hold Harmless
Agreement".
   (B)   Water distribution system. All development shall provide for a
complete potable water and fire protection distribution system in accordance
with all federal, state and local regulations; specifically, Chapter 13 Water
and Sewer Regulations of this Code.
      (1)   The design, materials, installation, and testing of any proposed
connection or extension to the village's water distribution system shall be in
accordance with the 35 Ill. Adm. Code 653 and the Standard Specifications for
Water & Sewer Construction in Illinois, 8th Edition, except when modified by
the following requirements and the village's Manual of Design Standards and
Construction Specifications of the Engineering Services Department.
         (a)   The proposed distribution system shall be sized to supply all
present and future needs based on the anticipated use of the subject
development.
         (b)   The design shall consider the affect that the anticipated
movement of water will have on the water's age and quality. Additional measures
may be required by the Engineering Services Director in cases where there may
be a concern unless additional information is provided to the satisfaction of
the Engineering Services Director.
         (c)   The minimum depth of bury (cover) shall be five-and-one-half
feet.
         (d)   System, shut-off valves shall be in approved enclosures and
spaced along a main no further than 800 feet apart. Shorter spacing may be
required in order to reduce the number of service lines interrupted when
isolating the water main.
         (e)   No more than three system shut-off valves shall be necessary to
isolate a main.
         (f)   Fire hydrants shall be installed on water mains in the dedicated
right-of-way at maximum intervals of 300 feet in a direct line.
         (g)   Each service line shall be equipped with its own shut-off valve
and enclosure.
      (2)   All water main and its appurtenances (including valves, enclosures,
fire hydrants, etc.) that will be privately maintained shall be covered by the
village's "Onsite Utility Maintenance, Right of Entry and Hold Harmless
Agreement".
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-5-15 OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS AND OVERSIZE DESIGN.
   (A)   Off-site improvements. The developer shall be responsible for the
design and construction of any extensions or modifications to existing
infrastructure, which is situated either in part or entirely outside of the
subdivision's boundary (i.e. "off-site"), when said infrastructure is deemed
inadequate to accommodate the full build-out of the subject development.
   (B)   Oversize design. When the Engineering Services Director deems that a
required land improvement must be larger than that which is necessary to serve
the subject development, the developer shall be responsible for all costs
associated with its design and construction.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-5-16 GAC AND NAC OVERLAY DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Identification of the Gary Avenue Corridor and North Avenue Corridor
Overlay Districts.
      (1)   For any lot that abuts Gary Avenue directly, other than a single-
family residential lot, the lot line abutting the Gary Avenue right-of-way
shall be considered the front lot line.
      (2)   For any lot that abuts North Avenue directly, other than a single-
family residential lot, the lot line abutting the North Avenue right-of-way
shall be considered the front lot line.
   (B)   Uses permitted within the Gary Avenue and North Avenue Overlay
Districts. Uses within the Gary Avenue and North Avenue Overlay Districts shall
be permitted pursuant to the Unified Development Ordinance, as amended, of the
village.
   (C)   Site design.
      (1)   Service areas and drives shall not hinder consumer access, parking,
driveways, walkways or entries. Service areas shall be out of sight from the
public roadways, paved, curbed and internally drained.
      (2)   Pedestrian facilities shall be provided within the site and between
adjacent sites to improve circulation, increase safety, or promote decreased
use of the automobile.
      (3)   Stormwater management facilities and post-construction best
management practices shall be incorporated as an integral part of the project
design to provide attractive open space in order to enhance the overall quality
and aesthetics of a site.
      (4)   All parking lots will be curbed. Ideally, the building will be
slightly elevated on a foundation constructed on the excavated soil to reduce
the visual barrier caused by automobiles adjacent to the roadway and result in
better visibility for the owner/tenant.
   (D)   Required setbacks.
      (1)   Building locations shall reflect consideration for roadway
visibility, existing site features and parking lot circulation.
      (2)   The minimum building setback from the Gary Avenue right-of-way
shall be 60 feet for properties in all zoning districts, except for the
residential districts which shall be as required by the Unified Development
Ordinance. The maximum building setback from the street right-of-way for all
buildings shall be 100 feet; except that, no maximum setback shall apply to
single-family residences.
      (3)   The minimum building setback from the North Avenue right-of-way
shall be 100 feet for properties in all zoning districts.
      (4)   For both the Gary Avenue Corridor and the North Avenue Corridor, no
road or parking lot pavement of any type shall be within the first 30 feet of
property from the right-of-way except for approved entry drives and properties
which were improved with buildings or parking lots at the time of the adoption
of this section, which shall be permitted to encroach no more than ten feet
into this required setback.
      (5)   Required front setbacks shall be improved as Transition Area Type D
as detailed in §
16-5-5(B)(4) of the Unified Development Ordinance.
   (E)   Architectural design. This section provides architectural regulations
and guidelines to the Plan Commission, village staff and owners and occupants
of land along Gary Avenue and North Avenue in order to promote the objectives
of the Gary Avenue and North Avenue Overlay Districts regulations.
      (1)   Multi-tenant, mixed-used developments shall be constructed with
compatible materials and design characteristics including building material,
roof lines, color and landscaping.
      (2)   Each building in B-1, B-2 or B-3 Zoning Districts shall have a
pedestrian arcade or canopy fronting the store for shade, identity and
pedestrian scale. Arcades should visually and/or physically link retail and
office functions within a shopping center to protect pedestrian patrons of the
center.
      (3)   Design improvements shall be compatible with the existing built and
natural environments. New materials shall be the same or complement existing
materials.
      (4)   Monotony shall be avoided within projects and between a project and
its surroundings. Site characteristics to be evaluated for this purpose include
building and plant materials, colors, textures, shapes, massing, rhythms of
building components and details, signage, height, roof-line and setback.
Facades of buildings shall incorporate such design features as changes in
materials, color, fenestration or other significant visual relief provided in a
manner or at intervals in keeping with the size, mass and scale of the building
and its views from public ways.
      (5)   The following materials shall not be used in any front facade or
side facade:
         (a)   Unfinished pre-cast concrete or unfinished poured-in-place
concrete;
         (b)   Fabricated metal, not to include high-quality decorative
architectural material, covering more than 25% of the wall area visible from
any public way; and
      (6)   The following materials shall not be used on any part of a
building:
         (a)   Materials with no proven record of durability or ease of
maintenance in the intended application; and
         (b)   Materials or construction methods used for one aspect or portion
of a project that are significantly lower in quality than those used for the
balance of that project, such that this one aspect or portion is or rapidly
becomes an eyesore or detriment to the project as a whole.
      (7)   Building designs and configurations that tend to catch and
accumulate trash, leaves and dirt shall be avoided. In addition, provisions for
washing and cleaning buildings, other structures and building grounds shall be
considered and included in the design.
      (8)   All building components, such as windows, doors, wall signs, eaves,
soffits and parapets, shall be proportionate to the facade of the building and
shall relate well to one another.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
ARTICLE 6: SIGN STANDARDS
Section
   
16-6-1   Purpose and applicability
   
16-6-2   Applicability to Gary Avenue Corridor and North Avenue Corridor
Overlay Districts
   
16-6-3   Calculating dimensions (See
Figure 16-6-3)
   
16-6-4   Permanent signs requiring a permit
   
16-6-5   Permanent signs not requiring a permit
   
16-6-6   Temporary signs requiring a permit
   
16-6-7   Temporary signs not requiring a permit
   
16-6-8   Prohibited signs
   
16-6-9   General standards for all signs (See
Figure 16-6-9(A))
   
16-6-10   Nonconforming signs
§ 16-6-1 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The Village Board find that signs can obstruct views, distract
motorists, displace alternative uses of land and pose other problems that
legitimately call for regulation. The purpose of this article is to regulate
the height, area, color, illumination, movement, materials, and condition of
signs placed upon property within the village, thus ensuring public safety, the
protection of property values, the character of neighborhoods, the creation of
a convenient, attractive and harmonious community and the encouragement of
economic development.
   (B)   It is the intent of this article to coordinate the type, placement,
size, and scale of signs within the village's zoning districts and for the
following purposes:
      (1)   To promote and protect public health, safety, comfort, morals,
convenience and general welfare through the reasonable and orderly display of
signs;
      (2)   To encourage the physical appearance of signs to be in harmony with
the visual character of the associated street corridor and to be an integral
part of the aesthetic of the site and architectural style of associated
buildings;
      (3)   To protect the general public, pedestrians, and motorists within
the village by assuring the design, location, construction, and maintenance of
signs presents safe navigation through discernable identification, and does not
create distractions, obstructions, or hazards;
      (4)   To protect the public investment in streets and highways by
reducing sign or advertising distractions that may increase traffic accidents;
      (5)   To ensure compatibility of signs with surrounding land uses and the
environment;
      (6)   To foster attractive business areas within the village; and
      (7)   To advance the Village of Carol Stream's implementation of its
Comprehensive Plan.
   (C)   These objectives shall be accomplished through the regulation of the
display, construction, use, and maintenance of signs. However, these
regulations do not entirely eliminate all of the harms that may be created by
the installation and display of signs. Rather, they strike a balance that
preserves ample channels of communication by means of visual display while
reducing and mitigating the negative effects caused by signs. Signs shall be
regulated based on their applicable zoning district. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this article, no sign shall be located in any area or in any
manner so as to create a nuisance or a threat to public health, safety, or
welfare.
   (D)   When a sign type is not specifically listed in the sections devoted to
permitted signs, it shall be assumed that such signs are hereby expressly
prohibited. If it is determined by the Community Development Director that such
sign is similar to and not more objectionable than signs listed, such signs may
then be permitted.
   (E)   From and after the effective date of this article, the use of all
signs and portions of signs erected, altered with respect to height and area or
sign face, added to, or relocated in the village shall be in conformity with
the provisions of this article. Any existing sign not in conformity with the
regulations herein prescribed shall be regarded as non-conforming.
   (F)   The regulations contained within this article are the minimum exercise
of the police power required in order to accomplish the purposes of this
article.
   (G)   The regulations contained within this article shall not be applicable
to signs erected and maintained by the Village of Carol Stream, DuPage County,
or State of Illinois for regulatory purposes.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-6-2 APPLICABILITY TO GARY AVENUE CORRIDOR AND NORTH AVENUE CORRIDOR
OVERLAY DISTRICTS.
   Signs placed on properties located within the Gary Avenue Corridor and North
Avenue Corridor Overlay Districts must comply with the regulations contained in
§§
16-8-3 and
16-8-4(A)(4).
   (A)   Signage for new development shall be included in the Gary Avenue or
North Avenue Corridor Development Plans and shall be subject to review and
approval by the Plan Commission in accordance with the procedures defined in §
16-8-4(A)(4).
   (B)   New or replacement monument signs placed on existing, developed
properties shall be subject to review and approval by the Plan Commission in
accordance with the procedures defined in §
16-8-4(A)(4).
   (C)   New or replacement wall signs placed on existing, developed properties
must meet the purpose and intent of the corridor regulations, as determined by
the Community Development Director, or his or her designee and review by the
Plan Commission shall not be required; however, the applicant may appeal the
decision of the Community Development Director in accordance with §
16-8-3(A)(2).
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-6-3 CALCULATING DIMENSIONS (SEE FIGURE 16-6-3).
   (A)   Sign area. Unless otherwise defined, sign area is determined by the
total area enclosed by a continuous perimeter along the edges of a sign,
including any frame or border. The area of a sign composed of individually-
affixed letters is determined by the total area of the smallest geometric shape
enclosing the letters. A maximum of two geometric shapes may be utilized. The
calculation for a double-faced sign shall be the area of one face only, but
must be the area of the largest side if the two sides are different.
   (B)   Sign height. Sign height is determined by the total distance between
the highest point on a sign to the crown of the street directly opposite the
sign, or from the natural grade level directly below the sign, whichever is
higher.
Calculation of Sign Area (16-6-3)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4461.png]
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-6-4 PERMANENT SIGNS REQUIRING A PERMIT.
   Permanent signs including wall signs, monument signs, awning or canopy
signs, and projecting signs, shall be permitted in the zoning district shown in
Table 16-6-4(B) only after the issuance of a sign permit in accordance with §
16-8-3.
   (A)   Standards for permanent signs requiring a permit.
      (1)   Wall signs. (See
Figure 16-6-4(A)(l))
         (a)   Sign area. The maximum permitted sign area of wall signs in the
B-1, B-2, B-3, O-S, and I Districts shall not exceed 10% of the total area of
the wall face on which the sign is to be located, or 500 square feet, whichever
is less. The maximum permitted sign area of wall signs in the R-l, R-2, R-3,
and R-4 Districts shall not exceed 5% of the total area of the wall face on
which the sign is to be located, or 300 square feet, whichever is less.
         (b)   Height. No wall sign shall protrude above the highest roof line
or above the top of the parapet wall or mansard roof.
         (c)   Projection. Wall signs must not extend more than 12 inches from
the wall of the building or structure to which it is attached and shall
maintain a vertical clearance of seven feet.
         (d)   Number of signs. (See
Figure 16-6-4(A)(1)(d)(iii))
            I.   Single- tenant buildings shall be permitted one wall sign per
lot frontage along a public right-of-way or private access drive.
            II.    Multi-tenant buildings shall be permitted one wall sign per
unit per frontage along a public right-of-way or private access drive.
            III.   A maximum of four secondary wall signs may be authorized for
buildings with lineal frontage in excess of 75 feet by the Community
Development Director provided such additional signage is:
               i.   In keeping with the overall design and architecture of the
building;
               ii.   A minimum of 20 feet from the primary wall sign and other
secondary wall signs;
               iii.   A maximum of 50% of the size of the primary wall sign;
               iv.    Accessory to the building's primary wall sign; and
               v.   The total area of all primary and secondary wall signs does
not exceed the maximum wall sign area as established in §
16-6-4(A)(1)(a).
         (e)   Sign copy. All copy featured on wall signs shall either be
individually affixed, affixed to a raceway, or be printed, etched, or otherwise
incorporated directly on the sign’s backing plate. Raceways and other supports
shall be of a color consistent with the color of the wall upon which the
raceway or other support shall be mounted. Should sign copy be incorporated
onto a sign’s backing plate, it shall be dimensional copy with a minimum depth
of two inches. Box signs or cabinet style wall mounted signs shall be
prohibited.
         (f)   Other provisions.
            I.   No wall sign shall cover any architectural features.
Architectural features shall include but not be limited to, pediment, cornice,
belt course, pier, windows, pilaster, roof, decorative stone or inlay, kick
plate/bulkhead, raised or colored brick pattern, and corbel of the building to
which it is affixed.
            II.   Buildings located on outlots of shopping centers may display
one additional wall sign towards a main parking area of the development and not
oriented towards a street.
            III.   No wall sign shall be affixed to HVAC screening, elevator
overrun, or other features protruding from the roof of the structure.
Wall Signs (16-6-4(A)(1))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4457.png]
 
Wall Signs (16-6-4(A)(1)(d)(III))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4455.png]
 
      (2)   Monument signs. (See
Figure 16-6-4(A)(2))
         (a)   Sign area. The maximum permitted sign area of a monument sign in
the I District shall not exceed 96 square feet. The maximum permitted sign area
of a monument sign in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, B-1, B-2, B-3, and O-S Districts
shall not exceed 72 square feet.
         (b)   Height. The maximum permitted height of a monument sign shall
not exceed six feet, with the exception of properties in the B-3, O-S, and I
Districts and/or in the GAC orNAC Overlay Districts, where the maximum
permitted height of a monument sign shall not exceed ten feet.
         (c)   Number of signs. Only one monument sign shall be permitted per
lot frontage along a public right-of-way.
         (d)   Landscape requirement. A landscape area shall be planted and
maintained around the base of a monument sign, the minimum area of which shall
be equal to the area of the sign.
Monument Signs (16-6-4(A)(2))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4459.png]
 
      (3)   Multitenant monument signs. (See
Figure 16-6-4(A)(3)).
         (a)   Sign area. The maximum permitted sign area of a multitenant
monument sign in the B-1, B-2, O-S, or I Districts shall not exceed 96 square
feet. The maximum permitted sign area of a multitenant monument sign in the B-
3 District shall not exceed 160 square feet.
         (b)   Height. The maximum permitted height of a multitenant monument
sign in the B-1 or B-2 District shall not exceed six feet. The maximum
permitted height of a multitenant monument sign in the B-3 District shall not
exceed 25 feet if the property is five acres in area or larger and contains a
minimum of 25,000 square feet of building floor area. The maximum permitted
height of a multitenant monument sign in the O-S or I District, or in the B-
3 District if the property is less than five acres in area and contains less
than 25,000 square feet of building floor area, shall not exceed ten feet.
         (c)   Number of signs. Only one multitenant monument sign shall be
permitted per lot frontage along a public right-of-way.
         (d)   Landscape requirement. A landscape area shall be planted and
maintained around the base of a monument sign, the minimum area of which shall
be equal to the area of the sign.
   Multitenant Monument Signs 16-6-4(A)(3)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4622.png]
 
      (4)   Awning/canopy signs. (See
Figure 16-6-4(A)(4))
         (a)   Sign area. The maximum permitted sign area of an awning or
canopy sign shall be 50% of the face of the awning or canopy.
         (b)   Other provisions. Awning or canopy signs shall only be permitted
on awnings or canopies extending above ground floor entrances or windows.
Awning or canopy signs may be downlit. Coloring or striping shall be allowed
but shall not be included in the calculation of sign area.
Awning/Canopy Signs (16-6-4(A)(4))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4478.png]
      (5)   Projecting/blade signs. (See
Figure 16-6-4(A)(5))
         (a)   Sign area. The maximum area of a projecting sign shall not
exceed six square feet.
         (b)   Height. Projecting signs shall not extend above the roofline of
the building to which it is attached, or a maximum of 12 feet. A minimum of
eight feet of clearance shall be maintained from the lower edge of the sign
face to grade.
         (c)   Number of signs. One projecting sign shall be permitted per
building or structure, or unit of the building or structure to which it is
attached. A projecting sign and a wall sign may be placed on the same wall. A
projecting sign and an awning or canopy sign shall not be placed on the same
wall.
         (d)   Projection. Projecting signs shall not horizontally project more
than four feet beyond that portion of the building or structure to which it is
attached.
         (e)   Other provisions. Illumination of projecting signs shall not be
permitted. Projecting signs may encroach upon, extend, or project over any
public sidewalk.
Projecting/Blade Signs (16-6-4(A)(5))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4480.png]
 
   (B)   Permitted locations. 
Table 16-6-4(B) identifies the districts where permanent signs that require a
permit may be located. Signs that are marked as a "P" in the table shall be
authorized with a permit, subject to all applicable regulations of this
article.
Table 16-6-4(B) Permitted Location of Permanent Signs Requiring a
Permit
Sign Type Zoning District
          R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 B-1 B-2 B-3 OS I
Table 16-6-4(B) Permitted Location of Permanent Signs Requiring a
Permit
Sign Type            Zoning District
                     R-1  R-2  R-3  R-4  B-1 B-2 B-3 OS I
Wall                 P(1) P(1) P(1) P(1) P   P   P   P  P
Monument             P(2) P(2) P(2) P(2) P   P   P   P  P
Multitenant Monument                     P   P   P   P  P
Awning/Canopy        P(1) P(1) P(1) P(1) P   P   P   P  P
Projecting/Blade                         P
(1) Sign shall only be permitted for nonresidential uses, and
residential subdivision and multiunit complex entrances.
(2) Sign shall only be permitted for non-single-unit detached uses.
 
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021;Ord. 2021-09-45, passed 9-20-2021; Ord. 2023-
03-08, passed 3-20-2023)
§ 16-6-5 PERMANENT SIGNS NOT REQUIRING A PERMIT.
   The following permanent signs may be displayed without a permit, provided
that said signs comply with the requirements of this article and shall be
subject to the provisions for unsafe and unlawful signs. Exempt signs which do
not conform to the given standards are unlawful. Permanent signs shall be
permitted in the zoning district shown in
Table 16-6-5(B) without a permit.
   (A)   Standards for permanent signs not requiring a permit. (See
Figure 16-6-5(A)(1))
      (1)   On-site traffic directional signs. On-site traffic directional
signs are permitted as determined necessary by the Engineering Services
Director to assist in the movement of vehicular traffic on a property for the
purpose of both pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
         (a)   Sign area. The maximum area of an on-site traffic directional
sign shall be six square feet.
         (b)   Height. The maximum height of an on-site traffic directional
sign shall be four feet.
         (c)   Other provisions.
            I.   No part of an on-site traffic directional sign shall be
located within any required landscape areas.
Onsite Traffic Directional Signs (16-6-5(A)(1))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4482.png]
 
      (2)   Window signs, permanent. (See
Figure 16-6-5(A)(2)).
         (a)   Sign area. The maximum area of a permanent window sign shall be
25% of the square footage of the window on which the sign shall be located.
Allowable permanent window sign area shall be considered in aggregate with
allowable temporary window sign area.
         (b)   Other provisions.
            I.   Permanent window signs shall not be illuminated.
            II.   Permanent window signs shall include window film, decals and
clings which are more than 50% opaque and/or contain sign copy.
Window Sign (16-6-5(A)(2))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4484.png]
 
   (B)   Permitted locations. 
Table 16-6-5(B) identifies the district where permanent signs not requiring a
permit may be located. Signs that are marked as a "P" in the table shall be
authorized without a permit, subject to all applicable regulations of this
article.
 
Table 16-6-5(B) Permitted Location of Permanent Signs not Requiring a
Permit
Sign Type                   Zoning District
                            R-1  R-2  R-3  R-4  B-1 B-2 B-3 O-S I
On-Site Traffic Directional P(2) P(2) P(2) P(2) P   P   P   P   P
Window, Permanent           P(1) P(1) P(1) P(1) P   P   P   P   P
(1) Sign shall only be permitted for nonresidential uses,
(2) Sign shall only be permitted for non-single-unit detached uses.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-6-6 TEMPORARY SIGNS REQUIRING A PERMIT.
   Temporary signs including wall mounted banner signs, ground mounted signs,
and feather signs, shall be allowed in the zoning district shown in
Table 16-6-7(B) only after the issuance of a temporary sign permit in
accordance with §
16-8-3. A maximum of four temporary sign permits may be issued each calendar
year. Temporary signs may be displayed on a property for a total of eight weeks
per calendar year. It is the applicant's choice as to how to allocate the eight
weeks of display among the four temporary sign permits that may be issued each
calendar year. A maximum of two temporary signs may be displayed concurrently.
   (A)   Standards for temporary signs requiring a permit.
      (1)   Wall mounted banner signs. (See
Figure 16-6-6(A)(1)).
         (a)   Sign area. The maximum permitted sign area of a wall mounted
banner sign in the B-1, B-2, B-3, O-S, and I Districts shall not exceed 5% of
the total area of the wall face on which the sign shall be located or 200
square feet, whichever is less. The maximum permitted sign area of a banner
sign in the R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 Districts shall not exceed 2.5% of the total
area of the wall face on which the sign shall be located.
         (b)   Height. No wall mounted banner sign shall protrude above the
highest roof line or above the top of the parapet wall or mansard roof.
         (c)   Number of signs. Only one wall mounted banner sign shall be
permitted per building frontage along a public right-of-way or unit of a
building along a public right-of-way.
         (d)   Location. Wall mounted banner signs shall be attached to a
building.
         (e)   Projection. Such signs shall be affixed flat against the
building to which they are mounted.
Wall Mounted Banner Signs (16-6-6(A)(1))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4486.png]
 
      (2)   Ground mounted signs. (See
Figure 16-6-6(A)(2))
         (a)   Sign area. The maximum permitted sign area of a ground mounted
sign shall not exceed 60 square feet.
         (b)   Height. The maximum permitted height of a ground mounted sign
shall be six feet.
         (c)   Number of signs. Only one ground mounted sign shall be permitted
per building frontage along a public right-of-way or unit of a building along a
public right-of-way.
         (d)   Maintenance. Ground mounted signs shall be maintained in good
condition and shall not sag, lie on the ground, or be torn.
         (e)   Other provisions.
            I.   No part of a ground mounted sign shall be located within any
required landscape area.
            II.   Ground mounted signs shall be securely anchored into the
ground or secured in a portable base designed for such function.
Ground Mounted Signs (16-6-6(A)(2))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4488.png]
 
      (3)   Feather signs. (See
Figure 16-6-6(A)(3))
         (a)   Sign area. The maximum area of a feather sign shall be 20 square
feet.
         (b)   Height. The maximum height of a feather sign shall be 12 feet.
         (c)   Number of signs. Only one feather sign shall be permitted per
building frontage along a public right-of-way or unit of a building along a
public right-of-way.
         (d)   Other provisions.
            I.   No part of a feather sign shall be located within any required
landscape area.
            II.   Feather signs shall be securely anchored into the ground or
secured in a portable base designed for such function.
Feather Signs (16-6-6(A)(3))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4490.png]
 
   (B)   Permitted locations. 
Table 16-6-7(B) identifies the district where temporary signs that require a
permit may be located. Signs that are marked as a "P" in the table shall be
authorized with a permit, subject to all applicable regulations of this
article.
 
Table 16-6-7(B) Permitted Location of Temporary Signs Requiring a
Permit
Sign Type             Zoning District
                      R-1  R-2  R-3  R-4  B-1 B-2 B-3 O-S I
Wall Mounted Banner   P(1) P(1) P(1) P(1) P   P   P   P   P
Ground Mounted Banner P(1) P(1) P(1) P(1) P   P   P   P   P
Feather               P(1) P(1) P(1) P(1) P   P   P   P   P
(1) Sign shall only be permitted for multiple-unit and nonresidential
uses.
 
Sidewalk Signs (16-6-7(A)(1))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4492.png]
 
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-6-7 TEMPORARY SIGNS NOT REQUIRING A PERMIT.
   Temporary signs including yard signs and temporary window signs shall be
allowed without a permit in the zoning district shown in Table 16-6-7(C), so
long as the temporary signs conform to the standards set forth in this article.
   (A)   Standards for temporary signs not requiring a permit.
      (1)   A-frame/sandwich board signs. (See
Figure 16-6-7(A)(1)).
         (a)   Sign area. The maximum permitted sign area of an A-frame/
sandwich board sign shall be six square feet.
         (b)   Height. The maximum permitted height of an A-frame/sandwich
board sign shall be three and one-half feet.
         (c)   Number of signs. Only one A-frame/sandwich board sign shall be
permitted per building or unit of a building.
         (d)   Duration of display. Twelve months, renewable on a 12 month
basis.
         (e)   Other provisions.
            I.   No A-frame/sandwich board sign shall be located upon public
property.
            II.   A-frame/sandwich board signs shall be placed in a manner to
preserve a continuous sidewalk width of a minimum of five feet.
            III.   No part of any A-frame/sandwich board sign shall block
points of ingress or egress.
            IV.   A-frame/sandwich board signs shall be placed no more than one
foot from the wall of the building or unit of a building to which the sign is
associated.
            V.   A-frame/sandwich board signs shall be placed no less than
three feet and no more than six feet from the building entrance of the building
or unit of a building to which the sign is associated.
            VI.   The display of A-frame/sandwich board signs shall only be
permitted during the operating hours of the use which the sign is associated.
      (2)   Yard signs. (See
Figure 16-6-7(A)(2)).
         (a)   Sign area. The maximum permitted sign area of a yard sign in the
R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 Districts shall not exceed six square feet.
         (b)   Sign height. The maximum permitted height of yard signs in the
R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4 Districts shall not exceed four feet.
         (c)   Number of signs. Only three yard signs shall be permitted per
lot frontage.
         (d)   Other provisions.
            I.   No part of any yard sign shall be located within any required
landscape area.
            II.   Yard signs shall be securely anchored into the ground or
secured in a portable base designed for such function.
Yard Signs (16-6-7(A)(2))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4494.png]
      (3)   Window signs, temporary. (See
Figure 16-6-7(A)(3)).
         (a)   Sign area. The maximum area of a temporary window sign shall be
25% of the square footage of the window on which the sign shall be located.
Permitted temporary window sign area shall be considered in aggregate with
permitted permanent window sign area.
         (b)   Other provisions.
            I.   In the B-1, B-2, B-3, O-S, and I Districts, neon tubing may
comprise a maximum of 50% of the permitted temporary window sign area.
            II.   Temporary window signs shall include window film, decals and
clings which are more than 50% opaque and/or contain sign copy.
Window Sign (16-6-7(A)(3))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4496.png]
 
   (C)   Permitted locations. 
Table 16-6-7(B) identifies the districts in which temporary signs authorized
without a permit may be located. Signs that are marked as a "P" in the table
shall be authorized without a permit, subject to all applicable regulations of
this article.
 
Table 16-6-7(B) Permitted Location of Temporary Signs Requiring a
Permit
Sign Type              Zoning District
                       R-1  R-2  R-3  R-4  B-1 B-2 B-3 O-S I
A-Frame/Sandwich Board P(1) P(1) P(1) P(1) P   P   P
Yard                   P    P    P    P
Window, Temporary      P    P    P    P    P   P   P   P   P
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-6-8 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided for in this article, the following signs are
expressly prohibited:
      (1)   Any sign which constitutes a traffic hazard by reason of size,
location, design or illumination or which is likely to interfere with, obstruct
the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device;
      (2)   Any sign which is located in the public right-of-way or extends
into the public right-of-way except as permitted under these regulations;
      (3)   Off-premises signs or billboards;
      (4)   Moving, rotating or animated signs;
      (5)   Searchlights;
      (6)   Signs with flashing lights;
      (7)   Trailer-type portable signs, excluding signs placed by the village,
county, or state for public health or safety purposes;
      (8)   Pennants, streamers, spinners, propellors, balloons, inflatable
shapes;
      (9)   Triangular, cube or "V" shaped signs;
      (10)   Signs which emit sounds including but not limited to voice, music
and similar attention getting methods;
      (11)   Signs painted on the surface of any building or structure;
      (12)   Signs containing obscene matter;
      (13)   Signs which obstruct in any manner the use of a driveway, door,
window, fire escape, or access or ingress from any building or structure;
      (14)   Vehicle signs, permanent: no vehicles bearing permanently affixed
signs shall be parked on public right-of-way, public property or private
property for a period which exceeds three days. All vehicles displaying
permanently affixed signs shall be currently licensed, operable, parked on the
property of the business owning or leasing the vehicle, and in the parking area
furthest from any street right-of-way, so as to minimize the effects of
additional signage on the property, except for vehicles actively in transport,
or in the specific act of receiving or delivering merchandise or rendering a
service;
      (15)   Roof signs;
      (16)   Snipe signs;
      (17)   Outline lighting; and
      (18)   Box signs.
   (B)   Signs not listed in §§
16-6-5 through 16-6-8 shall be deemed to be prohibited, even though such signs
are not specifically listed in §
16-6-8(A).
   (C)   Obscenity prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to display
upon any sign or other advertising structure any matter in writing or in
picture, which, considered as a whole, predominantly appeals to prurient
interest, that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex or excretion,
and goes substantially beyond customary limits of candor in description or
representation of such matters.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-6-9 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ALL SIGNS (SEE FIGURE 16-6-9(A)).
   (A)   Placement of signs on lots. No sign shall be placed closer than five
feet to any lot line, excluding multitenant monument signs for properties in
the B-3 District that are at least five acres in area or larger and contain a
minimum of 25,000 square feet of building floor area, which shall be set back a
minimum of 40 feet from any property line, or unless otherwise specific herein.
No sign of any type shall be located within the 25 foot sight triangle of a
corner lot, unless the height of the sign is no more than 30 inches above the
crown of the adjacent road. No sign shall be placed at any location on any lot
in such a manner as to obstruct the view of traffic.
Sign Obstruction (16-6-9(A))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4498.png]
 
   (B)   Illumination.
      (1)   Illumination of all signs shall be diffused or indirect and shall
be so arranged that there will be no direct rays reflecting into the public way
or any. Exposed light bulbs, flashing, blinking or traveling and similar
illumination are not permitted.
      (2)   Direct lighting shall be allowed only on monument signs and so long
as direct rays do not reflect into the public right-of-way or onto residential
lots.
   (C)   Changeable copy. (See
Figure 16-6-9(C-D)). Changeable copy is allowed on monument signs in accordance
with the following.
      (1)   One-third of the sign area must be permanent copy. The area of the
sign devoted to changeable copy shall be part of, not in addition to, the total
permitted sign area.
      (2)   The changeable copy must be protected from unauthorized changes
with a protective covering or other means of securing the sign.
   (D)   Electronic message boards. (See
Figure 16-6-9(C-D)). Electronic message boards are allowed on monument signs in
accordance with the following.
      (1)   One-third of the sign area must be permanent copy.
      (2)   The area of the sign devoted to an electronic message board shall
be part of, not in addition to, the maximum sign area permitted.
      (3)   The electronic message format shall conform to the following
requirements:
         (a)   The message will contain a static message or image only and not
have limited movement, or the appearance of movement, during the static display
period.
         (b)   The transition to change from one message or image to another
shall be instant and not dissolve, fade, scroll, travel, or have similar
transitions so as not to distract motorists.
         (c)   The message shall not change more frequently than once every
four seconds.
      (4)   Electronic message boards must be equipped with a default mechanism
that will stop the messaging or freeze the image in one position when a
malfunction in electronic programming occurs.
      (5)   Electronic message boards shall be equipped with a sensor or other
device that automatically determines the ambient illumination and is programmed
to automatically dim according to light conditions.
      (6)   Electronic message boards shall have a white light correlated color
temperature not exceeding 4,000 degrees Kelvin.
      (7)   Illumination of electronic message boards shall not exceed three-
tenth foot-candles over the ambient lighting conditions when measured at a
distance equal to the square footage of the sign area.
Changeable Copy & Electronic Message Signs (16-6-9(C-D))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4500.png]
 
   (E)   Construction, safety, maintenance, and abandonment. Every sign and all
parts thereof, including framework, supports, background, anchors and wiring
systems shall be constructed and maintained in compliance with the Property
Maintenance, Building, Electrical and Fire Codes of the village.
      (1)   All signs, together with all supports, braces, guys, and anchors
shall be kept in proper repair in accordance with the provisions of this
article. When not galvanized or constructed of approved corrosion resistive,
noncombustible materials, signs shall be painted when necessary to prevent
corrosion, rust, peeling paint, and excessive fading. Failure of owners to keep
signs maintained in good mechanical and visual repair shall be deemed a
violation of this article.
      (2)   It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner or lessee of
every sign to maintain the immediate premises occupied by the sign in a clean
condition, free of rubbish. Any landscaping surrounding the sign shall be kept
trimmed and in good condition. If the landscaping planted at the time of sign
installation dies, said landscaping shall be replaced immediately or as soon as
weather permits.
      (3)   Every existing sign shall be subject to an inspection whenever the
Community Development Director deems it necessary. In the event an inspection
demonstrates that repairs and/or maintenance is necessary, the sign owner shall
be notified and required to complete said repairs and/or maintenance within 30
days of notification. The Community Development Director is authorized to grant
one 30 day extension, if, upon written request, it is deemed necessary due to
extenuating circumstances.
      (4)   If the Community Development Director shall find that any sign is
unsafe or unsecure, or is a threat to the public safety, or was, after the
adoption of this article constructed, erected, or maintained in violation of
the provisions of this article, he or she shall give written notice per the
provisions of this article. Such notice shall specify the manner of which the
sign is unsafe or in violation of this article.
      (5)   Sign copy shall be removed and in the case of a wall sign, the
building facade shall be repaired, by the owner or lessee of the premises upon
which the sign is located when the use which the sign is associated is no
longer conducted on the premises. The sign copy shall be removed within 30 days
of when the use ceases to operate. If the owner or lessee fails to remove the
sign copy, the Community Development Director shall give the owner 30 days
written notice to remove it. Upon failure to comply with the notice, the
Community Development Director may have the sign removed at the owner's
expense.
(Ord. 2015-05-15, passed 5-3-2021;Ord. 2021-09-45, passed 9-20-2021)
§ 16-6-10 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   All permanent signs which are in existence at the time of passage of
this article, but which do not conform to one or more provisions of this
article, shall be deemed to be a legal nonconforming use and may be continued
only as provided in this article.
   (B)   Any sign for which a permit has been lawfully granted prior to the
effective date of this or any subsequent amendment of the sign code and which
does not comply with the provisions of such amendment may nonetheless be
completed in accordance with the approved plans, provided construction of the
sign is started within 90 days after the passage of the ordinance amendment,
and is diligently prosecuted to completion.
   (C)   Whenever a nonconforming sign has been discontinued for a period of
six consecutive months, or whenever there is evident a clear intent on the part
of the owner to abandon a nonconforming sign, such sign shall not, after being
discontinued or abandoned, be reestablished, and the sign thereafter shall be
in conformity with the regulations of this code.
   (D)   Normal maintenance of a nonconforming sign is permitted, including
necessary nonstructural repairs and incidental alterations which do not extend
or intensify the nonconforming features of the sign.
   (E)   No structural alteration, enlargement or extension shall be made in a
nonconforming sign, except in the following situations:
      (1)   When the alteration is required by law; and/or
      (2)   When the alteration will actually result in eliminating the
nonconforming use.
   (F)   If a nonconforming sign is damaged or destroyed by any means to the
extent of 50% or more of its replacement value at that time, the sign can be
rebuilt or used thereafter only for a conforming use and in compliance with the
provisions of the code. In the event the damage or destruction is less than 50%
of its replacement value, based upon prevailing costs, the sign may then be
restored to its original condition and the use may be continued which existed
at the time of such partial destruction until the nonconforming sign is
otherwise abated by the provisions of this code. In either event, restoration
or repair must be started within a period of six months from the date of damage
or destruction, and diligently prosecuted to completion.
   (G)   Existing temporary signs shall expire at the termination date
specified on the permit, but in no case later than six months from the date of
passage of this amendment. New temporary signs shall be allowed only in
conformance with the provisions contained in
Article 16-8 of this UDO.
   (H)   The Community Development Director shall, after the adoption of this
sign code, notify each owner of a nonconforming sign of the manner in which
such sign is not in compliance with this code. He or she shall further notify
each owner of a nonconforming sign that such sign must either be brought into
compliance with this code or removed prior to its required abatement date.
   (I)   Conformity of sign setbacks reduced by the exercise of eminent domain.
Legal, permitted signs which do not meet the requirements of the minimum
setback which conformed to the provisions of this article but were reduced in
setback as a result of the exercise of eminent domain or the threat of the
exercise of eminent domain by a governmental body and which are still located
entirely upon private property and not in the 25 foot sight triangle shall not
be found to be nonconforming with the provisions of this article as a result of
the loss of such territory.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
ARTICLE 7: PLANNED DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Section
   
16-7-1   Intent and purpose
   
16-7-2   General provisions
   
16-7-3   Standards for review
   
16-7-4   Site development allowances
   
16-7-5   Procedures
   
16-7-6   Amendments and alterations to approved planned developments
§ 16-7-1 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the regulations, standards, and criteria contained in this
article is to provide an alternate zoning procedure under which land can be
developed or redeveloped with innovation, imagination, and creative
architectural and site design when sufficiently justified under the provisions
of this article. The objective of the planned development is to encourage a
higher level of design and amenity than is possible to achieve under otherwise
applicable zoning regulations. The end result can be a product which fulfills
the objectives of the Comprehensive Plan and planning policies of the village
while departing from the strict application of the use and bulk regulations as
detailed in
Article 16-3 of the UDO. The planned development is intended to permit and
encourage such flexibility and to accomplish the following purposes:
   (A)   To stimulate creative approaches to the commercial, residential, and
mixed-use development of land.
   (B)   To provide more efficient use of land.
   (C)   To preserve natural features and provide open space areas and
recreation areas in excess of that required under conventional zoning
regulations.
   (D)   To develop new approaches to the living environment through variety in
type, design and layout of buildings, transportation systems, and public
facilities.
   (E)   To unify buildings, structures, and site amenities through design.
   (F)   To promote long-term planning pursuant to the Village of Carol Stream
Comprehensive Plan, which will allow harmonious and compatible land uses or
combination of uses with surrounding areas.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-7-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The following must be approved as a planned development in accordance
with the Unified Development Ordinance:
      (1)   Any mixed-use development.
      (2)   Any development in the B-1 District.
   (B)   Any development other than single-unit detached residential uses may
be approved as a planned development.
   (C)   Each planned development should be presented and judged on its own
merits. It shall not be sufficient to base justification for approval of a
planned development solely upon an already existing planned development except
to the extent such planned development has been approved as part of a
development master plan.
   (D)   The burden of providing evidence and persuasion that any planned
development is necessary and desirable shall rest with the applicant.
   (E)   Uses within a planned development shall be as permitted within the
zoning district in which the planned development is located, with the following
exceptions:
      (1)   Planned developments in the O-S District shall also be entitled to
the uses of the B-2 District.
      (2)   Planned developments in the I District shall also be entitled to
the uses of the B-3 District.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-7-3 STANDARDS FOR REVIEW.
   Approval of development through the use of a planned development, including
modifications to conventional zoning and subdivision regulations, is a
privilege and will be considered by the village only in direct response to the
accrual of tangible benefits from the planned development to the village or the
neighborhood in which it would be located. These benefits shall be in the form
of exceptional amenities, outstanding environmental, landscape, architectural
or site design, or the conservation of special man-made or natural features of
the site. In reviewing an application for a planned development, the Plan
Commission and/or Village Board, as the case may be, shall be required to make
certain findings based on the following standards:
   (A)   Required findings. No application for a planned development shall be
approved unless all the following findings are made about the proposal:
      (1)   Comprehensive plan. The planned development shall conform with the
general planning policies of the village as set forth in the Comprehensive
Plan.
      (2)   Public welfare. The planned development shall be designed, located,
and proposed to be operated and maintained such that it will not impair an
adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property and will not
substantially increase the danger of fire or otherwise endanger the public
health, safety, and welfare.
      (3)   Impact on other property. The planned development shall not be
injurious to the use or enjoyment of other property in the neighborhood for the
purposes permitted in the district, shall not impede the normal and orderly
development and improvement of surrounding properties for uses permitted in the
zoning district, shall not be inconsistent with the community character of the
neighborhood, shall not alter the essential character of the neighborhood and
shall be consistent with the goals, objectives, and policies set forth in the
Comprehensive Plan, and shall not substantially diminish or impair property
values within the neighborhood, or be incompatible with other property in the
immediate vicinity.
      (4)   Impact on public facilities and resources. The planned development
shall be designed such that adequate utilities, road access, drainage, and
other necessary facilities will be provided to serve it. The planned
development shall include such impact donations as required by this UDO.
      (5)   Archaeological, historical or cultural impact. The planned
development shall not substantially adversely impact a known archaeological,
historical, or cultural resource located on or off the parcel(s) proposed for
development.
      (6)   Parking and traffic. The planned development shall have or make
adequate provision to provide necessary parking and ingress and egress to the
proposed use in a manner that minimizes traffic congestion in the public
streets and provides adequate access for emergency vehicles.
      (7)   Adequate buffering. The planned development shall have adequate
landscaping, public open space, and other buffering features to protect uses
within the development and surrounding properties.
      (8)   Performance. The applicant shall demonstrate a successful history
of having completed one or more recent projects of comparable value and
complexity to provide the village with reasonable assurance that, if
authorized, the planned development can be completed according to schedule as
proposed.
      (9)   Signs. Any sign on the site of the planned development shall be in
conformity with or shall satisfy the standards of review for variations as
detailed in
Article 16-8 of the UDO.
   (B)   Modification standards. In addition to the findings required above,
the following standards shall be utilized in considering applications for
modifications of the conventional zoning and subdivision regulations for a
planned development. These standards shall not be regarded as inflexible but
shall be used as a framework by the village to evaluate the quality of the
amenities, benefits to the community, and design and desirability of the
proposal.
      (1)   Integrated design. A planned development shall be laid out and
developed as a unit in accordance with an integrated overall design. This
design shall provide for safe, efficient, convenient, and harmonious grouping
of structures, uses and facilities, and for appropriate relation of space
inside and outside buildings to intended uses and structural features.
      (2)   Beneficial common open space. Any common open space in the planned
development shall be integrated into the overall design. Such spaces shall have
a direct functional or visual relationship to the main building(s) and not be
of isolated or leftover character. The following would not be considered usable
common open space:
         (a)   Areas reserved for the exclusive use or benefit of an individual
tenant or owner.
         (b)   Dedicated streets, alleys, and other public rights-of-way.
         (c)   Vehicular drives and parking, loading and storage areas.
         (d)   Irregular or unusable narrow strips of land.
         (e)   Land areas needed to provide required buffer yards as set forth
in
Article 5 of the Unified Development Ordinance.
      (3)   Location of taller buildings. Taller buildings shall be located
within the planned development in such a way as to dissipate any material
adverse impact on lower buildings within the development or on surrounding
properties, and shall not unreasonably invade the privacy of occupants of such
lower buildings.
      (4)   Functional and mechanical features. Exposed storage areas, refuse
and recycling facilities, exposed machinery installations, service areas, truck
loading areas, utility buildings and structures, and similar accessory areas
and structures shall be included in the design of the planned development and
made as unobtrusive as possible. They shall be subject to such setbacks,
special planting or other screening methods as shall reasonably be required to
prevent their being incongruous with the existing or contemplated environment
and the surrounding properties.
      (5)   Visual and acoustical privacy. The planned development shall
provide reasonable visual and acoustical privacy for each dwelling unit or
tenant space. Fences, walls, barriers, and landscaping shall be used as
appropriate for the protection and aesthetic enhancement of property and the
privacy of its occupants, screening of objectionable view or uses, and
reduction of noises.
      (6)   Energy efficient design. A planned development shall be designed
with consideration given to various methods of site design and building
location, architectural design of individual structures, and landscaping design
capable of reducing energy consumption within the planned development.
      (7)   Landscape conservation and visual enhancement. The existing
landscape and trees in a planned development shall be conserved and enhanced,
as feasible, by minimizing tree and soil removal, and the conservation of
special landscape features such as streams, ponds, groves, and land forms. The
addition or use of larger trees, shrubs, flowers, fountains, ponds, special
paving amenities will be encouraged to the extent of their appropriateness and
usefulness to the planned development and the likelihood of their continued
maintenance.
      (8)   Drives, parking and circulation. Principal vehicular access shall
be from dedicated public streets, and access points shall be designed to
encourage smooth traffic flow with controlled turning movements and minimum
hazards to vehicular or pedestrian traffic. With respect to vehicular and
pedestrian circulation, including walkways, interior drives and parking,
special attention shall be given to location and limiting the number of access
points to the public streets through the use of cross access connections, width
of interior drives and access points, general interior circulation, separation
of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, adequate provision for service by
emergency vehicles, and arrangement of parking areas that are safe and
convenient, and insofar as feasible, do not detract from the design of proposed
buildings and structures and the neighboring properties.
      (9)   Surface water drainage. Special attention shall be given to proper
site surface drainage so that removal of surface waters will not adversely
impact neighboring properties or the public storm drainage system. Surface
water in all paved areas shall be collected at intervals so that it will not
obstruct the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-7-4 SITE DEVELOPMENT ALLOWANCES.
   Notwithstanding any limitations on variations which can be approved as
contained elsewhere in the Unified Development Ordinance, site development
allowances (i.e. deviations from the underlying zoning provisions set forth
outside this article) may be approved provided the applicant specifically
identifies each such site development allowance and demonstrates how each such
site development allowance would be compatible with surrounding development; is
in furtherance of the stated objectives of this article; and is necessary for
proper development of the site.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-7-5 PROCEDURES.
   The following steps are provided to ensure the orderly review of every
planned development application:
   (A)   Pre-filing review and transmittal of application.
      (1)   Conference.
         (a)   A prospective applicant, prior to submitting a formal
application for a planned development, shall meet for a pre-filing conference
with the Community Development Director and any other village employee
designated by the Community Development Director as a member of the Development
Review Team. The purpose of the conference is to help the applicant understand
the Comprehensive Plan, Unified Development Ordinance, site development
allowances, standards by which the application will be evaluated, and the
application requirements, including:
            I.   The names and addresses of the owner of the subject property,
the applicant, and all persons having an ownership or beneficial interest in
the subject property and proposed planned development.
            II.   A statement from the owner of the subject property, if not
the applicant, approving of the filing of the application by the applicant.
            III.   A plat of survey legal description and street address for
the subject property.
            IV.   A statement indicating compliance of the proposed planned
development with the Comprehensive Plan; and evidence of the proposed project's
compliance in specific detail with each of the "Standards for Review" for
planned developments as detailed in §
16-7-3.
            V.   A scaled site plan showing the existing contiguous land uses,
natural topographic features, zoning districts, public thoroughfares,
infrastructure, and utilities.
            VI.   A scaled site plan of the proposed planned development
showing lot area, the required yards and setbacks, contour lines, common space,
and the location, floor area ratio, lot area coverage and heights of buildings
and structures, number of parking spaces and loading areas.
            VII.   Schematic drawings illustrating the design and character of
the building elevations, building materials, building heights, types of
construction, and floor plans of all proposed buildings and structures. The
drawings shall also include a schedule showing the number, type, and floor area
of all uses or combinations of uses, and the floor area of the entire
development.
            VIII.   A landscape plan showing the location, size, character and
composition of vegetation and other material.
            IX.   The substance of covenants, easements, and other restrictions
existing and any to be imposed on the use of land, including common open space,
and buildings or structures.
            X.   A schedule of development showing the approximate date for
beginning and completion of each stage of construction of the planned
development.
            XI.   A professional traffic study acceptable to the Engineering
Services Director showing the proposed traffic circulation pattern within and
in the vicinity of the area of the planned development, including the location
and description of public improvements to be installed, and any streets and
access easements.
            XII.   A professional economic analysis acceptable to the village,
including the following:
               i.   The financial capability of the applicant to complete the
proposed planned development;
               ii.   Evidence of the project's economic viability; and
               iii.   An analysis summarizing the economic impact the proposed
planned development will have upon the village.
            XIII.   Copies of all environmental impact studies as required by
law.
            XIV.   An analysis setting forth the anticipated demand on all
village services.
            XV.   A plan showing off-site utility improvements required to
service the planned development, and a report showing the cost allocations and
funding sources for those improvements.
            XVI.   A site drainage plan for the planned development.
            XVII.   The mailing list and a written summary of comments,
pertaining to the proposed application, from any meeting held pursuant to §16-
7- 5(A)(1)(d) below.
         (b)   After reviewing the planned development process, the applicant
may request a waiver of any application requirement which in the applicant's
judgment should not apply to the proposed planned development. Such request
shall be made in writing prior to the submission of the formal application
documents.
         (c)   All requests for waiver shall be reviewed by the Community
Development Director. A final determination regarding the waiver shall be given
to the prospective applicant following the decision. Denied requests may be
appealed to the Village Board.
         (d)   The applicant, prior to submitting a formal application for a
planned development, may be required to schedule and hold a meeting to discuss
the proposed planned development and its impact on adjoining properties and
area residents. Instances in which a meeting may be required include but are
not limited to projects which propose:
            I.   Deviation from the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Plan
land use recommendation for the property that is the subject of the planned
development;
            II.   Uses which are not listed as allowable uses in the UDO; and
            III.   Projects which include the rezoning of a property.
         (e)   Should the village require such a meeting to be held, the
applicant shall send a written notice of the meeting via mail to all taxpayers
of record for all property within 250 feet of the proposed planned development
not less than 15 days prior to the date of the meeting. A copy of the mailing
list and written summary of comments made at the meeting shall be maintained
and submitted by the applicant with the application.
   (B)   An application for a planned development shall be reviewed and decided
upon following the procedures set for a special use permit as detailed in §
16-8-4(E) and (L).
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 2022-09-39, passed 9-6-2022)
§ 16-7-6 AMENDMENTS AND ALTERATIONS TO APPROVED PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS.
   (A)   A minor change is any change in the site plan or design details of an
approved planned development which is consistent with the standards and
conditions applying to the planned development and which does not alter the
concept or intent of the planned development. A minor change shall not:
      (1)   Increase the planned development's density,
      (2)   Increase the height of buildings,
      (3)   Reduce open space by more than 10%,
      (4)   Modify the proportion of housing types,
      (5)   Change parking areas in a manner inconsistent with this UDO,
      (6)   Limit the installation of ground-mounted utility and mechanical
equipment provided screening is installed per the requirements of this UDO,
      (7)   Prohibit additions to buildings which do not increase gross floor
area by more than 500 square feet,
      (8)   Alter alignment of roads, utilities or drainage,
      (9)   Amend final development agreements, provisions or covenants, or
      (10)   Provide any other change inconsistent with any standard or
condition imposed by the Village Board in approving the planned development.
Said minor change may be approved by the Community Development Director without
obtaining separate approval by the Village Board. In addition, the Village
Board may, after reviewing the request for a major change made by the
applicant, direct the Community Development Director to process the request as
a minor change.
   (B)   A major change is any change in the site plan or design details of an
approved planned development which is not a minor change as detailed in
subsection (A) above and shall require separate review and approval under the
provisions of
Article 16-8 the Unified Development Ordinance.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
ARTICLE 8: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section
   
16-8-1   Administration
   
16-8-2   General application provisions
   
16-8-3   Staff review and action
   
16-8-4   Petition review and approval
   
16-8-5   Enforcement
   
16-8-6   Declarations and associations for common areas and shared facilities
§ 16-8-1 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Community Development Director.
      (1)   Responsibility. The Community Development Director may delegate any
of the duties detailed below to a village officer or employee.
         (a)   The Community Development Director shall not approve any plans
or issue any permits or certificates of occupancy for any excavation or
construction until he or she has inspected such plans in detail and found them
to conform with this Unified Development Ordinance and other applicable
ordinances of the village.
         (b)   This Unified Development Ordinance shall not nullify any private
agreement or covenant; however, where the terms of this Unified Development
Ordinance are more restrictive than a private agreement or covenant, this
Unified Development Ordinance shall control. Where such covenants are known to
the Community Development Director, he or she may, at his or her discretion,
refuse the issuance of a permit for a period of time, during which he or she
may notify the parties known to him or her to be interested in the enforcement
of such covenants.
      (2)   Powers and duties. In administering and enforcing this Unified
Development Ordinance, the Community Development Director shall have the
following powers and duties, which may be delegated to a village officer or
employee.
         (a)   Determine conformance of applications with regulations of this
Unified Development Ordinance;
         (b)   Serve as or designate the village's Zoning Administrator;
         (c)   Issue all certificates of occupancy, and make and maintain
records thereof;
         (d)   Conduct inspections of buildings, structures and use of land to
determine compliance with this Unified Development Ordinance;
         (e)   Issue violation notices that require compliance and advise
suspected violators of the right of appeal;
         (f)   Maintain permanent and current records of the administration and
enforcement of this Unified Development Ordinance, including, but not limited
to, applications and decisions for all amendments, variations, special uses,
and appeals;
         (g)   Inform the Village Manager of all applications initially filed
with the Community Development Director for amendments, appeals, variations,
special uses and other matters under this Unified Development Ordinance upon
which the Village Board, the Zoning Board of Appeals and/or the Plan Commission
are required to act; and
         (h)   Provide such clerical and technical assistance as may be
required by the Zoning Board of Appeals and Plan Commission in the exercise of
their duties.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-8-2 GENERAL APPLICATION PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Authority to file applications. An application for staff review or
petition review under this Unified Development Ordinance must be filed by the
record owner, purchaser under contract from the record owner with signature
from that owner, or the duly authorized agent of the record owner in the
absence of satisfactory proof to the contrary. The village is authorized to
require proof of legal authority to take the action sought. The Village Board,
Plan Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals, and Village Manager may initiate any
action under this Unified Development Ordinance with or without an application
from the property owner.
   (B)   Where to file applications. Applications for staff review or petition
review shall be submitted to the office of the Community Development Director.
   (C)   How to file applications. Applications for staff review or petition
review must be submitted on forms and in such numbers as required by the
Community Development Director.
   (D)   Application fees. Every application must be accompanied by a fee in
such amount as established in
Chapter 6, Article 13 of the Village Code of Ordinances.
   (E)   Incomplete applications. Applications that are not complete, or that
are not accompanied by required fees, will not be processed. No further
processing of the application will occur until the deficiencies are corrected.
Applications will be processed when determined to be complete.
   (F)   Approval authority.
      (1)   Applications for staff review are reviewed and acted upon by
village staff.
      (2)   Applications for petition review are reviewed by village staff and
forwarded to the appropriate decision-making body for final action.
   (G)   Application processing cycles. The Community Development Director,
after consulting with review and decision-making bodies, may provide processing
cycles for applications. Processing cycles may establish:
      (1)   Deadlines for receipt of complete applications.
      (2)   Dates of regular meetings.
      (3)   The scheduling of staff reviews and staff reports on complete
applications.
      (4)   All required steps in the application process (including reviews by
other agencies and public hearings).
      (5)   Required timeframes for action by review and decision-making
bodies.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-8-3 STAFF REVIEW AND ACTION.
   (A)   Community Development Director authority.
      (1)   The Community Development Director shall have the authority to
receive applications and make determinations for the following staff review
procedures:
         (a)   Development staff review;
         (b)   Staff adjustment;
         (c)   Site plan review;
         (d)   Sign permit;
         (e)   Fence permit;
         (f)   Specific use permits:
            I.   Home occupation permit;
            II.   Outdoor dining permit;
            III.   Outdoor special exhibition, show or sales permit;
            IV.   Temporary buildings, structures, or uses.
      (2)   Any applicant who receives a notice of denial as an outcome of a
staff review procedure from the Community Development Director may, within 30
days after receipt of notice of such decision, appeal such decision to the
Zoning Board of Appeals by filing a written notice of appeal with the Community
Development Director with an explanation as to why said decision was not
warranted according to the applicant.
   (B)   Engineering Services Director authority.
      (1)   The Engineering Services Director shall have the authority to
receive applications and make determinations for land improvement permits.
      (2)   Any applicant who receives a notice of denial as an outcome of a
staff review procedure from the Engineering Services Director may, within 30
days after receipt of notice of such decision, appeal such decision to the
Village Board by filing a written notice of appeal with the Engineering
Services Director.
   (C)   Summary of staff review procedures. Table 16-8-3(C) summarizes the
staff review procedures and lists the appropriate boards or commissions for
appeals of staff determinations or decisions.
Table 16-8-3(B) Summary of Staff Review Procedures
                  Community   Engineering       Zoning Board of
Procedure Section Development Services Director Appeals         Village Board
                  Director
Table 16-8-3(B) Summary of Staff Review Procedures
                       Community   Engineering Zoning Board of
Procedure    Section   Development Services    Appeals         Village Board
                       Director    Director
Development  16-8-3(D) [ ]
Staff Review
Staff        16-8-3(E) [ ]
Adjustment
Site Plan    16-8-3(F) [ ]                     *
Review
Sign Permit  16-8-3(G) [ ]                     *
Fence Permit 16-8-3(H) [ ]                     *
Specific Use 16-8-3(I) [ ]                     *
Permit
Land
Improvement  16-8-3(J)             [ ]                         *
Permit
[ ] = Review and Final Determination
* = Appeal Body
 
   (D)   Development staff review.
      (1)   Applicability. The developer of any proposed development, or his/
her agent, may apply to the village for development staff review with the
submission of plans and information reflecting the details of the proposed
development.
      (2)   Application. An application for development staff review shall
include a brief description of the project and any other pertinent project
information.
      (3)   Purpose. The purpose of the development staff review is to offer
the developer initial feedback regarding technical, code-based requirements
pertaining to a potential development.
      (4)   Review. The Community Development Director shall inform the
developer in writing of the extent to which the plans and information as
submitted or as modified do or do not meet the requirements of the UDO and
other village ordinances and policy documents.
   (E)   Staff adjustment.
      (1)   Applicability. The Community Development Director, upon written
request, shall have the authority to authorize a deviation of up to 10% from
any side or rear yard setback requirements set forth in §
16-3-9. The adjustment shall be only granted to the minimum extent necessary,
in order to closely maintain the intent of the dimensional standard.
      (2)   Application. An application for a staff adjustment shall include a
brief description of the requirement to be varied and any other information
necessary to ensure the review criteria are met.
      (3)   Review criteria. To approve an application for a staff adjustment,
the Community Development Director shall make an affirmative finding that the
following review criteria are met:
         (a)   That granting the staff adjustment will ensure the same general
level of land use compatibility as the otherwise applicable standards.
         (b)   That granting the staff adjustment will not materially and
adversely affect adjacent land uses and the physical character of uses in the
immediate vicinity of the proposed development because of inadequate buffering,
screening, setbacks, and other land use considerations.
         (c)   That granting the staff adjustment will be generally consistent
with the purposes and intent of this Unified Development Ordinance.
         (d)   That the staff adjustment granted is the minimum amount
necessary for the application and is not more than 10% of the required
dimension established by the Unified Development Ordinance.
      (4)   Review and action. The Community Development Director shall review
the application and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application
based on the review criteria. A written decision including the findings on the
review criteria shall be rendered to the applicant.
      (5)   Appeals. Appeal of a staff adjustment denied by the Community
Development Director shall not be permitted. Instead, the applicant may choose
to apply for a variation in accordance with §
16-8-4(A)(5).
   (F)   Site plan review.
      (1)   Applicability. Whenever any proposed development meets any of the
following criteria, a site plan review shall be required to certify compliance
with all applicable provisions of this UDO. Development proposed in the Gary
Avenue Corridor or North Avenue Corridor Overlay Districts shall be reviewed as
detailed in §
16-8-4(A)(4)(j). Prior to review and issuance of an application for a building
permit or land improvement permit for developments identified in §
16-8-3(F)(a), an application for site plan review must be submitted and
reviewed by village staff.
         (a)   New development, including the construction or placement of any
new building(s) or expansion of any existing building, in any of the following
general use categories, as found in §
16-3-11:
            I.    Multiple-unit dwellings, complex;
            II.    Commercial retail;
            III.    Commercial service;
            IV.   Eating and drinking;
            V.   Physical health and entertainment;
            VI.   Auto oriented businesses;
            VII.   Office;
            VIII.   Industrial; and
            IX.   Medical uses.
         (b)   The proposed development is subject to off-street parking and
loading improvement requirements, see § 16-5-2.
      (2)   Application. When site plan review is required, such plans shall be
submitted in a form established by the Community Development Director, along
with a nonrefundable fee established by the Village Board. The application
shall contain the following information:
         (a)   Plans at a size of at least 24 inches by 36 inches, and drawn to
scale.
         (b)   Labels for the date, scale, north point, title, name of owner,
and name of person preparing the plan.
         (c)   A map layout showing the location of existing boundary lines and
dimensions of the legal lot(s) or tract of land, any existing easements, and
utility locations. A boundary survey prepared by a professional land surveyor
registered in the State of Illinois may be required by the Community
Development Director.
         (d)   The location, size, and setbacks from the property lines, of all
existing and proposed structures, buildings, and land improvements.
         (e)   A building elevation plan showing the height, facade design, and
exterior building materials and window specifications, for all proposed
buildings.
         (f)   A site plan, showing the location and size of existing and
proposed streets and alleys, sidewalks, parking and loading spaces, ADA
compliant spaces, drive aisles, driveways, vehicular and pedestrian
circulation, cross-access connections, fire lanes, bumpers, curbs, wheel stops.
         (g)   A landscaping plan, showing the location and size of existing
and proposed landscaping areas, including parking lot perimeter area
landscaping, parking lot interior area landscaping, building foundation area
landscaping, transition area landscaping, and curbing, a table of plant types,
sizes, and quantities, installation specifications, irrigation, and maintenance
provisions.
         (h)   The location, size, and type of proposed permanent signs, if
known.
         (i)   A preliminary application for a Stormwater Management
Certification that includes narratives and/or calculations to support the
approximate footprints of any stormwater management facilities and/or special
management areas shown on the site plan. This shall include an Alternatives
Analysis per 15-86.B and/or 15-86.C of the DuPage County Ordinance for every
direct impact to a wetland that is proposed.
      (3)   Review and action. The Community Development Director shall:
         (a)   Review and evaluate the application in accordance with this UDO
and any other relevant information.
         (b)   Advise the applicant, in writing, of required and recommended
revisions to the plans and application.
         (c)   Render an approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the
application, in writing to the applicant. An approval may only be rendered when
the Community Development Director is satisfied that the proposed project
complies with all applicable provisions of this UDO and with all adopted plans
and policy documents of the village. The Director may grant approval with
conditions only to the extent that such conditions specify the actions
necessary to bring the application into compliance with this UDO and adopted
plans and policy documents. Any notice of denial shall state the reason for
denial.
      (4)   Concurrent applications. A special use permit or variation
application may be processed concurrently with the site plan review.
      (5)   Expiration and lapse of approval. The applicant shall have 12
months from the date of a site plan review approval to secure a building permit
or land improvement permit to carry out the proposed improvements. If a
building permit has not been obtained within 12 months of the date of approval,
the approval shall expire. An extension of the time requirements may be
requested in writing and granted by the Community Development Director for good
cause shown by the applicant, provided a written request is filed with the
village at least four weeks prior to the respective deadline.
   (G)   Sign permit.
      (1)   Applicability. A sign permit shall be required prior to the
display, construction, erection, or alteration of a sign, and its structural
components, on any property. All signs must comply with
Article 16-6, and the applicable sections of the building code as adopted by
the village. All electrical installations associated with the erection and
installation of a sign must be done in accordance with the adopted Building and
Electrical Codes.
      (2)   Exemptions. Signs exempt from a permit are listed in §
16-6-5 and 16-6-7.
      (3)   Permanent sign permit application. An application for a permanent
sign permit shall be submitted in a form established by the Community
Development Director. The application shall contain the following information:
         (a)   Name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
         (b)   A site plan drawn to scale showing the location of the building,
structure or lot to which the sign is to be attached or erected, and showing
the position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings and thoroughfares;
         (c)   A plan drawn to scale showing the design of the sign including
dimensions, materials used and method of construction, and means of attachment
to the building or the ground;
         (d)   The name of the person, firm, corporation or association
erecting, altering or relocating such sign;
         (e)   Written consent of the owner of the land on which the sign is to
be erected, altered or relocated; and
         (f)   Any other information as the Community Development Director
shall require in order to show full compliance with this and all other
applicable ordinances of the village.
      (4)   Temporary sign permit applications. An application for a temporary
sign permit shall be submitted in a form established by the Community
Development Director. The application shall contain all information required
for a permanent sign permit application as detailed in §
16-8-3(G)(3).
         (a)   Review and action. The Community Development Director shall
review applications for permanent and temporary sign permits in accordance with
all applicable regulations. The Community Development Director shall render an
approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the application, with reasons
included in writing to the applicant. An approval shall only be rendered when
the Community Development Director is satisfied that the proposed sign complies
with all applicable provisions of this UDO. The Community Development Director
may grant approval with conditions only to the extent that such conditions
specify the actions necessary to bring the application into compliance with
this UDO.
         (b)   Temporary sign permit sticker. Upon approval of a temporary sign
permit application, the Community Development Director shall issue a sticker
which shall be applied to the approved temporary sign. The sticker shall
include the following information:
            I.   Name and contact information of the applicant;
            II.   Permitted location of the sign; and
            III.   Dates between which the sign may be displayed.
   (H)   Fence permit.
      (1)   Applicability. A fence permit shall be required prior to the
construction or installation of any fence. All fences must comply with §
16-5-9, and the applicable sections of the building code as adopted by the
village.
      (2)   Application. An application for a fence permit shall be submitted
in a form established by the Community Development Director. The application
shall contain the following information:
         (a)   A completed fence permit application form;
         (b)   Name, address, and contact information of the applicant;
         (c)   A site plan or plat of survey showing the location on the
property where the fence will be placed and its distance to all applicable
property lines and all other buildings and structures;
         (d)   Plans and specifications of the fence or wall structure,
including all dimensions, materials, an indication of the fence design or
style, and structural supports.
      (3)   Review and action. The Community Development Director shall review
the fence permit application in accordance with all applicable regulations. The
Community Development Director shall render an approval, approval with
conditions, or denial of the application, with reasons included in writing to
the applicant. An approval shall only be rendered when the Community
Development Director is satisfied that the proposed fence complies with all
applicable provisions of this UDO. The Community Development Director may grant
approval with conditions only to the extent that such conditions specify the
actions necessary to bring the application into compliance with this UDO. Any
notice of denial shall state the reason for denial.
      (4)   Expiration and lapse of approval. The applicant shall have 12
months from the date of approval of a fence permit to carry out the proposed
improvements.
   (I)   Specific use permits.
      (1)   Home occupation permit. A home occupation permit shall be required
prior to the initiation or operation of a home occupation and shall be renewed
each year the home occupation is in operation. The permit for a home occupation
does not run with the land, is personal to the applicant, is not transferable
to any other person, and does not apply to any other business of the applicant.
         (a)   Application. An application for a home occupation permit shall
contain the following information:
            I.   Name, address, and contact information of the applicant;
            II.   Description of the home occupation to be conducted;
            III.   Hours of operation; and
            IV.   Evidence and statement of compliance with the standards of §
16-4-16.
         (b)   Review and action. The Community Development Director shall be
responsible for conducting reviews to determine if the proposed home occupation
complies with all applicable regulations and standards. No permit shall be
issued unless the plans and specifications conform in all respects to the
provisions of this UDO and the building code.
      (2)   Outdoor dining permit. An outdoor dining permit shall be required
prior to the installation of outdoor dining areas or the initiation of outdoor
service and must be renewed annually. The permit for outdoor dining does not
run with the land, is personal to the applicant, is not transferable to any
other person or business, and does not apply to any other business of the
applicant.
         (a)   Application. An application for an outdoor dining permit shall
contain the following information:
            I.   Name, address, and contact information of the applicant;
            II.   A site plan shall be submitted showing the location on the
property where the seating area will be located; the layout and quantity of
tables and chairs; dimensions of pedestrian walkways; the height and design
specifications of the fence, if required; and relation to all required
setbacks, parking spaces, and required landscape areas;
            III.   Hours of operation;
            IV.   Evidence and statement of compliance with the outdoor dining
standards in §
16-4-19.
         (b)   Review and action. The Community Development Director shall be
responsible for conducting reviews to determine if the proposed outdoor dining
complies with all applicable regulations and standards, including §
16-4-19 . No permit shall be issued unless the plans and specifications conform
in all respects to the provisions of this UDO.
         (c)   Concurrent applications. A special use permit application may be
processed concurrently with the outdoor dining permit.
      (3)   Temporary building, structure, or use permit. A temporary building,
structure, or use permit shall be required prior to the establishment of a
temporary use of a building, structure, or property that does not otherwise
conform with certain UDO regulations, provided that such use will not have an
adverse impact on surrounding properties or the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and provided that such use shall not exceed a period of six
months.
         (a)   Application. An application for a temporary building, structure,
or use permit shall contain the following information:
            I.   Name, address, and contact information of the applicant;
            II.   A written description of the specific nature of the building,
structure or use, including the proposed duration that the building, structure
or use will be in operation, the purpose of the building, structure or use, the
hours of operation of the building, structure or use, and any other pertinent
information. A written description of the parking and traffic impacts, if any,
and the efforts to mitigate such impacts, should be included;
            III.   A plan showing the entire property and illustrating the
location and dimensions of the temporary building, structure or use. Design
plans or manufacturer's product information may be required depending on the
nature of the use;
            IV.   Written authorization from the owner of the property in which
owner specifically authorizes the temporary building, structure or use. Such
written authorization shall make reference to the specific terms of the use, as
proposed;
            V.   Evidence and statement of compliance with any applicable use
specific provisions of Article 16-4 including but not limited to the outdoor
special exhibition, show, or sales standards in §
16-4-24.
         (b)   Review and action. The Community Development Director shall be
responsible for conducting reviews to determine if the proposed temporary
building, structure, or use complies with all applicable regulations and
standards, including this UDO. No permit shall be issued unless the plans and
specifications conform in all respects to the provisions of this UDO.
         (c)   Village Board approval. Requests for temporary uses in excess of
six months, or those determined by the Community Development Director as having
a potential adverse impact on surrounding properties, shall require Village
Board approval. The Village Board shall only grant approval of such temporary
uses for specified periods of time and subject to such conditions as the
Village Board determines to be appropriate to protect against any potential
adverse impact on surrounding properties and for safeguarding the public
health, safety and general welfare. Such approval shall be considered pursuant
to a public hearing in accordance with the requirements of this section, or may
be considered in accordance with §
1-1-17 if so authorized by the Village Manager.
   (J)   Land improvement permit.
      (1)   Applicability. No person shall construct, alter, relocate, remove
or destroy any off-street parking, off-street loading, off-street lighting,
driveway, sanitary sewer system, water distribution system, minor or major
stormwater system, or sidewalk, nor shall said person perform any earthwork
including clearing, grubbing, topsoil stripping, excavating, filling or
grading, upon any improved or unimproved real estate without first obtaining a
land improvement permit. A land improvement permit shall not be required if any
of the following applies:
         (a)   The activity is directly covered under a Type B, C or E permit
issued from the Community Development Department;
         (b)   The activity meets all the criteria of Section 15-30.A, or any
of the criteria of Section 15-30.B, of the DuPage County Countywide Stormwater
and Floodplain Ordinance as it pertains to Stormwater Management
Certifications.
      (2)   Application. Any person desirous of obtaining a land improvement
permit shall make application therefor to the village on a form provided by the
Engineering Services Department, as well as an application for a Stormwater
Management Certification, if applicable. The form shall be accompanied by any
plans, specifications and calculations required by the Engineering Services
Director to perform the review. Unless waived in writing by the Engineering
Services Director, the supporting documentation shall be signed and sealed by a
professional engineer licensed in the State of Illinois.
      (3)   Review and action. The Engineering Services Director shall review
the application for conformance with the requirements set forth in this UDO and
the Manual of Design Standards and Construction Specifications (DSCS Manual).
The Engineering Services Director shall render an approval, approval with
conditions, or denial of the application in writing to the applicant. Approval
with conditions shall specify the actions necessary to bring the application
and its supporting documentation into conformance. Any notice of denial shall
state the reason for denial. When applicable, a Stormwater Management
Certification shall be approved and issued, either prior or in conjunction
with, the issuance of a land improvement permit.
      (4)   Expiration of permit. Every land improvement permit shall only be
valid for the time period as specified in Article IV Stormwater Management
Certifications, § 15-44 Duration and Revision to Certifications and
Authorizations of the DuPage County Countywide Stormwater and Flood Plain
Ordinance as adopted in Ch. 6, Art. 14 of this code or otherwise become null
and void unless the Engineering Services Director extends the expiration date
as allowed by § 15-44.
      (5)   Revocation of permit. In the event any person holding a land
movement permit pursuant to this article violates the terms of the permit or
conducts or carries on such site development in such a manner as to materially
adversely affect the health, welfare or safety of persons residing or working
in the neighborhood of the property of the permittee or conducts or carries on
such site development so that it is materially detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the
Engineering Services Director shall revoke or suspend the land improvement
permit in accordance with Article XIV Prohibited Acts/Enforcement/Penalties, §
15-107 Revocation and Suspension of Certifications of the DuPage County
Countywide Stormwater and Flood Plain Ordinance as adopted in
Ch. 6, Art. 14 of this code.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 2021- 08-33, passed 8-2-2021)
§ 16-8-4 PETITION REVIEW AND APPROVAL.
   (A)   Staff authority. The Community Development Director shall have the
authority to receive applications for the following petition requests to
village boards or commissions.
      (1)   Courtesy review;
      (2)   Shared parking facility permit;
      (3)   Easement encroachment;
      (4)   Gary Avenue Corridor and North Avenue Corridor Overlay District
Development review;
      (5)   Variation;
      (6)   Special use permit;
      (7)   Text amendment;
      (8)   Map amendment;
      (9)   Subdivision;
      (10)   Annexation.
   (B)   Application review and approval procedures for planned developments
are included in
Article 16-7 of this UDO.
   (C)   If in the opinion of the Community Development Director the village
does not have the requisite expertise on staff to complete the review of any
application for petition review and approval, the Community Development
Director shall notify the applicant before acquiring the services of
consultants and/or attorneys as may be necessary for the proper review and
preparation of the report and/or opinion. The developer shall, within five
calendar days either formally withdraw its application or provide written
acknowledgment that the developer is responsible for all fees incurred by the
village for said review.
   (D)   Summary of petition review procedures. Table 16-8-4(B) summarizes the
petition review procedures and lists the appropriate boards or commissions that
serve as recommending or decision making bodies.
Table 16-8-4(D) Summary of Petition Review Procedures
Procedure Section Community Development Plan Commission/ Zoning Village Board
                  Director              Board of Appeals
Table 16-8-4(D) Summary of Petition Review Procedures
                             Community   Plan Commission/
Procedure          Section   Development Zoning Board of  Village Board
                             Director    Appeals
Courtesy Review    16-8-4(G) Non-binding review only
Shared Parking     16-8-4(H) [ ]                          *
Facility Permit
Public Easement    16-8-4(I) [ ]                          *
Encroachment
Gary Avenue
Corridor and North
Avenue Corridor    16-8-4(J) [ ]         *
Overlay Districts
Development Review
Variation          16-8-4(K) [ ]         X                *
Special Use Permit 16-8-4(L) [ ]         X                *
Text Amendment     16-8-4(M) [ ]         X                *
Map Amendment      16-8-4(N) [ ]         X                *
Subdivision        16-8-4(O) [ ]         X                *
Annexation         16-8-4(P) [ ]                          *
[ ] = Staff Review
X = Recommending Body
* = Decision Making Body
 
   (E)   Recommending and decision-making bodies.
      (1)   Authority for actions.
         (a)   Decision-making bodies may take any action on an application
that is consistent with the notice given, including, but not limited to,
approving the application, approving the application with conditions, or
denying the application. Decision-making bodies must act by simple majority
vote of the body.
         (b)   Decision-making bodies may approve an application for a lower
density of development, a less intensive use, a less intensive zoning district,
increased setbacks, fewer dwelling units, less height, or fewer access points,
than indicated in the notice.
      (2)   Inaction.
         (a)   When a recommending body fails to take action on an application,
the application will be forwarded to the decision-making body with no
recommendation.
         (b)   When a decision-making body fails to take action on an
application that inaction will be deemed a denial of the application.
      (3)   Continuation of public hearings. A public hearing for which proper
notice was given may be continued to a later date without again complying with
the notice requirements, provided that the continuance is set for a date and
time certain and announced at the original public hearing. If the public
hearing is canceled for lack of a quorum or any other reason, notice of the
continuance shall be posted at the main entrance of the building where the
original public hearing was held.
   (F)   Notice requirements.
      (1)   Notice content. All notices required under this UDO shall include
the following content:
         (a)   The date, time, and place of all scheduled public hearings.
         (b)   A description of the property involved in the application by
street address if one exists.
         (c)   A description of the nature, scope, and purpose of the
application.
         (d)   The location and source of additional information on the
application.
      (2)   Notice methods.
         (a)   Published notice. When the provisions of this UDO require that
notice be published in the newspaper, the official responsible for accepting
the application shall ensure that notice is published in a newspaper of general
circulation within the village at least 15 days and no more than 30 days before
the date of the first scheduled public hearing.
         (b)   Written notice. Unless otherwise expressly stated, when the
provisions of this UDO require that written notice be provided, the official
responsible for accepting the application shall provide written notice by first
class mail to all taxpayers of record of the subject property and all taxpayers
of record within 250 feet of the boundaries of the subject property. The notice
shall be deposited in the U.S. mail by the Community Development Department at
least 15 days and no more than 30 days before the first scheduled public
hearing. Ownership information shall be obtained from the most current taxpayer
records.
      (3)   Notice issues. Minor technical deviations from specified notice
requirements shall not be deemed to impair notice where there is actual notice.
When required written notices have been properly addressed and deposited in the
mail, failure of a party to receive such notice shall not invalidate any
subsequent action. In all cases, however, the requirements for the timing of
the notice and for specifying the time, date and place of a hearing and the
general location of the subject property shall be strictly construed. If
questions arise at the hearing regarding the adequacy of notice, the body
hearing the matter shall make a finding regarding whether there was compliance
with the notice requirements of this chapter.
      (4)   Cost of notice. All costs associated with published and written
notice, as required by this UDO, shall be the responsibility of the applicant.
   (G)   Courtesy review.
      (1)   Applicability. Whenever any development is proposed, the developer
or his/her agent may submit to the Community Development Director plans and
information reflecting the detail of the proposed development for inclusion on
the agenda of an upcoming Plan Commission and Village Board meeting.
      (2)   Purpose. The purpose of the courtesy review is to offer the
developer informal feedback regarding a proposed development from the
recommending and decision making bodies.
      (3)   Application. An application for courtesy review shall include a
brief description of the project and any other information necessary to
communicate the scope, intent and impacts of the project.
      (4)   Review. At the Plan Commission and Village Board meetings during
which the developer presents their plans and information, the appointed and
elected officials may offer informal feedback, however no comment offered shall
be construed as a binding decision of the village.
   (H)   Shared parking facility permit.
      (1)   Applicability. Shared parking facilities shall require the review
and approval of the Village Board. The following procedure is established to
ensure the public health, safety, and welfare through the provision of adequate
parking, conservation of land resources, reduction of stormwater runoff,
reduction in heat island effect caused by large paved areas, and improvement of
the appearance of the community.
      (2)   Application. An application for a shared parking facility permit
shall be submitted to the Community Development Director, along with such
accompanying information as is detailed in §
16-5-2(B)(2). Application procedures are described in the General Application
Provisions found in §
16-8-2.
      (3)   Shared parking facility permit review criteria. The Village Board
shall consider the following criteria in their review of shared parking
facility permit applications.
         (a)   That no substantial conflict exists in the peak periods of
parking demand of the uses for which shared parking is proposed, as
demonstrated through the professionally prepared shared parking study.
         (b)   That a shared parking agreement with a term of not less than
five years has been executed between the owners of the property for which
shared parking is proposed, and is on file with the Village Clerk's Office.
      (4)   Review and action. The Village Board may act to approve, approve
with conditions, or deny the shared parking facility permit based on the review
criteria set out in this section.
   (I)   Public easement encroachment.
      (1)   Applicability. Easement encroachment requests shall require review
and approval of the Village Board. The following procedure is established to
ensure the public health, safety, and welfare through the provision of adequate
areas for utilities, safe measures for public services, and general appearance
of the community.
      (2)   Application. An application for an easement encroachment shall be
submitted to the Community Development Director, along with the following
information:
         (a)   Plat of survey with legal description depicting the location of
all structures on the property including setbacks from property lines. The
proposed structure that is the subject of the easement encroachment application
also needs to be shown on the plat, with dimensions provided. The easement that
the applicant is requesting to encroach within must be clearly labeled on the
plat.
         (b)   A cover letter addressed to the Mayor and Village Board
introducing the applicant and explaining the details of the request.
         (c)   If the easement being encroached upon is a utility easement, the
applicant shall provide the village with letters from any and all other
entities that were also afforded rights by said easement in which they indicate
no objection to easement encroachment request.
      (3)   Easement encroachment review criteria. The Village Board shall
consider the following criteria in their review of easement encroachment
applications:
         (a)   The need to encroach within the easement as opposed to placing
the structure elsewhere on the property.
         (b)   That all other options have been considered for the placement of
the structure outside of the easement and rejected as impractical.
      (4)   Review and action. Before the Village Board may act on the easement
encroachment request, the property owner must sign and submit the village's
terms of approval letter. Upon receipt of the signed letter, the Village
Manager shall schedule the review of the request before the Village Board. The
Village Board may act to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the easement
encroachment based on the review criteria set out in this section.
   (J)   Gary Avenue Corridor and North Avenue Corridor Overlay District
Development review (See
Figure 16-8-4(J)).
      (1)   Applicability. Whenever any development is proposed to occur in the
Gary Avenue Corridor or North Avenue Corridor Overlay Districts; a review shall
be required to certify compliance with all applicable provisions of this UDO.
      (2)   Application. Plans shall be submitted in a form established by the
Community Development Director. The application shall contain the following
information, as required by the Community Development Director:
         (a)   Plans at a size of at least 24 inches by 36 inches, and drawn to
scale.
         (b)   Labels for the date, scale, north point, title, name of owner,
and name of person preparing the plan. A map layout showing the location of
existing boundary lines and dimensions of the legal lot(s) or tract of land,
any existing easements, and utility locations. A boundary survey prepared by a
professional land surveyor registered in the State of Illinois may be required
by the Community Development Director.
         (c)   The location, size, and setbacks from the property lines, of all
existing and proposed structures, buildings, and land improvements.
         (d)   A building elevation plan showing the height, facade design, and
exterior building materials and window specifications, for all proposed
buildings.
         (e)   A site plan, showing the location and size of existing and
proposed streets and alleys, sidewalks, parking and loading spaces, ADA
compliant spaces, drive aisles, driveways, vehicular and pedestrian
circulation, cross-access connections, fire lanes, bumpers, curbs, wheel stops.
The site plan shall also include the approximate footprints of stormwater
management facilities (ex. site runoff storage facilities and post-construction
best management practices) and/or special management areas (ex. special flood
hazard areas, wetlands, and buffers) that have the potential to impact the
proposed geometrics of the site.
         (f)   A landscaping plan, showing the location and size of existing
and proposed landscaping areas, including parking lot perimeter area
landscaping, parking lot interior area landscaping, building foundation area
landscaping, transition area landscaping, and curbing, a table of plant types,
sizes, and quantities, installation specifications, irrigation, and maintenance
provisions.
         (g)   A tree preservation plan, including an inventory of all mature,
high-quality trees on the lot.
         (h)   The location, size, and type of proposed permanent signs, if
known.
         (i)   A preliminary application for a Stormwater Management
Certification that includes narratives and/or calculations to support the
approximate footprints of any stormwater management facilities and/or special
management areas shown on the site plan. This shall include an Alternatives
Analysis per 15-86.B and/or 15-86.C of the DuPage County Ordinance for every
direct impact to a wetland that is proposed.
      (3)   Development review criteria. The village intends that all
development and redevelopment within the Gary Avenue Corridor and North Avenue
Corridor Overlay Districts strive toward the highest level of quality in both
design and construction. Nothing in these provisions is intended to stifle
creativity or artistic expression nor is anything in these provisions intended
to impede the economic use of land. Rather, the provisions are intended to
challenge design professionals to create extraordinary sites and buildings
within a context that is unique to the village. The criteria, by which all new
development and redevelopment in the Overlay Districts shall be reviewed is as
follows:
         (a)   Consistency with all provisions of the Comprehensive Plan and
the Gary Avenue Corridor Plan, as amended from time to time; all provisions of
the UDO not specifically overridden by the provisions of this section; and all
other applicable regulations of this Code of Ordinances;
         (b)   Conservation of the natural conditions found on each site where
desirable, through minimized removal of trees and other vegetation and soil,
and through enhancement of natural wetlands;
         (c)   Establishment throughout the Overlay Districts of harmonious
physical and visual relationships among existing, new and proposed buildings,
open spaces, natural terrain and plant materials and placements, with the
intent of creating a unique and unified appearance for the entire Overlay
District;
         (d)   Creation of unified site designs with a sense of internal and
interrelated order, that provide desirable environments for site users and
visitors and the community as a whole and that consider all site elements,
including: the relationship of buildings to surrounding land forms; grading;
architectural design; building, parking and loading-dock orientation; building
height; site furnishings (lighting, outdoor seating, signs and the like);
landscaping (retention of natural vegetation, plant selection and placement,
retention and incorporation of water features, and the like); and other visible
outdoor site elements;
         (e)   Creation of a suitable balance between the amount and
arrangement of open space, landscaping and view protection on the one hand and
the design and function of human-made features on the other. Achieving this
balance should consider screening, buffering, size and orientation of open
spaces, personal and property security, and localized wind and solar effects;
         (f)   Provision of safe and adequate access to and from the site,
giving ample consideration to the location and number of access points from
public streets, the safety and convenience of merging and turning movements,
and traffic management and mitigation; and
         (g)   The provision of interior drives, parking areas, pathways and
walkways adequate to handle anticipated needs and to safely buffer pedestrians
and cyclists from motor vehicles where necessary for the safety and convenience
of on-site vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian circulation.
      (4)   Action by the Plan Commission. The Plan Commission may approve,
approve with conditions, or deny any corridor review request, or may refer it
back to the Community Development Director with recommendations for further
refinement to address specific issues.
      (5)   Concurrent applications. A special use permit or variation
application may be processed concurrently with the corridor review.
      (6)   Right of appeal. The applicant shall have the right to appeal
decisions of the Plan Commission to the Village Board. If an appeal is desired,
the applicant shall submit, in writing, a request for appeal and specific
reasons for the appeal to the Community Development Department. The Village
Board may grant modifications to the requirements contained within the corridor
regulations when the Board can identify specific justification for the
modification. The Village Board shall review the appeal request within 30 days
of its receipt by the Community Development Department unless the applicant
requests an extension.
      (7)   Expiration and lapse of approval. The applicant shall have 12
months from the date of a corridor review approval to secure a building permit
to carry out the proposed improvements. If a building permit has not been
obtained within 12 months of the date of approval, the approval shall lapse and
be of no further effect.
16-8-4(J) Gary Avenue Corridor and North Avenue Corridor Overlay District
Development Procedure
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4544.png]
 
   (K)   Variation (See
Figure 16-8-4(K)).
      (1)   Applicability. The Village Board, by ordinance, upon report of the
Zoning Board of Appeals, and only after a public hearing before the Zoning
Board of Appeals, shall decide variations of the provisions of this UDO in
harmony with its general purpose and intent, and shall vary them only in the
specific instances hereinafter set forth where the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall have made a finding of fact based upon the standards hereinafter
prescribed that there are practical difficulties or particular hardships in the
way of carrying out the strict letter of the regulations of this chapter.
      (2)   Application. An application for a variation shall be submitted to
the Community Development Director, along with such accompanying material as is
required to ensure compliance with the variation review criteria below.
Application procedures are described in the general application provisions
found in §
16-8-2 and include published and mailed notification requirements of §
16-8-4(F)(2)(a) and (b).
      (3)   Use variations prohibited. The Village Board may not grant a use
variation to allow a use not permitted within a specific zoning district.
      (4)   Variation affecting rights-of-way prohibited. The Village Board may
not grant a variation that will allow a use or structure to extend into a
public right-of-way or easement.
      (5)   Variation review criteria. A variation may be granted by the
Village Board upon an affirmative finding by the Zoning Board of Appeals that
all of the following conditions exist:
         (a)   The requested variation arises from conditions that are unique
to the subject property, that are not ordinarily found in the same zoning
district and that are not a result of the owner's intentional action;
         (b)   That the variation to be granted will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood in which the subject property is located, nor
substantially or permanently impair use or development of adjacent property;
         (c)   The strict application of the applicable standards will
constitute an unnecessary physical hardship (not economic hardship) because the
property cannot be used for an otherwise allowed use without coming into
conflict with applicable site development standards;
         (d)   The variation is the minimum action necessary to alleviate the
hardship and observes the spirit of this UDO; and
         (e)   The variation desired will not adversely affect the public
health, safety, or general welfare or impair the purposes or intent of this UDO
or the comprehensive plan.
      (6)   Sign variation review criteria. A variation from the regulations of
Article 6 : Sign Standards may be granted by the Village Board upon an
affirmative finding by the Zoning Board of Appeals that all of the following
conditions exist:
         (a)   The inability to follow the strict standards of the sign code
are due to the unique physical feature of the property;
         (b)   The available locations for adequate signing on the property;
         (c)   The effect of the proposed sign on pedestrian and motor traffic;
         (d)   The proposed variation will not impair visibility to the
adjacent property, create or increase traffic problems, endanger public safety
or otherwise be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other
property or improvements in the area;
         (e)   The cost to the applicant of complying with the sign code as
opposed to the detriment; and
         (f)   The proposed variation is in harmony with the spirit and intent
of this article.
      (7)   Fence variation review criteria. 
         (a)   An exceptional situation related to topography, surroundings or
conditions of a specific piece of property, or by reason of exceptional
narrowness or shallowness;
         (b)   Difficulties or particular hardship in the way of carrying out
the strict letter of the fence standards;
         (c)   The fence will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to
adjacent property;
         (d)   The fence will not endanger the public safety;
         (e)   The fence will not unreasonably diminish or impair established
property values within the surrounding area; and
         (f)   The fence will not impair the public health, safety, comfort,
morals or welfare of the inhabitants of the village.
      (8)   Findings of fact. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall make a
determination on each of the variation review criteria and submit its findings
in the form of a written report to the Village Board. Findings of fact shall be
based on evidence presented at the public hearing on the variation request. A
negative finding of fact on any of the variation review criteria shall require
a negative vote on the application as a whole.
      (9)   Conditions of approval. The Zoning Board of Appeals may recommend
and the Village Board may require such conditions and restrictions upon the
premises benefitted by a variation as may be necessary to comply with the
standards set forth in this section to reduce or minimize the injurious effect
of such variation upon other property in the neighborhood, and to implement the
general purpose and intent of this chapter.
      (10)   Expiration and lapse of approval. The applicant shall have 12
months from the date of approval of a variation to secure any necessary permits
to carry out the proposed improvements. If permits have not been obtained
within 12 months of the date of variation approval, the approved variation
shall lapse.
16-8-4(K) Variation Procedure
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4546.png]
 
   (L)   Special use permit (See
Figure 16-8-4(L)).
      (1)   Applicability. Uses designated under the various zoning districts
herein as special uses are so classified because they may have site-specific
impacts that require the discretionary review of the Plan Commission and
Village Board. The following procedure is established to integrate the special
uses properly with other land uses located in the district. These uses shall be
reviewed and authorized or denied according to the following procedure.
      (2)   Application. An application for a special use permit shall contain
all of the required elements of site plan review as detailed in §
16-8-3(F), and shall include a detailed written description of the operation
and nature of the proposed special use. Site plan review shall occur
concurrently with special use permit review. Application procedures are
described in the general application provisions found in §
16-8-2 and include published and mailed notification requirements of §
16-8-4(F)(2)(a) and (b).
      (3)   Special use permit review criteria. A special use permit may be
recommended by the Plan Commission and granted by the Village Board only upon
finding in the review of the application that all of the following criteria are
met. No special use shall be recommended by the Plan Commission, nor approved
by the Village Board, unless the special use:
         (a)   Is deemed necessary for the public convenience at the location;
         (b)   Will not be unreasonably detrimental to or endanger the public
health, safety, morals, comfort or general welfare;
         (c)   Will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property
in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted, nor substantially
diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood;
         (d)   Will not impede the normal and orderly development and
improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted in the district;
         (e)   Will provide adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and
other important and necessary community facilities; and
         (f)   Will conform to the applicable regulations of the district in
which it is located, except as such regulations may in each instance be
modified by the Village Board.
      (4)   Hearing and recommendation by the Plan Commission. The Plan
Commission shall make a determination on each of the special use permit review
criteria and submit its findings in the form of a written report to the Village
Board. Findings of fact shall be based on evidence presented at the public
hearing on the special use permit request. A negative finding of fact on any of
the six special use permit review criteria shall require a negative vote on the
application as a whole. The Plan Commission may recommend certain conditions
and restrictions, including, but not limited to, those upon the establishment,
location, construction, maintenance and operation of the special use as deemed
necessary for the protection of the public interest and to secure compliance
with the standards and requirements specified herein, or as may be from time to
time required.
      (5)   Action by the Village Board. Prior to granting any special use
permit, the Village Board may stipulate certain conditions and restrictions,
including, but not limited to, those upon the establishment, location,
construction, maintenance and operation of the special use as deemed necessary
for the protection of the public interest and to secure compliance with the
standards and requirements specified herein, or as may be from time to time
required. In all cases in which special use permits are granted, the Village
Board shall require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as
proof that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being, and
will be complied with, including, but not limited to, the acceptance in writing
of the owner of the property involved and other interested parties of the
conditions and guarantees set forth within the UDO. A copy of the ordinance
bearing the acceptance may be recorded in the office of the County Recorder of
DuPage County. The acceptance shall be in approximately the following form:
         (a)   "The undersigned, being the (owner, tenant, contract purchaser,
etc.) of the property legally described in this ordinance do/does hereby
acknowledge that the fulfillment of such conditions and guarantees are
essential to the granting and continuation of the special use allowed herein,
and that but for the imposition of these requirements and guarantees the
special use would not have been granted. The undersigned do/does further
certify and agree that such conditions and guarantees shall equally bind and be
effective against any/all successor/ successors to the interest of the
undersigned. The commitment herein made shall run with the land and shall be
enforceable by the Village of Carol Stream in a court of law or equity in
addition to any and all other remedies available to the village to secure
compliance with the conditions and guarantees agreed to herein."
      (6)   Expiration and lapse of approval. The applicant shall have 12
months from the date of Village Board approval of a special use permit to
secure any necessary permits to carry out the proposed improvements. If permits
have not been obtained within 12 months of the date of approval, the approval
shall lapse. An extension of the time requirements may be granted by the
Village Board, at the Board's sole discretion, for good cause shown by the
applicant, provided a written request is filed with the village at least four
weeks prior to the respective deadline.
      (7)   Successive applications. If an application is not approved, an
application for the same use on the same property shall not be filed for a
period of 12 months from the date of Village Board action, except upon
demonstration of significant/substantive changes that address the factors
leading to previous denial.
      (8)   Amendments to special use permits. Any change which would alter the
provisions, conditions, or restrictions of a special use ordinance or that
would alter the way the use is operated, designated, maintained, or occupied;
or significantly alters the building size or integral changes to the design or
location of site elements, shall require the applicant or owner to apply for an
amendment to the special use permit. The criteria for amendment for an
amendment to a special use permit shall be the same as for the issuance of a
special use permit.
16-8-4(L) Special Use Permit Procedure
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4548.png]
 
   (M)   Text amendment (See
Figure 16-8-4(M)).
      (1)   Applicability. The regulations imposed under the authority of this
UDO may be amended by ordinance in accordance with applicable state law. An
amendment shall be granted or denied by the Village Board only after a public
hearing before the Plan Commission and a report of its findings and
recommendations has thereafter been submitted to the Village Board.
      (2)   Application. Text amendments to the UDO may be proposed by the
Village Board, Plan Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals, or by any resident
or owner of property in the village. Application procedures are described in
the general application provisions found in §
16-8-2 and include published notification requirements of §
16-8-4(F)(2)(a).
      (3)   Text amendment review criteria. The Plan Commission and Village
Board shall consider the following criteria in their review of text amendments.
Proposed text amendments that satisfy all of the review criteria may be
approved.
         (a)   The amendment must be consistent with the purpose of this UDO
and the cillage comprehensive plan.
         (b)   The amendment must not adversely affect the public health,
safety, or general welfare.
         (c)   The amendment is necessary because of changed or changing social
values, new planning concepts, or other social, technological, or economic
conditions in the areas affected.
      (4)   Hearing and recommendation by the Plan Commission. The Plan
Commission shall hold a public hearing on the text amendment, and, at the close
of the public hearing, make a recommendation to the Village Board to approve,
approve with modifications, or deny the amendment based on the review criteria
set out in this section.
      (5)   Action by the Village Board. The Village Board, upon report of the
Plan Commission and without further public hearing, may grant or deny any
proposed amendment in accordance with applicable state law, or may refer it
back to the Plan Commission for further considerations.
16-8-4(M) Text Amendment Procedure
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4550.png]
 
   (N)   Map amendment (See
Figure 16-8-4(N)).
      (1)   Applicability. The district boundaries created under the authority
of this UDO may be amended by ordinance in accordance with applicable state
law. An amendment shall be granted or denied by the Village Board only after a
public hearing before the Plan Commission and a report of its findings and
recommendations has thereafter been submitted to the Village Board.
      (2)   Application. Map amendments to the Official Zoning Map may be
proposed by the Village Board, Plan Commission or Zoning Board of Appeals, or
by the property owner or duly authorized agent or representative of the
property or properties proposed for map amendment. Application procedures are
described in the general application provisions found in §
16-8-2 and include published and mailed notification requirements of §
16-8-4(F)(2)(a) and (b).
      (3)   Map amendment review criteria. The decision to amend the Official
Zoning Map is a matter of legislative discretion that is not controlled by any
single review criterion. In making recommendations and decisions on map
amendments, the Plan Commission and Village Board must consider all relevant
factors, including at minimum the following criteria:
         (a)   The existing uses and zoning of nearby property;
         (b)   The extent to which property values are diminished by the
current zoning classification;
         (c)   The extent to which the diminishment of property value of the
applicant promotes the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the public;
         (d)   The relative gain to the public as opposed to the hardship
imposed upon the individual property owner;
         (e)   The suitability of the subject property for the zoned purposes;
         (f)   The length of time the property has been vacant as zoned
considered in the context of land development in the area;
         (g)   The care with which a community has undertaken to plan its land-
use development; and
         (h)   Community need for the use proposed by the applicant.
      (4)   Hearing and recommendation by the Plan Commission. The Plan
Commission shall hold a public hearing on the map amendment, and, at the close
of the public hearing, make a recommendation to the Village Board to approve or
deny the amendment based on the review criteria set out in this section.
      (5)   Action by the Village Board. The Village Board, upon report of the
Plan Commission and without further public hearing, may grant or deny any
proposed amendment in accordance with applicable state law, or may refer it
back to the Plan Commission for further considerations.
      (6)   Successive applications. If the Village Board denies an application
for a map amendment, an application for the same or any more intensive district
on any portion of the subject tract may not be refiled for a period of 12
months from the date of the Village Board action on the proposed amendment.
16-8-4(N) Map Amendment Procedure
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4552.png]
 
   (O)   Subdivision.
      (1)   Types of subdivision applications.
         (a)   Major subdivision (See
Figure 16-8-4(O)). Any subdivision of land, as defined in this article, that
involves the dedication of rights-of-way or easements for public use, or the
dedication or reservation of land for schools, parks, playgrounds or other
public uses. The review of major subdivisions shall occur in two stages: a
preliminary plat approval as detailed in §
16-9-7 and a final plat approval as detailed in §
16-9-8. The Community Development Director may, at his or her discretion, re-
categorize any major subdivision as a minor subdivision.
            I.   A developer may submit a preliminary plat and final plat
concurrently for review and consideration by the Plan Commission and Village
Board only if he/she elected to participate in the development staff review and
concept plan review detailed in this article.
         (b)   Minor subdivision (See
Figure 16-8-4(O)). Any subdivision of land, as defined in this article, that
does not meet the definition of a major subdivision. The preliminary plat
process shall not be required for minor subdivisions but may be followed when
requested by the developer.
16-8-4(O) Minor Subdivision Procedure
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4554.png]
 
16-8-4(O) Major Subdivision Procedure
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4556.png]
 
      (2)    Preliminary plat approval procedures.
         (a)   Application. An application for preliminary plat approval shall
be made on forms furnished by the Community Development Director and shall
include applicable copies of the supporting data required per §
16-8-4(N)(3).
         (b)   The Community Development Director shall refer the preliminary
plat to the Plan Commission at the next regular meeting of the Plan Commission
after the application is determined to be complete.
         (c)   The Plan Commission shall recommend approval or denial of the
preliminary plat within 90 days from the date of the application or the filing
by the developer of the last item of required supporting data, whichever date
is later, unless such time is extended by mutual consent. The recommendation of
the Plan Commission, in the form of the meeting minutes, shall be forwarded to
the Village Board.
         (d)   If recommended for approval by the Plan Commission, the Village
Board shall approve or deny the preliminary plat within 30 days at a regular
meeting following the action of the Plan Commission.
            I.   Approval of the preliminary plat by the Village Board is
preliminary in nature, indicating only the general acceptability of the layout
as submitted, and shall be effective for a maximum period of one year. The
Village Board may grant an extension upon receipt of a written request from the
developer. The request for the extension shall not require an additional filing
fee or the submittal of additional copies of the approved preliminary plat.
            II.   If the preliminary plat is denied, the Village Board shall
state in writing the reasons for the denial, which shall be filed in the office
of the Village Clerk and a copy shall be sent to the developer.
      (3)   Preliminary plat application; supporting data. The application for
preliminary plat approval shall include plans clearly drawn such that legible
prints can be made therefrom. Plans shall be on 24 inch by 36 inch sheets and
shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or, if the area of the
subdivision is more than 200 acres, one inch equals 200 feet. A digital
submission of Adobe Acrobat (PDF) format files with to-scale sheet sizes of 24
inches by 36 inches shall also be provided. Those plans shall, at a minimum,
include the following supporting data:
         (a)   Preliminary plat.
            I.   Identification and description. Name of the proposed
subdivision or re-subdivision; location by section-township-range or by other
legal description; names and addresses of the owner or developer; and the
person or firm who prepared the plat;
            II.   North arrow and date, including any revisions;
            III.   Boundary line survey;
            IV.   Adjacent lots or parcels, and their owner of record;
            V.   Zoning districts, existing and proposed, including adjacent
lots or parcels;
            VI.   Location and width of existing right-of-way;
            VII.   Location and width of proposed right-of-way for dedication;
            VIII.   Lot lines showing dimensions, lot size (square feet), and
setback lines;
            IX.   Lots for school site(s), park site(s) or other public grounds
to be dedicated, if any;
            X.   Lots to be used for storage of stormwater runoff;
            XI.   Easements, existing and proposed.
         (b)   Preliminary engineering improvement plans and drawings.
            I.   A boundary line survey prepared by a professional land
surveyor licensed in Illinois shall be used as a basis for the plans. The plans
shall either include the surveyor's seal and signature, or provide a separate
plat of survey bearing the same.
            II.   A description and elevation of benchmark(s) used and set. All
design elevations shall be based on the USGS National American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988.
            III.   All horizontal coordinates shall reference the Illinois East
State Plane Coordinate System North American Datum 1983.
            IV.   Location map, with the project site delineated thereon.
            V.   Existing right-of-way and easements, including recording
number.
            VI.   Proposed right-of-way, lot configuration, and easements
indicating the use of the easement.
            VII.   Existing pavement (ex. streets, parking lots, sidewalks,
paths), structures (ex. buildings, retaining walls), and underground features
(ex. septic tanks, wells), as well as vegetation that is to be retained in
place, including all trees with a diameter at breast height of ten inches or
greater.
            VIII.   Proposed streets, parking lots, sidewalks, multi-use paths
and other substantial pavement areas.
            IX.   Location of existing and proposed water, sanitary sewer and
storm sewer systems.
            X.   A topographical map of existing conditions at one foot contour
intervals, including adjacent property ground surface and top of foundation
elevations.
            XI.   Proposed elevations at key high and low points, plus
tentative building footprint(s) and top of foundation elevation(s) adjacent to
stormwater special management areas.
            XII.   Location of any existing and proposed site runoff storage
facilities.
            XIII.   Boundaries of stormwater special management areas,
including wetlands, wetland buffers, floodplain, riparian buffers, and
floodway.
            XIV.   Location of existing and proposed parkway trees.
         (c)   Preliminary stormwater management report.
            I.   Site runoff storage calculations and supporting documentation.
            II.   Offsite tributary area and drainage pattern through the site.
         (d)   Additional documentation.
            I.   A statement that the proposed subdivision (where contiguous)
is or is not to be annexed to the village;
            II.   Draft of protective covenants, whereby the developer proposes
to regulate land use in the subdivision and otherwise protect the proposed
development in accordance with §
16-8-6;
            III.   For all proposed subdivisions larger than five acres in
gross area, and for all planned developments, a written narrative describing
the different land uses proposed to be developed on the subject property. If
residential dwelling units are proposed, the total number of dwelling units,
the distribution of these dwelling units, the number of dwelling units by
building type distributed by bedroom count shall be quantified, as well as the
projected number of people and the estimated number of students to reside
within the dwelling units;
            IV.   For all proposed developments desiring new access onto DuPage
County or IDOT highways, the developer shall concurrently submit such
preliminary plan to the affected agency to coordinate access location and
design. A commitment of the agency toward the viability of the proposed access
shall be required as a condition of approval of the preliminary plat; and
            V.   The owner shall provide documentation that the site has been
inspected by an individual qualified to determine whether or not a wetland is
present on the site. If a wetland is present, then documentation shall be
provided indicating that coordination with the United States Army Corps of
Engineers and any other involved federal or state agency has been initiated.
         (e)   Traffic impact report (if required).
            I.   Required when directly impacting existing traffic signals or
proposing new traffic signals.
            II.   Required when requested by the village or other affected
agencies (ex. IDOT, DuDOT or township).
      (4)   Final plat approval procedures.
         (a)   Application. An application for final plat approval shall be
made on forms furnished by the Community Development Director and include
applicable copies of the supporting data required per §
16-8-4(N)(3). For applications that included a preliminary plat approval, the
final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat and its
supporting documentation, as previously approved by the Village Board.
            I.   The developer may seek to have final approval of a geographic
part or parts of the preliminary plat, and may delay application for approval
of other parts until a later date or dates beyond one year with the approval of
the Village Board. In such case only such part or parts of the plat as have
received final approval shall be recorded.
         (b)   Upon the determination by the Community Development Director
that the developer has supplied all drawings, maps and other documents required
by this article to be furnished in support thereof, and if all such material
meets all village requirements, the Community Development Director shall refer
the application for final plat approval to the Plan Commission at their next
regular meeting.
         (c)   The Plan Commission shall recommend approval or denial of the
application for final plat approval. The recommendation of the Plan Commission,
in the form of the meeting minutes, shall be forwarded to the Village Board and
to the developer.
         (d)   The Village Board shall take action within 60 days from the date
the developer filed the last required document or other plan, or within 60 days
from the date of filing application for final plat approval, whichever date is
later. The applicant and the Village Board may mutually agree to extend the 60
day period.
         (e)   Upon approval by the Village Board, the developer shall provide
the village with one Mylar reproducible print, three contact prints of the
approved final plat, and three copies of the approved supporting documents. The
Village Clerk shall then collect the necessary signatures and shall record the
plat with the County Recorder. The cost of such prints, copies, and recording
fees shall be paid by the developer.
         (f)   If the Village Board fails to act upon the final plat within the
time prescribed, the developer may, after giving 14 days written notice to the
Village Board, file a complaint in the circuit court seeking to compel the
Village Board to take final action and approve or deny the final plat of
subdivision.
         (g)   The provisions set forth in §§
16-9-7 and 16-9-8 shall supersede in its entirety Section 11-12-8 of the
Illinois Municipal Code.
      (5)   Final plat application; supporting data. The application for final
plat approval shall, at a minimum, include the following:
         (a)   Final engineering improvement plans. The plans shall be in
substantial conformance with the preliminary engineering improvement plans, if
applicable, and shall generally follow the village's guidance provided in the
"Manual of Design Standards and Construction Specifications".
            I.   Title sheet.
            II.   Index of sheets.
            III.   Alignment, ties and benchmarks.
            IV.   General notes and specifications.
            V.   Summary of quantities.
            VI.   Master utility plan.
            VII.   Plan and profile sheets.
            VIII.   Utility (i.e. water main, sanitary sewer, storm sewer)
sheets.
            IX.   Sanitary sewer profile sheets.
            X.   Grading plan.
            XI.   Soil erosion and sediment control plan.
            XII.   Intersections.
            XIII.   Traffic signals.
            XIV.   Street lighting & wiring plan.
            XV.   Pavement markings and signing.
            XVI.   Traffic control.
            XVII.   Typical sections.
            XVIII.   Construction details.
            XIX.   Cross sections (if required).
         (b)   Stormwater Management Certification. An application for a
Stormwater Management Certification and all supporting documentation required
by the DuPage County Stormwater and Flood Plain Ordinance, as adopted by §
16-5-7, in a format acceptable to the Engineering Services Director.
         (c)   Final plat. The final plat shall be accurately drawn in black
waterproof drawing ink on sheets not to exceed 36 inches wide by 48 inches long
and shall be at a scale of 100 feet equal to one inch. Where necessary, the
plat may be on several sheets accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire
subdivision. The final plat shall show the following:
            I.   Identification and description:
               i.   Name of subdivision or development.
               ii.   Location by section, township and range, or by other legal
description.
               iii.   Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider or developer
of the subdivision or development and the person or firm who prepared the plat.
               iv.   Graphic scale - not to exceed one inch equals 100 feet.
               v.   North point.
               vi.   Date.
            II.   Delineation of final plat:
               i.   Boundary of plat, based on an accurate traverse, with
angles and lineal dimensions.
               ii.   Exact location, width and name of all streets within and
adjoining the plat, and the exact location and widths of all crosswalks
easements for right-of-way provided for public services and utilities.
               iii.   True angles and distances to the nearest established
street lines or official monuments (not less than three), which shall be
accurately described in the plat by location, size and elevation.
               iv.   Municipal, township, county or section lines accurately
correlated to the lines of the subdivision or development by distances and
angles.
               v.   Radii, internal angles, curvature points, tangent bearings,
and lengths of all acres.
               vi.   All lot lines, with accurate dimensions in feet and
hundredths, and identification number of each lot and block.
               vii.   Accurate location, elevation and description of permanent
monuments.
               viii.   Accurate outlines and legal description of any areas to
be dedicated or reserved for public use, with the purposes indicated thereon,
and of any area to be reserved by deed covenant for common uses of all property
owners.
               ix.   Proposed building setback lines on all lots and other
sites accurately shown with dimension.
               x.   Proposed street address numbers, according to village
numbering system for each subdivided lot or parcel.
            III.   Certificates. The certificates listed below shall appear on
the final plat. The content of each certificate is detailed in Engineering
Services' "Manual of Design Standards and Construction Specifications".
               i.   Plan Commission.
               ii.   Engineering Services Director.
               iii.   Village Finance Director.
               iv.   Village Clerk.
               v.   DuPage County Highway Department. (Only for developments
with access onto county highways.)
               vi.   Illinois Department of Transportation. (Only for
developments adjacent to or having access onto state highways.)
               vii.   County certificates and plats. For areas within one and
one-half miles of the village.
               viii.   Owner's certificate.
               ix.   Notary certificate.
               x.   Professional land surveyor's certificate.
               xi.   Certification concerning drainage.
            IV.   Accompanying documents.
               i.   Protective covenants in accordance with §
16-8-6 which meet the approval of the Village Board shall be lettered on the
final plat or attached thereto as an accompanying document.
               ii.   Certification by a registered Illinois Land Surveyor or
Engineer certifying to accuracy of the survey and plat.
               iii.   Certification showing that all taxes and special
assessments due on the property to be subdivided have been paid in full.
               iv.   Statement by owner dedicating streets, rights-of-way and
any sites for public use, plus any conveyances running with the land.
               v.   Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements, or other
dedication as may be required by the Plan Commission or Village Board or
otherwise by law in the enforcement of these regulations and recordation of
plats.
      (6)   Compliance required for issuance of building permit. No building
permit shall be issued for construction on any lot created through the final
plat approval process until such final plat has been recorded.
      (7)   Security for public improvements.
         (a)   No work shall be started upon any development until the
developer has posted security to ensure proper completion of the public
improvements. The security shall be in an amount equal to not less than 110% of
the estimated cost of the public improvements as approved by the Engineering
Services Director and conditioned on the completion and acceptance by the
Engineering Services Director of all public improvements within two years from
the date that the security has been posted with the village. The village may
also require separate security sufficient to ensure completion of all lot
improvements on individual lots as required herein.
         (b)   The security required herein shall be secured by either:
            I.   A cash escrow account at a federally insured financial
institution with resources of at least $35,000,000 under the provisions of an
escrow agreement approved in form by the Village Attorney, in the amount
required herein and subject to draw by the village to install the public
improvements or pay such costs as are necessary to properly complete the public
improvements as required herein; or
            II.   A non-declining, irrevocable letter of credit in such form as
provided by the Village Attorney, issued by a federally insured financial
institution with resources of at least $35,000,000 in the amount required
herein and subject to draw by the village to install the public improvements or
pay such costs as are necessary to properly complete the improvements as
required herein. This letter shall provide that funds can be drawn only by the
village; or
            III.   A surety bond provided in form by the Village Attorney from
an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, in the amount
required herein and subject to draw by the village to install the public
improvements or pay such costs as are necessary to properly complete the public
improvements as required herein.
         (c)   An underestimation of the costs to complete any public
improvement or a failure to provide an estimate for any individual public
improvement shall not relieve the developer of its responsibility to install
the public improvements or prohibit the village from requiring the completion
of the public improvements from the posted security. The estimate shall solely
be a method for determining the amount of the security to be provided.
         (d)   Security posted with the village may, upon completion of
specific public improvements but prior to final acceptance of all public
improvements, be reduced, from time to time, upon recommendation of the
Engineering Services Director and approval of the Village Board, so long as the
security remaining shall be in an amount equal to 110% of the estimated value
of the uncompleted work plus 10% of the estimated cost of the completed work,
as determined by the Engineering Services Director. Upon final acceptance of
such public improvements as provided herein and the posting of a maintenance
security for the completed and accepted public improvements, such completion
security shall be fully released.
         (e)   In the event that any time prior to the final acceptance of the
public improvements, the amount of the security remaining unused by the village
as cash or not drawn down under the irrevocable letter of credit, or no longer
available through the surety, should not be adequate to cause the completion of
the uncompleted public improvements, the village may upon seven days' written
notice require the developer, or the owner of the property which benefits from
the improvements, or their respective successors and/or assigns, to post
additional security in an amount sufficient to cause the completion of the
public improvements. The village may take this action on more than one occasion
if the amount of the security at any time should be inadequate to permit the
completion of public improvements. In the event that there is inadequate
security to complete public improvements, the village shall not issue any
building or occupancy permits.
         (f)   Where the required public improvements have not been installed
within the terms of the performance security, the village may then declare the
developer to be in default and may use the security amount on matters related
to insuring the satisfactory completion of the public improvements.
         (g)   Where the village has caused the completion of public
improvements which have not been adequately completed by the developer or the
owner of the property or their respective successors and assigns, or where the
village accepts maintenance responsibilities for public improvements which have
not been completed or where bills of sale or other documentation has not been
furnished to the village for public improvements associated with the
subdivision, which will be owned by the village, the developer, the owner and
their respective successors or assigns shall remain responsible for the full
obligations contained within the village ordinances associated with the
dedication and improvement of property until all provisions of this code
associated with completion of the public improvements, the transfer of
ownership and maintenance responsibility to the village have been properly
completed.
         (h)   The Engineering Services Director is authorized to waive the
surety requirements of this section for the installation of any public
improvements by a governmental agency, provided that the installation of the
public improvements is for a governmental purpose. The Engineering Services
Director may require the governmental agency to execute an agreement binding
the governmental agency to construct and install the public improvements in
full accordance with village ordinances and all applicable laws, rules and
regulations and to correct any deficiencies in such public improvements, as
determined by the village.
      (8)   Inspection of public improvements. All public land improvements
required under the provisions of this article shall be inspected during the
course of construction by the Engineering Services Director or a duly
designated deputy. During the course of construction of the improvements, the
developer shall notify the Engineering Services Director 24 hours before any
required inspection of said improvements.
      (9)   Acceptance of public improvements.
         (a)   Upon written notification that the developer believes the public
improvements ready for acceptance, the Engineering Services Director, the
design engineer and the contractor shall make an inspection of the completed
work. The Engineering Services Director shall prepare a list of all items not
meeting the requirements of this article (i.e. "punchlist").
         (b)   The developer shall cause all items not meeting the requirements
of this article to be corrected within 60 days of the receipt of such items.
         (c)   Following the completion of all work required by the inspection,
the developer shall submit the following materials (the acceptance documents):
            I.   A certificate of completion, signed by the design engineer,
inspecting engineer and by the developer in the form approved by the village,
certifying that the public improvements have been completed in accordance with
the requirements of this title;
            II.   A title insurance policy, indicating that the public
improvements have been completed, are ready for acceptance by the village, and
are free and clear of any and all liens and encumbrances;
            III.   A bill of sale, including an Inventory of public
improvements and an exhibit of public improvements, transferring title to all
public improvements to the village; and
            IV.   Maintenance security as required by division (O)(10) of this
section.
            V.   One set of as-built plans bearing the signature and seal of
the Illinois registered professional engineer or licensed land surveyor who
prepared it.
         (d)   Acceptance by the Village Board. The acceptance of the required
public improvements shall be made only by the adoption of a resolution by the
Village Board after all the provisions of this section have been met.
      (10)   Maintenance security.
         (a)   At the time of the acceptance of the required public
improvements by the Village Board as provided herein, the developer, or its
successors and/or assigns shall file a maintenance guarantee with the Village
Board in the amount of 10% of the estimated cost of the required public
improvements and in a form satisfactory to the Village Attorney. The guarantee
may be held by the village for a period of 18 months after acceptance of the
public improvements for the purpose of:
            I.   Guaranteeing and securing the correction of any defect in
material or workmanship furnished for any public improvements; and
            II.   Guaranteeing against any damage to the public improvements by
reason of the settling of ground, base or foundation thereof.
         (b)   The maintenance guarantee shall provide that, if the defects
have so developed and have not been corrected by developer or its successors or
assigns, then the guarantee may be applied by the village to correct such
defects.
         (c)   If the date of acceptance of the public improvements results in
the 18 month maintenance period ending between November 1st and April 30th, the
maintenance guarantee shall be extended to the following May 1st.
      (11)   Design standards and construction specifications. The Engineering
Services Director maintains and may amend from time to time, standards and
specifications for the design, installation, and construction of public and
private improvements. Such standards and specifications shall be compiled into
a manual titled "Manual of Design Standards and Construction Specifications "
(DSCS). The design and construction of all required land improvements, whether
intended to remain privately-owned or dedicated to the village (i.e. public),
shall comply with the requirements established in the version of the DSCS
Manual in effect at the time of the developer's application for the final plat
of subdivision.
   (P)   Annexation (See
Figure 16-8-4(P)).
      (1)   Applicability. Annexation of unincorporated land to the village
shall require review and approval by the Village Board. The following procedure
is established to ensure the public health, safety, and welfare through the
provision of further growth and expansion of the community through sound
annexation and good planning practices.
      (2)   Application. An application for annexation shall be submitted to
the Community Development Director, along with the following information:
         (a)   Plat of survey with legal description for all parcels within the
land proposed to be annexed, depicting the location of all structures and
setbacks from property lines.
         (b)   Plat of annexation depicting the boundary of all parcels
proposed to be annexed, including adjacent street rights-of-way when
appropriate.
         (c)   An executed petition for annexation.
         (d)   Cover letter addressed to the Village Board, explaining the
applicant's interest in the property and details of the annexation request
including a description of the future plans for the development and use of the
property.
         (e)   Proof of property ownership or consent letter from the property
owner.
         (f)   Annexation agreement, if required.
      (3)   Annexation review criteria. The Village Board shall have the sole
discretion to approve or disapprove applications seeking the annexation of land
to the village.
      (4)   Annexation fees. In addition to the fees for processing an
application for annexation and, if applicable, an annexation agreement, as set
forth in
Chapter 6, Article 13 of the Village Code of Ordinances, a per acre annexation
fee established by the Village Fee Schedule shall be due and paid to the
village prior to the recordation of the ordinance annexing the property.
      (5)   Annexation ordinance.
         (a)   Each annexation ordinance shall contain a clause making the
payment of annexation fees a binding obligation upon the successors in title of
the person requesting the annexation.
         (b)   The annexation ordinance shall be recorded by the Village Clerk
in the office of the DuPage County Recorder of Deeds, thereby making the
obligations under the ordinance a matter of public record to any successors in
title of the owner at the time the property is annexed.
         (c)   The Village Clerk shall also file a certified copy of the
annexation ordinance with the following:
            I.   DuPage County Clerk;
            II.   DuPage County Board of Election Commissioners;
            III.   Northern Illinois Gas Company;
            IV.   Commonwealth Edison Company;
            V.   AT&T;
            VI.   United States Post Office; and
            VII.   Illinois Department of Revenue.
      (6)   No construction or improvements shall be made on any property
annexed until payment in full shall be made of all annexation fees. Nothing
herein contained shall be construed as compelling the village to make any
extension or improvements or to expend any monies for such purpose in relation
to the annexation.
      (7)   Extension of annexation agreements. Where land has been annexed to
the village pursuant to an annexation agreement, and at least five years of
that agreement have expired, and the village and the owner have concluded that
it is desirable to extend the terms of that agreement beyond the period
established by statute, the village and the owner may, utilizing the procedures
established by state law for the extension of an annexation agreement, extended
the terms of the agreement for up to an additional period of 20 years. The
village intends to fully exercise its home rule powers through the passage of
this division and finds that it will benefit the citizens of the community and
will assist in the appropriate planning and development of the village to
provide an option for property owners and the corporate authorities of the
village to mutually benefit from the terms of an extended annexation agreement.
16-8-4(P) Annexation
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4558.png]
 
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 2021-08-33, passed 8- 2-2021; Ord.
2023-03-08, passed 3-20-2023; Ord. 2025- 08-31, passed 8-4- 2025)
§ 16-8-5 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Responsibility of enforcement. The Community Development Director or
his or her designee shall enforce the provisions of this UDO.
   (B)   Types of violations. Violations of this UDO will be subject to the
remedies and penalties provided in this UDO, the Village Code, and state law.
Violations of this UDO include but are not limited to:
      (1)   Work without required permits or approvals. It is a violation of
this UDO to engage in any subdividing, development, use, construction,
remodeling or other activity of any nature without obtaining all the permits,
approvals, certificates and other forms of authorization required by this UDO.
      (2)   Work inconsistent with permit. It is a violation of this UDO to
engage in any development, use, construction, remodeling, or other activity of
any nature in any way inconsistent with the terms and conditions of any permit,
approval, certificate or other form of authorization required in order to
engage in such activity.
      (3)   Work inconsistent with conditions. It is a violation of this UDO to
violate, by act or omission, any term, condition, or qualification imposed by a
decision-making body upon a required permit, certificate, or other form of
authorization.
      (4)   Work inconsistent with UDO. It is a violation of this UDO to erect,
construct, reconstruct, remodel, alter, maintain, move, or use any building or
structure or to use any land in violation or contravention of any zoning,
subdivision, or other regulation of this UDO.
      (5)   Making lots or setbacks nonconforming. It is a violation of this
UDO to reduce or diminish any lot area so that the setbacks or open spaces are
smaller than prescribed by this U DO, except in accordance with the procedural
and substantive requirements of this UDO.
      (6)   Increasing intensity of use. It is a violation of this UDO to
increase the intensity of use of any land or structure, except in accordance
with the procedural and substantive requirements of this UDO.
      (7)   Continuing violations. It is a violation of this UDO to continue
any of the violations specified in this article. Each day that a violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense.
   (C)   Responsibility for violations. In addition to any person violating the
provisions of this UDO, each person having an ownership interest in the land
upon which the violation exists shall be jointly and severably liable for any
violation of this UDO existing upon such land, regardless of whether such
person created the violation.
   (D)   Remedies and enforcement powers. The village shall have the following
remedies and enforcement powers:
      (1)   Withhold permits.
         (a)   The village may deny or withhold permits, certificates or other
forms of authorization on any land or structure or improvements thereon upon
which there is an uncorrected violation of this UDO or of a condition or
qualification of a permit, certificate, approval or other authorization
previously granted by a decision-making body.
         (b)   Instead of withholding or denying an authorization, the village
may grant a permit when the work to be completed includes correction of the
violation.
      (2)   Revoke permits. A permit may be revoked when the Community
Development Director determines that:
         (a)   There is a departure from the plans, specifications, or
conditions as required under the terms of the permit;
         (b)   The plans, specifications, or conditions were obtained by false
representation or were issued in error; or
         (c)   Any provision of this UDO is being violated.
      (3)   Stop work. The village may stop work on any building or structure
on any land on which there is an uncorrected violation of this UDO or of a
permit or other form of authorization issued hereunder.
      (4)   Revoke plan or other approval. When a violation of this UDO
involves a failure to comply with approved plans or conditions to which the
approval of such plans was made subject, the Village Board may, upon notice to
the applicant and property owner(s) (including any holders of building permits
affected) and after a public hearing, revoke the plan or other approval or
condition its continuance on strict compliance, the provision of security or
such other conditions as the Village Board may reasonably impose.
      (5)   Injunctive relief. The village may seek an injunction or other
equitable relief to stop any violation of this UDO or of a permit, certificate
or other form of authorization granted hereunder.
      (6)   Abatement. The village may seek a court order in the nature of
mandamus, abatement, injunction or other action or proceeding to abate or
remove a violation or to otherwise restore the premises in question to the
condition in which they existed prior to the violation.
      (7)   Penalties. The penalty for a violation of this UDO shall be
governed by the penalty provisions of the Village Code.
      (8)   Other remedies. The village shall have such other remedies as are
and as may be from time to time provided by Illinois law and other village
codes for the violation of zoning, subdivision or related UDO provisions.
      (9)   Remedies cumulative. The remedies and enforcement powers
established in this chapter are cumulative.
   (E)   Enforcement procedures.
      (1)   Non-emergency matters.
         (a)   In the case of violations of this UDO that do not constitute an
emergency, the Community Development Director shall give notice of the nature
of the violation to the property owner and to any other person who is party to
the agreement and to any applicant for any relevant permit, after which the
persons receiving notice shall have ten days, or such longer period as the
Community Development Director allows, to correct the violation.
         (b)   If the violation is not corrected within the required timeframe,
the Community Development Director and Village Prosecutor or Village Attorney
shall use all penalties, remedies and enforcement powers available under this
UDO.
         (c)   Notice must be given in-person, by United States Mail, or by
posting notice on the premises. Notices of violation must state the nature of
the violation, the time period allowed for achieving compliance, the corrective
steps necessary, the nature of subsequent penalties and enforcement actions
should the situation not be corrected, and the appeal procedures for the notice
of violation.
      (2)   Emergency matters. In the case of violations of this UDO that
constitute an emergency, the village shall use all remedies, penalties and
enforcement powers available under this article without prior notice, but the
Community Development Director must send notice simultaneously with beginning
enforcement action to the property owner and to applicants for any relevant
permit.
   (F)   Other enforcement matters.
      (1)   Other powers. In addition to the enforcement powers specified in
this chapter, the village may exercise any and all enforcement powers granted
to them by Illinois law.
      (2)   Continuation. Nothing in this UDO shall prohibit the continuation
of previous enforcement actions, undertaken by the village pursuant to previous
and valid ordinances and laws.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-8-6 DECLARATIONS AND ASSOCIATIONS FOR COMMON AREAS AND SHARED FACILITIES.
   (A)   Applicability. For any subdivision, planned development, or other
development of property comprised of individually owned units that results in
common areas or shared facilities, a declaration in accordance with 765 ILCS
160 or 765 ILCS 605 containing all applicable covenants, conditions,
restrictions, or easements shall be required.
   (B)   Application. The declaration and all other applicable instruments
shall be in a form approved by the Village Attorney and suitable for recording
with the DuPage County Recorder's Office. They shall be reviewed by the Village
Attorney and revised as needed prior to approval of the subdivision, planned
development, or other development.
   (C)   Declaration. The declaration shall ensure the use, maintenance,
control, and continued protection of common areas and shared facilities,
including but not limited to:
      (1)   Sanitary sewers and water distribution systems;
      (2)   Minor and major stormwater systems;
      (3)   Post-construction best management practices;
      (4)   Vehicular and/or pedestrian ingress and egress, including cross-
access drives or roads;
      (5)   Parking facilities; and
      (6)   Open space and recreational facilities.
   (D)   Association point of contact required. For all associations, a point
of contact for the board, or management company, if applicable, shall be
provided to the Community Development Director within 30 calendar days of any
election or change.
   (E)   Right of village to maintain. In the event that the developer, owner
(s), or association fails or is unable to maintain, repair, protect, or control
any of the common areas or shared facilities, the village, upon reasonable
written notice, except in an emergency, shall have the right, but not the
obligation, to perform reasonable repair and maintenance, to correct material
deficiencies, and to take such other actions as are deemed necessary by the
village to maintain and protect the common areas or shared facilities, and
charge the reasonable costs and expenses thereof. Under no circumstances shall
the village have any responsibility or duty to perform said actions.
   (F)   Special service area. The owner(s) of the property comprising the
subdivision, planned development, or other development of property containing
common area or shared facilities, or the village, shall take all actions as
necessary to establish a special service area over the property comprising the
subdivision, planned development, or other development containing common areas
or shared facilities, for the purpose of ensuring that:
      (1)   The common areas and shared facilities may be maintained, repaired,
or replaced in the event the developer, any subsequent property owner, or the
homeowners association refuses, fails, or is unable to perform maintenance,
repairs, or replacement work on such common areas or shared facilities; and
      (2)   The payment of the actual costs, expenses, administrative costs,
consultant fees, and legal fees incurred by the village including, but not
limited to, insurance premiums for liability insurance coverage, in connection
with maintaining, repairing, or replacing the common areas or shared
facilities.
   (G)   Declaration amendments. No amendment materially changing the terms and
conditions of the declaration shall be made alleviating the developer, owner
(s), or association from its responsibility for the continued use, maintenance,
control, and continued protection of all common areas and shared facilities.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
ARTICLE 9: SUBDIVISION STANDARDS
Section
   
16-9-1   Purpose
   
16-9-2   General provisions
   
16-9-3   Design standards, generally
   
16-9-4   Street standards
   
16-9-5   Easements
   
16-9-6   Blocks
   
16-9-7   Lots
   
16-9-8   Required land improvements
   
16-9-9   Utilities; broadband telecommunications, electric, and gas
   
16-9-10   Monuments and markers
   
16-9-11   Soil investigations
   
16-9-12   Land and cash donations
§ 16-9-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of these regulations is:
   (A)   To establish reasonable rules and regulations governing the
subdivision, development and platting of land, the preparation of plats, the
location and extension of streets and highways, the installation of utilities
and the provision of necessary public grounds for schools, parks, playgrounds
and public open space;
   (B)   To promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare,
to conserve, protect and enhance property values and to secure the efficient
use of land;
   (C)   To discourage scattered development beyond existing public utilities
and to facilitate the adequate provision of public improvements;
   (D)   To assure the development of land for optimum use with necessary
protection against deterioration and obsolescence;
   (E)   To limit and control the pollution of the environment that can be
caused by inadequate or incomplete urban development;
   (F)   To provide common grounds of understanding and a sound working
relationship between the village and the developer; and
   (G)   To implement the goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-9-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   No subdivision of land, as set forth below, shall be conducted or occur
within the village or in any unincorporated area that is within one and one-
half miles of the corporate limits and covered by the village's comprehensive
plan until the provisions of this Unified Development Ordinance have been met.
   (A)   The following acts shall constitute the subdivision of land:
      (1)   The division of land (for any purpose) into two or more lots or
parcels of record.
      (2)   The changing or rearranging of the boundary, division, or lot lines
of any parcel of land.
      (3)   The consolidation of two or more lots or parcels of record for the
purpose of development.
      (4)   Development that involves the construction of any public
improvements that are to be dedicated to the village, or private roads that
intersect or connect with public roadways.
      (5)   The development of multiple-unit structures with the intent of
dividing them into individual condominium units, to be sold and owned
separately, with or without common areas.
      (6)   The creation of a planned development of single entities or
contiguous land, according to a single plan as provided in
Article 16-7 of this UDO.
   (B)   No plat of subdivision shall be entitled to be recorded in the county
recorder's office or have any validity until it has been approved in the manner
provided in this UDO.
   (C)   No development shall be entitled to the issuance of a building permit
until such development meets the requirements, terms and conditions of this
UDO.
   (D)   No person, firm or corporation required to make or having made a
subdivision within the village or any area within the extra-territorial plat
approval jurisdiction of the village shall proceed with any construction work,
including grading, unless Stormwater Certification and a land improvement
permit have been previously issued, until the final plat of subdivision has
been properly recorded.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-9-3 DESIGN STANDARDS, GENERALLY.
   The Engineering Services Director is authorized to develop, adopt and amend
from time to time, engineering and design standards for the design,
installation and construction of public and private improvements. All
subdivisions and the installation of all public and private improvements within
any development shall comply with the requirements established in the Manual of
Design Standards and Construction Specifications, as amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-9-4 STREET STANDARDS.
   (A)   Where not shown on the comprehensive plan, the arrangement of streets
within a subdivision shall either:
      (1)   Provide for the continuation or projection of existing principal
streets in adjacent areas; or
      (2)   Conform to a plan for the area or neighborhood approved or adopted
by the Village Board to meet a particular situation where topographical or
other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets
impracticable.
   (B)   All street right-of-way widths shall be designed in accordance with
the minimum dimensions set forth below.
      (1)   Residential local/cul-de-sac - 66 feet;
      (2)   Residential collector - 80 feet;
      (3)   Commercial or industrial - 80 feet.
   (C)   All required pavement widths, curves, gradients and sight distances
shall be as shown in the Manual of Design Standards and Construction
Specifications maintained by the Engineering Services Department.
   (D)   Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
avoided.
   (E)   All street intersections and confluences shall encourage safe and
efficient traffic flow and, in general, be at or near right angles and in no
case shall a street intersect any other street at less than 80 degrees. An
intersection of more than two streets shall not be permitted.
   (F)   Cul-de-sac streets may be utilized in residential subdivisions,
however in no instance shall cul-de-sac streets reduce the connectivity index
of a subdivision below 1.2 (See
Figure 16-9-4(G)). A cul-de-sac street in residential subdivisions shall be not
more than 600 feet in length, measured along its centerline from the street
centerline to the center of the turnaround. Each cul-de-sac street shall have a
terminus of nearly circular shape with a minimum right-of-way diameter of 120
feet (See
Figure 16-9-4(G)).
   (G)   Half-streets shall be prohibited.
   (H)   Provisions shall be made for vehicular access to residential property
abutting a major street by backing lots to the thoroughfare with a planting
strip at least ten feet wide along the line adjacent and parallel to the major
street. These standards are established for the purpose of providing protection
for the residential properties and to provide for traffic safety and the
efficient use of the major street for its intended function of accommodating
through traffic.
   (I)   Reserve strips controlling access to public utilities, streets or
alleys shall be prohibited.
   (J)   Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic
will be discouraged.
   (K)   Street grades shall provide proper relation between the street and the
first floor elevation of the houses or buildings and permit convenient and
economical access to and drainage of the lots.
Connectivity Standards (16-9-4(G))
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/31ac5c1818f3639f50e8fe695dad8c176b87617d/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4560.png]
 
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-9-5 EASEMENTS.
   Easements shall be provided for the following, when applicable, and
illustrated on the plat of subdivision along with the easement provision
language as provided by the Engineering Services Director.
   (A)   Utility easements. Easements shall be provided to accommodate the
infrastructure of the village and holders of a franchise agreement with the
village. The width of utility easements within each lot shall not be less than
ten feet wide along each rear lot line and five feet along each side lot line.
Easements shall be designed to provide access to public right-of-way, as well
as continuity between blocks. Additional easements at other locations or a
greater width for specific conditions shall be provided when deemed necessary
by the Engineering Services Director.
   (B)   Stormwater management & conveyance easements. When required by the
DuPage County Stormwater and Flood Plain Ordinance, easements shall be provided
over site runoff storage facilities, compensatory storage facilities, and major
stormwater systems.
   (C)   Cross-access easements. When access is contemplated through one lot or
parcel to another lot or parcel, and no public right-of-way will be dedicated
for such purpose, an easement shall be provided from the nearest public right-
of-way to its logical terminus. The width of the easement shall be based on the
proposed land use and traffic pattern, but no less than 20 feet.
   (D)   Recreational access easement. Easements shall be provided for any
sidewalks or shared-use paths that will be dedicated to the village, but are
not otherwise within dedicated right-of-way, covering the full width of the
paved area or additional width when deemed necessary by the Engineering
Services Director.
   (E)   Other easements. Other easements shall be provided whenever required
land improvements, not otherwise covered herein, cannot be located within the
dedicated public right-of-way. The provision language shall specifically cover
said improvements, the language of which shall be provided by the Engineering
Services Director.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-9-6 BLOCKS.
   (A)   The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to:
      (1)   Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs
of the types of use contemplated,
      (2)   Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions within the
corporate limits of the village, and
      (3)   Needs of convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of
street traffic.
   (B)   In residential subdivisions, the maximum length of blocks shall be
1,000 lineal feet for neighborhood collector or less intense roadways, and
1,800 lineal feet for all other roadways. No blocks shall be less than 600
lineal feet in length, unless recommended by the Plan Commission and approved
by the Village Board.
   (C)   In industrial and business subdivisions, maximum length of blocks
shall be as recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by the Village
Board.
   (D)   The shape of blocks shall be determined by topographical features, the
basic street system and traffic pattern, lot depths and areas designated for
public and other non-residential land uses.
   (E)   Blocks or portions thereof intended for commercial or industrial use
shall be designated as such, and the plan shall show adequate off-street areas
to provide for parking, loading docks and other facilities.
   (F)   Pedestrian crosswalks shall be required where deemed necessary by the
Plan Commission and required by the Village Board, to provide for pedestrian
circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation
and other community facilities.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-9-7 LOTS.
   (A)   The lot size, width, depth, shape, and orientation shall be
appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development
and use contemplated.
   (B)   Width and area of lots shall conform with lot width and area
requirements set forth in the UDO of the village or that of DuPage County in
the unincorporated areas beyond the village limits.
   (C)   Depth of lots shall be not less than 100 feet in any residential
district; except that, where residential lots abut arterial streets, the lot
depth shall be a minimum of 135 feet.
   (D)   All residential lots shall abut on a publicly dedicated street or as
provided for in
Article 16-7 (Planned Development) of this code.
   (E)   Width, area, and depth of lots in an industrial or business
subdivision shall be as recommended by the Plan Commission and approved by the
Village Board.
   (F)   Side lot lines of lots shall be at right angles or radial to the
street line, or substantially so.
   (G)   Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided, except
where essential to provide separation of residential development from major
streets or highways or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and
orientation. A landscape easement of at least ten feet, and across which there
shall be no right of vehicular access, shall be provided along the rear lot
lines of lots abutting such highways and major thoroughfares.
   (H)   Lots abutting upon a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream
shall have an additional depth or width as recommended by the Plan Commission
and approved by the Village Board in order to provide acceptable building
sites.
   (I)   In the subdividing of any land, due regard shall be given to the
preservation of natural features, such as trees, watercourses, historical land
marks and similar community assets, which, if preserved, would add to the
attractiveness and value of the subdivision, neighborhood or the community as a
whole. The Plan Commission shall include in its report its conclusions as to
compliance herewith.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-9-8 REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS.
   The developer shall be responsible for the design and construction of both
public land improvements and private land improvements that will serve the
future development. The land improvements shall be in accordance with
Article 16-5 of this UDO, the village's Manual of Design Standards and
Construction Specifications, and the requirements hereinafter, which shall at a
minimum consist of the following:
   (A)   Streets, including curb and gutters, street lighting, parkway
landscaping and trees, traffic signs and striping, sidewalks, shared use paths,
and any other safety-related appurtenances.
   (B)   Street name signs, traffic control signs, and pavement striping and
markings.
      (1)   Street name signs. The developer shall provide and install street
name signs at each intersection, preferably at the northwest corner, whose
street names shall be as shown on the approved plat of subdivision.
      (2)   Traffic control signs. The developer shall provide traffic control
signs including, but not limited to, stop, yield and speed limit signs.
      (3)   Pavement striping and markings. The developer shall provide
pavement striping and intersection pavement marking on new streets, as well as
revising any existing striping and marking impacted by the subject subdivision.
   (C)   Sidewalks and/or shared use paths, ADA ramps, and crosswalks.
      (1)   Sidewalk. Sidewalks shall be provided throughout the subdivision on
both sides of the street within the dedicated right-of-way.
      (2)   Shared-use paths. Shared-use paths shall be provided when shown in
the comprehensive plan and considered when an existing path is within a
quarter-mile of the subdivision boundary. Shared-use paths may be used in lieu
of sidewalks on collector or arterial streets.
   (D)   Sanitary sewer system, including service lines to each lot, manholes,
lift stations and force main and other related appurtenances.
      (1)   When a sanitary sewer is required in a residential rear or side
yard to connect to an existing system or to provide for a future extension, a
minimum easement of 20 feet shall be provided.
      (2)   Sanitary service lines shall be installed prior to the construction
of any pavement within dedicated right-of-way or shall be installed via a
trenchless method. The service shall be installed at least to the property
line, its end sealed to prevent infiltration, and its location marked and
recorded.
   (E)   Water distribution system, including service lines to each lot, fire
hydrants, valves, and other related appurtenances.
      (1)   When a watermain is required in a residential rear or side yard to
connect to an existing system or to provide for a future extension, a minimum
easement of 20 feet shall be provided.
   (F)   Water service lines shall be installed prior to the construction any
pavement within dedicated right-of-way or shall be installed via a trenchless
method. The service shall be installed to the property line and terminated with
a shut-off valve and enclosure.
   (G)   Stormwater management facilities, including site runoff storage, post-
construction best management practices, and major and minor stormwater systems,
as well as earthwork to ensure proper drainage throughout the development.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-9-9 UTILITIES; BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATIONS, ELECTRIC, AND GAS.
   (A)   All utility distribution lines for broadband telecommunications,
electric and gas service in the subdivision shall be placed underground
entirely throughout a subdivided area.
   (B)   Underground broadband tele- communications, electric and gas service
facilities shall be placed within rights-of-way or easements in a manner that
will not conflict with other existing or future underground services.
   (C)   All above-ground service facilities shall be located to minimize the
adverse aesthetic impact on the environment and create no hazard to the public.
   (D)   Utility lines shall be parallel to and not less than 12 inches from
property lines.
   (E)   Monuments and markers disturbed by the installation of utility lines
shall be reset by a professional land surveyor licensed in the State of
Illinois.
   (F)   Subject to the foregoing requirement to place utility distribution
line underground, installation of such facilities shall be made in compliance
with the applicable orders, rules and regulations of the Illinois Commerce
Commission now or hereafter effective, and the developer shall be responsible
for compliance with rules and regulations now and hereafter effective and filed
with the Commission pursuant to the State Public Utilities Act, being 220 ILCS
5/1-101 et seq., or any public utility whose service will be required for the
subdivision with respect to the provision of such facilities.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-9-10 MONUMENTS AND MARKERS.
   Monuments shall be placed at all corners and angle points of the outside
boundary, but no further than one-fourth mile apart. The monuments shall be of
concrete, not less than six inches in diameter and 36 inches deep, with a
center copper dowel three inches long cast in place. Iron pipe or steel bars
not less than one-half inch in diameter and 24 inches long shall be set at all
lot corners, at each end of all curves, at the points where a curve changes its
radius, and at all angle points in any line that are not otherwise marked by
monuments. The monuments and markers shall be set level with the finished
grade. The developer shall verify the existence of the monuments and markers
after the completion of all construction and replace any that are damaged or
missing before final acceptance of the subdivision by the Village Board.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-9-11 SOIL INVESTIGATIONS.
   If the subdivision contains soils with limitations for urban development
and, in the opinion of the Engineering Services Director, soil investigations,
borings or other soil tests are necessary to determine the nature and extent of
such questionable material, a competent testing laboratory shall investigate
and provide a report to the Engineering Services Director. The Engineering
Services Director shall have no liability for costs connected with the tests,
borings, or interpretations of results of such work.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-9-12 LAND AND CASH DONATIONS.
   (A)   Donations required. Unless otherwise provided for in an annexation
agreement with the village, as a condition of approval of a final plat of
subdivision or of a final plat of a planned development, each subdivider or
developer shall be required to dedicate land and/or make cash contributions in
lieu of land for acquisition of park and school sites; and cash donations for
school construction, fire protection, village services, books and library
services, and recreation to serve the immediate and future needs of the
residents of the subdivision or planned development as herein-after set forth.
   (B)   Donations required from properties outside village corporate limits.
      (1)   In the event that land which is subject to subdivision approval by
the village is not within the corporate limits of the village at the time of
approval of a final plat of subdivision for the land, the provisions of this
article shall not apply to such land with respect to contributions for village
library services or in any other instance where the land is not within the
jurisdiction of the governmental entity to which the contribution or donation
is to be made.
      (2)   However, in the event that land which is subject to subdivision
approval by the village is not within the corporate limits of the village at
the time of approval of a final plat of subdivision for the land, the governing
body of any governmental entity which would be entitled to land and/or cash
donations pursuant to this article may request that the village vary the terms
of this article by allowing such governmental entity to make its own agreement
and/or waiver as to any or all of the donations and amounts thereof required in
this article with the subdivider, developer and/or owner of such land. The
request shall be made in writing by a resolution adopted by the governing board
of such governmental entity. In such an event, the village may, by motion,
condition subdivision approval upon compliance with the provisions of this
article as the provisions of this article have been modified by the variation
and/or waiver.
   (C)   Donations computed on projected population.
      (1)   For purposes of computing the amount of land donations or cash
contributions in lieu of land for park and school sites, and cash donations for
school construction, fire protection, village services, books and library
services and recreation that will be required of each subdivision or planned
development to enable the village to provide facilities and services to meet
the needs of such subdivision or planned development, its projected population
density shall be computed in accordance with
16-9-12(F) set forth at the end of this article, which is generally indicative
of current and short range projected trends in family size by age groups.
      (2)   
Table 16-9-12(F) shall be used for all population estimates unless a subdivider
or developer files a written objection to the village data, together with his
or her own demographic study showing the estimated population to be generated
by his or her subdivision or planned development. In that event, the final
determination of the density formula to be used in such calculations shall be
made by the corporate authorities on the basis of the foregoing village data,
data submitted by the subdivider or developer, and from other sources which may
be submitted to the corporate authorities by the park district, school
districts, fire protection district, public library or others. It is recognized
that population density, age distribution and local conditions change over the
years and that
Table 16-9-12(F) is subject to periodic review and amendment, if necessary.
   (D)   Land contribution to school districts. School sites shall be donated
and conveyed to the village in accordance with the following criteria.
      (1)   Number of students. The ultimate number of students that will be
generated by the proposed subdivision or planned development shall be
determined in accordance with the current (at the time of plan review) edition
of
Table 16-9-12(D)(3): School Site Dedication Requirements.
      (2)   Land donation to school. The amount of land required to be
dedicated shall be determined by dividing the estimated number of children in
each of the school age brackets hereinafter set forth that will be generated by
the proposed subdivision or planned development by the maximum recommended
number of students that can be served in the type of school assigned to such
age bracket, hereinafter set forth, and multiplying the quotient times the
minimum number of acres recommended for a school site, hereinafter set forth.
The product thereof shall be the acres of land deemed needed to have sufficient
land for school sites to serve the estimated increased children in each such
school classification.
      (3)   School classifications and size of school site. School
classifications and size of school sites shall be determined in accordance with
the following criteria*:
 
Table 16-9-12(D)(3): School Site Dedication Requirements
School Classification by Maximum Number of Students Minimum Number of Acres of
Grades                   for Each Such School       Land for Each School Site
                         Classification             of Such Classification
Elementary Schools,      600 students               11 acres
Grades K - 5
Middle Schools, Grades 6 900 students               29 acres
- 8
High Schools, Grades 9 - 2,300 students             53 acres
12
*The residents of the village are served by seven different school districts.
In the event that an affected school district has a different school
classification than as shown in the table above, such school classifications,
size of school sites and minimum acres of land set forth in the table above
shall be modified to meet the requirements of the affected district.
      (4)   Location of school site. The comprehensive plan of the village
shall be used as a guideline in locating sites.
      (5)   Improved sites. Prior to conveyance, all sites shall be prepared in
accordance with the Unified Development Ordinance and water retention/detention
requirements. All sites shall be conveyed in a condition ready for full service
of electrical, water, sewer and streets (including enclosed drainage and curb
and gutter) as applicable to the location of the site, or acceptable provision
made therefor. The sidewalks and trees normally included within the definition
of improved sites may be deferred due to the delay time between conveyance of
any such school sites and construction of school facilities thereon.
      (6)   School land conveyed to the village. School land conveyed to the
village shall be held by it for transfer to the affected school district or
other entity. Any school land conveyed to the village or thereafter transferred
to a school district or other entity pursuant to this article which is not used
for school purposes within 20 years after it is conveyed to the village shall
be reconveyed to the developer.
   (E)   Cash contribution to school districts.
      (1)   In addition to the land donation referred to in §
16-9-12(D), or a cash contribution in lieu of land referred to in §
16-9-12(O), each subdivider or developer shall be required to make a cash
contribution to aid in the provision of necessary funds for the construction,
expansion or rehabilitation of a school for the use of the children who will be
generated by the proposed subdivision or planned development, or for other
improvements to the extent required in whole or part by the existence of a
school.
      (2)   The amount of the cash donation shall be determined by multiplying
the estimated number of children in the K-12 school age bracket that will be
generated by the proposed subdivision or planned unit development times $1,000
per child. The contribution required for school construction shall be regularly
updated, pursuant to §
16-9-12(L). Funds contributed by a developer pursuant to this section shall be
deposited with the Village Treasurer to be held in a special fund which shall
not be used for any purpose other than for payment of the cost of school
construction, expansion or rehabilitation or for other improvements to the
extent required in whole or in part by the existence of a school. Any interest
which accrues shall also be used for the purposes set forth in this section.
Any cash donated to the village for school construction or expansion purposes
pursuant to this article which has not been expended for those purposes within
20 years shall be refunded to the developer.
      (3)   The funds and any accrued interest will be apportioned among the
school districts affected by a particular development based on the number of
students estimated to be generated as set forth at the end of this article in
Table 16-9-12(F), or may be expended by the village for construction,
maintenance or replacement of physical structures and facilities owned or
operated by the village to the extent required in whole or in part by the
existence of a school.
      (4)   This cash contribution is a requirement of the village's
Subdivision Code. However, in order not to make this requirement overly onerous
and to assist developers in meeting this financial responsibility, the cash
contributions required in this section shall be payable upon the issuance of
the building permit for each dwelling unit.
Table 16-9-12(F): Estimated Population per Dwelling Unit
                                 Junior High               High School
Type of Pre-School  Elementary   Grades 6 - 8 Total        Grades 9 -  Adults
Unit    0 - 4 Years Grades K - 5 11 - 13      Grades K - 8 12          18 - Up
                    5 - 10 Years Years        5 - 13 Years 14 - 17
                                                           Years
Table 16-9-12(F): Estimated Population per Dwelling Unit
                       Elementary Junior High               High School
Type of    Pre-School  Grades K - Grades 6 - 8 Total        Grades 9 -  Adults
Unit       0 - 4 Years 5          11 - 13      Grades K - 8 12          18 - Up
                       5 - 10     Years        5 - 13 Years 14 - 17
                       Years                                Years
Apartments
Efficiency -           -          -            -            -           1
1-bedroom  -           -          -            -            -           1.19
2-bedroom  0.038       0.065      0.021        0.086        0.035       1.5
3-bedroom  0.208       0.157      0.037        0.194        0.082       2.33
Attached Single Family
1-bedroom  -           -          -            -            -           1.05
2-bedroom  0.051       0.075      0.011        0.086        0.021       1.741
3-bedroom  0.217       0.212      0.022        0.234        0.051       1.775
4-bedroom  0.333       0.316      0.166        0.482        0.18        2.333
Detached Single Family
2-bedroom  0.125       0.12       0.026        0.146        0.018       1.7
3-bedroom  0.308       0.381      0.174        0.555        0.146       1.978
4-bedroom  0.472       0.513      0.314        0.827        0.313       2.195
5-bedroom  0.402       0.26       0.42         1.04         0.327       2.65
NOTES TO TABLE:
There are only three significant categories provided in this chart. Because of
the similarity of yields of all types of attached single family, only one
category is provided. The same is true with apartments, thus only one category.
Because of the short history of some newer types of single units, both detached
and attached individual evaluations may be necessary.
 
   (F)   Contributions; park sites. Park sites shall be donated and conveyed to
the park district in accordance with the following criteria.
      (1)   Number of residents. The ultimate number of residents that will be
generated by the proposed subdivision or planned unit development shall be
determined in accordance with
Table 16-9-12(F) : Estimated Population per Dwelling Unit. The amount of land
required to be dedicated for park sites in each subdivision or planned unit
development shall be determined by dividing the estimated population of such
subdivision or planned development by 1,000 and multiplying the quotient times
five and one-half acres of park land required for each 1,000 people.
      (2)   Location of park sites.
         (a)   Except for combined school/park sites, as defined in §
16-9-12(J), the comprehensive plan adopted by the village, and the Carol Stream
Park District Master Plan shall be used as a guideline in locating sites. If
the village or the park district has not planned a park within the subdivision
or planned development or the neighborhood in which the subdivision or planned
development is located, the park site shall be so located as to be readily
accessible to the people within such neighborhood. Play and athletic fields and
large park sites must be conveniently accessible to the community at large.
         (b)   Proper ingress, egress and curb cuts shall be provided. For
water areas, provisions must be made for pathway/driveway around these areas
for emergency vehicles and police patrol. Provisions for major use of a
pathway/driveway for bike riding, walkway, jogging trail and pedestrian traffic
shall be made.
      (3)   Environmental quality.
         (a)   Land to be dedicated for park sites shall be approved by the
village according to its environmental quality, as well as its suitability for
active and passive recreational activities. The land is to be dry and usable at
all times and not subject to flooding or used as detention. Should a donation
include a detention/retention area over and above the five and one-half acres
required per 1,000 of ultimate population estimated to be generated by the
development, the park district may accept such additional land. No bogs or
swamps shall be acceptable as required park sites. Lakes and native prairie
wetlands shall not normally be acceptable, but may be approved by the village
where the area offers an exceptional amenity or the chance to protect a
significant natural resource. No site that has been part of an unlicensed
landfill or a toxic waste dump shall be acceptable as required park acreage.
         (b)   Every effort shall be made to conserve for public use and
enjoyment those areas of significant natural and environmental value. Except in
those specific areas designated by the village for development as playfields or
other active areas, all trees, other plant materials, streams and other natural
features shall be retained on land to be dedicated for park site use, unless
specifically cited by the village for removal by the developer.
         (c)   Shape. Dedicated park sites shall be regularly configured to
permit efficient park programming, security and maintenance. Sites shall be
rectangular, or nearly rectangular, in shape with no interior angle of the
boundary line less than 60 degrees, unless specifically approved by the
village. Narrow strips of land, small parcels that intrude into adjacent
orderly development, or left over parcels that are oddly shaped or located
shall be avoided.
      (4)   Improvements.
         (a)   Prior to conveyance, all sites shall be prepared in accordance
with the village's Subdivision Code and water retention/detention requirements,
except as varied by the specific terms of this article. In addition, in the
event that a park site includes retention/detention areas, slopes must be
mowable and shall not exceed a five to one (5:1) slope. Those areas, where by
necessity and subject to the approval of the Village Engineer, the grade
exceeds five to one (5:1), must have a covering of flagstone or crown vetch
which eliminates the need to mow. All areas must be final graded and seeded to
meet park district specifications as to seed mixture.
         (b)   All sites shall be conveyed in a condition ready for full
service of electrical, water, sewer, and streets (including enclosed drainage
and curb and gutter) as applicable to the location of the site, or acceptable
provision made therefor. In addition, location of hydrants shall be made in
conformance with village requirements. Provision for water for watering
vegetation and flooding for ice skating shall be made where appropriate. Sewers
for possible installation of restrooms or shelters at a later date shall be
provided. Electricity for street lights for future lighting for shelters and
security shall be provided. Security lighting along pathway shall be provided.
   (G)   Credit for private open spaces and recreation areas.
      (1)   When subdividers or developers provide their own open space for
recreation areas and facilities, it has the effect of reducing the demand for
local public recreational services. Depending on the size of the development, a
portion of the park and recreational area in subdivisions or planned
developments may, at the option of the Village Board, be provided in the form
of "private" open space in lieu of dedicated "public" open space. The extent of
same shall be determined by the Village Board, based upon the needs of the
projected residents and in conformance to the total park and recreation land
for the general area.
      (2)   In general, a substitution of private open space for dedicated
parks will imply a substantially higher degree of improvement and the
installation of recreational facilities, including equipment by the developer
as part of his or her obligation. Detailed plans of such areas, including
specifications of facilities to be installed, must be approved by the village,
and before any credit is given for private recreation areas, the subdivider or
developer must guarantee that these private recreation areas will be
permanently maintained for such use by the execution of the appropriate legal
documents.
   (H)   Reservation of additional land. Where the comprehensive plan of the
village calls for a larger amount of park and recreational land or school sites
in a particular proposed subdivision or planned development than the developer
is required to dedicate, the land needed beyond the developer's contribution
shall, if so determined by the Village Board, be reserved for subsequent
purchase by the village or other public body designated by the village;
provided that, such acquisition is made within one year from the date of
approval of the final plat.
   (I)   Combining with adjoining developments. Where the subdivision or
planned development is less than 40 acres, public open space or a school site
which is to be dedicated should, where possible, be combined with dedications
from adjoining developments in order to produce usable recreation areas or
school sites without hardship on a particular developer.
   (J)   Combined school/park sites. The developer and the village may agree
that the developer shall dedicate and convey land (or contribute cash in lieu
of land pursuant to §
16-9-12(O) for combined school/park sites in lieu of land donations otherwise
required under §
16-9-12(D) and
16-9-12(F) in accordance with the following standards.
      (1)   The amount and quality of land required to be dedicated for park
purposes shall first be determined pursuant to §
16-9-12(F).
      (2)   The amount of land required to be dedicated for school purposes
shall be determined by dividing the estimated number of children in each of the
school age brackets hereinafter set forth that will be generated by the
proposed subdivision or planned development, by the maximum recommended number
of students that can be served in the type of school assigned to such age
bracket, set forth in the following table, and multiplying the quotient times
the minimum number of acres recommended for a school site, within a combined
school/park site, for each school classification hereinafter set forth:*
 
Table 16-9-13(J)(2): School/Park Site Dedication Requirements
                                                    Minimum Number of Acres of
School Classification by Maximum Number of Students Land for Each School Site
Grades                   for Each Such School       Within a Combined School/
                         Classification             Park Site of Such
                                                    Classification
Elementary Schools,      600 students               6-1/2 acres
Grades K - 5
Middle Schools, Grades 6 900 students               8-1/2 acres
- 8
High Schools, Grades 9 - 2,300 students             22-1/2 acres
12
*The residents of the village are served by seven different school districts.
In the event that an affected school district has a different school
classification than as shown in the table above, such school classifications,
size of school sites and minimum acres of land set forth in the table above
shall be modified to meet the requirements of the affected district.
      (3)   A combined elementary school/park site shall be at least 13 acres
in area, of which six and one-half acres shall be conveyed to the park district
and the remaining six and one-half acres shall be held by the village for
transfer to the affected school district or other entity.
      (4)   A combined middle school/park site shall be at least 17 acres in
area, of which eight and one-half acres shall be conveyed to the park district
and the remaining eight and one-half acres shall be held by the village for
transfer to the affected school district or other entity.
      (5)   A combined high school/park site shall be at least 55 acres in
area, of which 22.5 acres shall be conveyed to the park district and the
remaining 22.5 acres shall be held by the village for transfer to the affected
school district or other entity.
      (6)   The standards set forth in §
16-9-12(D),
16-9-12(F), and
16-9-12(N) as to location, improvements and topography shall be applicable to
combined school/park sites.
   (K)   Distribution of plans and plats. Copies of each subdivision plat or
planned development plan shall be transmitted to the park district and the
affected school districts for their written recommendations at the same time
that they are transmitted to the Plan Commission, but nothing herein contained
shall be construed as requiring receipt of a recommendation prior to action by
the corporate authorities of the village.
   (L)   Time of conveyance of donations. All land donations required pursuant
to this article shall be conveyed no later than the earlier of the following to
occur:
      (1)   Within 180 days after a written demand by the village; and
      (2)   The fourth anniversary of the approval of the plat of subdivision
or planned development by the village.
   (M)   Title insurance, survey, assessment plats. Each deed or other
instrument conveying land to the village or the Park District shall be
accompanied by the following:
      (1)   A written commitment issued by a title insurer licensed to do
business in this state to insure that grantee has good merchantable title to
such real estate in an amount equal to its value computed pursuant to §
16-9-12(O)(5), subject only to then current general real estate taxes as of the
date of transfer; covenants, conditions and restrictions which do not prohibit
the use of the subject real estate for school or park use; utility easements
located within 20 feet of the boundary lines of the subject real estate;
drainage ditches, feeders, laterals and underground pipe or other conduit;
      (2)   A current boundary line survey, certified to the grantee by a
licensed state land surveyor to be in compliance with the state's Land Survey
Standards; and
      (3)   Except in instances where the real estate to be conveyed is a lot
in a recorded subdivision, an assessment plat and tax division petition in a
form acceptable to the appropriate county authorities so that the land to be
conveyed can be assigned its own permanent real estate index number for
exemption purposes.
   (N)   Topography and grading. The slope, topography and geology of the
dedicated site, as well as its surroundings, must be suitable for its intended
purposes. Grading on sites dedicated for park and recreational uses shall not
differ greatly from surrounding land.
   (O)   Cash contributions in lieu of land. Criteria for requiring cash
contributions in lieu of land donations.
      (1)   Whenever, in the determination of the village, any subdivision or
planned development is so small that the school or park sites required under
the provisions of §
16-9-12(D),
16-9-12(F) and/or
16-9-12(J) will not be large enough for practical development and maintenance
as school or park sites, or when the available land cannot meet the standards
set forth in §
16-9-12(D) and
16-9-12(F), or is otherwise inappropriate for park or recreational purposes or
for a school site, the village shall require the subdivider or developer to pay
a cash contribution in lieu of the land dedication required.
         (a)   The cash contribution to be paid in lieu of land donations for
school sites shall be held in trust by the village or other public body
designated by the village, solely for use in the acquisition of a school site
to serve the immediate or future needs of children from that subdivision or
planned unit development, or for reimbursement to the school district for prior
acquisition of a school site(s) for which bonds or other financing obligations
are outstanding which will serve immediate or future needs of children from
that subdivision or planned unit development, or for the improvement of any
existing school site which predominantly serves such needs, but not for the
construction, repair or rehabilitation of any school building(s) or addition(s)
thereto.
         (b)   All cash donations shall be apportioned among the affected
school districts on a pro rata basis determined by the estimated population to
be generated in the subdivision or planned development as set forth in
Table 16-9-12(F), set forth at the end of this article.
      (2)   The cash contribution to be paid in lieu of land donations for park
and recreational purposes shall be held in trust by the village or other public
body designated by the village solely for the acquisition of park and
recreational land which will be available to serve the immediate or future
needs of the residents of that subdivision or planned unit development or for
the improvement of existing park and recreational lands which predominantly
serve such needs.
      (3)   If any portion of a cash contribution in lieu of park or
recreational land donations, or school site donations made pursuant to this
article is not expended for the purposes above set forth within 20 years from
the date of its receipt, it shall be refunded to the subdivider or developer
who made such contribution.
      (4)   Fair market value: The amount of cash contributions in lieu of land
shall be based on the "fair market value" of land in the proposed subdivision
or planned unit development improved as specified in §
16-9-12(D),
16-9-12(F) that otherwise would have been donated for park, recreational and
school sites. The corporate authorities have determined that the present "fair
market value" of such improved land in the surrounding village is $150,000 per
acre. Such figure shall be regularly updated pursuant to this section, and
shall be used in making any calculation herein unless the subdivider or
developer files a written objection thereto. In the event of any such written
objection, the developer shall submit an appraisal showing the "fair market
value" of such improved land in the area of his or her development or other
evidence thereof and final determination of such "fair market value" per acre
of such improved land shall be made by the corporate authorities based upon
such information submitted by the subdivider or developer and from other
sources which may be submitted to the corporate authorities by the park
district, school districts or others. It is recognized that population density,
age distribution, land values, the cost of providing park, school and village
services, construction costs and other local conditions change over the years.
Therefore, the specific formula for the dedication of land, or the payment of
fees in lieu thereof, the required contribution for school construction,
police, fire, library and administrative services, and the "fair market value"
of land in and around the village shall be reviewed at least every two years
and amended if necessary.
      (5)   There will be situations in subdivisions or planned developments
when, in the determination of the village, a combination of land donation and
cash contribution in lieu of land is appropriate. These occasions will arise
when:
         (a)   Only a portion of the land to be developed is proposed as the
location for a park or school site. That portion of the land within the
subdivision or planned development falling within the park or school site shall
be conveyed as aforesaid, and cash shall be donated by the developer, and cash
shall be donated in an amount equal to the difference between the fair market
value of the land donated and the fair market value of the land required to be
donated under §
16-9-12(D) and
16-9-12(F);
         (b)   A major part of a local park or recreation site or school site
has already been acquired and only a small amount of land is needed from the
proposed subdivision or planned development to complete the site. The remaining
amount of land shall be donated by the developer, and cash shall be donated in
an amount equal to the difference between the fair market value of the land
donated and the fair market value of the land required to be donated under §
16-9-12(D) and
16-9-12(F); or
         (c)   Because of the large number of school districts serving the
village, there may be instances where a combination of land donation and cash
contributions in lieu of land will be appropriate, and will be decided on a
case by case basis in accordance with the criteria set forth in this article.
For example, a portion of the land to be developed is proposed as one type of
school site, for example elementary, but that there is no site which is
suitable for a high school site in accordance with the criteria set forth in
this section. In that event, a land donation will be made to the elementary
school district and a cash donation will be made to the high school district.
      (6)   A cash contribution in lieu of land is a requirement of the
village's Subdivision Code. However, in order not to make this requirement
overly onerous and to assist developers in meeting this financial
responsibility, the cash contributions required in this section shall be
prorated and payable upon the issuance of the building permit for each dwelling
unit.
   (P)   Contributions; village services.
      (1)   In order to provide the village with funds to defray the increased
cost of providing village services to developers during the construction
process and residents of new subdivisions before tax revenues are generated by
such new subdivisions or planned developments in the process of construction, a
cash contribution in the amount of $360 per person or fraction thereof shall be
made to the village on the basis of the estimated ultimate population per
dwelling unit determined as set forth in
Table 16-9-12(F), set forth at the end of this article. The contribution
required for village services shall be regularly updated pursuant to §
16-9-12(T).
      (2)   This cash contribution is a requirement of the village's
Subdivision Code. However, in order not to make this requirement overly onerous
and to assist developers in meeting this financial responsibility, the cash
contributions required in this section shall be payable upon the issuance of
the building permit for each dwelling unit.
   (Q)   Contributions; additional school services.
      (1)   In the event that an affected school district decides by resolution
at anytime within five years after approval of a plat of subdivision of planned
development that a land donation or cash in lieu of a land donation will not be
required by that particular district within the next five years to accommodate
the number of students projected to be generated by a proposed subdivision or
planned development, but that such projected number of students shall require
the hiring of additional teachers and expansion and creation of new programs,
in order to provide the affected school district with funds to provide such
services before tax revenues are generated by such new subdivision or planned
development, a cash contribution in the amount of $333 per student shall be
made to the village on the basis of the estimated ultimate population per
dwelling unit determined pursuant to the table set forth at the end of this
article in
Table 16-9-12(F), and all such funds shall be paid over by the village to the
affected school district. The contribution required for school services shall
be regularly updated pursuant to §
16-9-12(T).
      (2)   All such donations shall be apportioned among the affected school
districts on a pro rata basis determined by the estimated population in the
subdivision or planned development as set forth at the end of this article in
Table 16-9-12(F).
      (3)   This cash contribution is a requirement of the village's
Subdivision Code. However, in order not to make this requirement overly onerous
and to assist developers in meeting this financial responsibility, the cash
contributions required in this section shall be payable upon the issuance of
the building permit for each dwelling unit.
   (R)   Contributions; Fire Protection District. In order to help defray the
cost of providing fire protection for residents of new subdivisions or planned
developments during the construction process, and before tax revenues are
generated by such subdivisions and planned developments in the process of
construction, a cash contribution in the amount of $600 per acre shall be paid
to the village, prior to the recordation of the ordinance annexing the
property. The contribution required for fire services shall be regularly
updated pursuant to §
16-9-12 (T).
   (S)   Contributions; public library. In order to help defray the cost of
providing library services for residents of new subdivisions or planned
developments during the construction process and before tax revenues are
generated by subdivisions and planned developments in the process of
construction, a cash contribution in the amount of $65 per person or fraction
thereof shall be made to the village on the basis of the estimated ultimate
population per dwelling unit determined pursuant to
Table 16-9-12(F) , and all such funds shall be paid over by the village to the
Carol Stream Board of Library Trustees. The contribution required for library
services shall be regularly updated pursuant to §
16-9-12 (T).
   (T)   Updating of required contributions and fair market value. It is
recognized that population density, age distribution, land values, the cost of
providing park, school and village services, construction costs and other local
conditions change over the years. Therefore, the specific formula for the
dedication of land, or the payment of fees in lieu thereof, the required
contribution for school construction, police, fire, library and administrative
services, and the fair market value of land in and around the village shall be
reviewed at least every two years and amended if necessary.
   (U)   Severability. The various provisions of this article are to be
considered as severable and if any part or portion of this article shall be
held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining provisions of this article.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021; Ord. 2025- 08-31, passed 8-4-2025)
ARTICLE 10: NONCONFORMING LOTS, BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND USES
Section
   
16-10-1   General
   
16-10-2   Nonconforming lots, parcels, or land of record
   
16-10-3   Nonconforming buildings or structures
   
16-10-4   Nonconforming uses
   
16-10-5   Nonconforming parking lots
   
16-10-6   Certification of occupancy for nonconforming uses
§ 16-10-1 GENERAL.
   (A)   Purpose and scope of regulations.
      (1)   Any use of land classified as either a permitted use or special use
prior to the effective date of this article or any subsequent amendment to this
article, which is no longer allowed by this article or any subsequent amendment
to this article as either a permitted or special use in the zoning district in
which it is located, is classified as a nonconforming use.
      (2)   It is the intent of this section to permit nonconforming lots,
buildings, structures, and uses to continue until they are removed, but not to
encourage their continued use. Nonconforming uses are declared to be
incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved.
      (3)   It is further the intent of this section that nonconformities shall
not be enlarged upon, expanded, added to, or increased in intensity.
      (4)   Any use of land or structure which was in violation of a provision
of the Zoning Code, Sign Code, Subdivision Code, or Fence Code of the Village
of Carol Stream in effect at the time of the adoption of this UDO, or
amendments thereto, and which does not conform to the provisions of this UDO,
and/or amendments thereto, shall be considered unlawful and in violation of
this UDO.
   (B)   Authority to continue. Nonconforming buildings, structures, and uses
shall be allowed to continue only in accordance with the regulations of this
article.
   (C)   Determination of nonconforming status. The burden of establishing the
legality of a nonconforming building, structure, or use is the owner's burden,
not the village's.
   (D)   Repairs and maintenance. Repairs and normal maintenance required to
keep nonconforming buildings or structures in a safe condition are permitted,
provided that no alterations may be made except those allowed by this UDO or
required by law or ordinance.
   (E)   Change of tenancy or ownership. Changes of tenancy, ownership or
management of an existing nonconforming building or structure are permitted,
provided that no changes in the nature or character, extent or intensity of
such nonconforming building or structure may occur except those allowed by this
UDO.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-10-2 NONCONFORMING LOTS, PARCELS, OR LAND OF RECORD.
   In any district in which a legal lot, parcel, or land of record exists on
the effective date of adoption of this UDO that does not conform in size or
area to the provisions of this UDO, buildings for the uses permitted in such
district may be erected, as permitted in this UDO, on such lot, provided that
such lot is in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other
lots in the same ownership.
   (A)   Lots, parcels or land of record, or portions of planned developments
which do not meet the requirements of minimum lot width and area or minimum
size of required yards which conformed to the provisions of this code, but were
reduced in size as the result of the exercise of eminent domain or the threat
of the exercise of eminent domain by a governmental body and which have not
lost required off-street parking or loading facilities shall not be found to be
nonconforming with the provisions of this UDO as a result of the loss of such
territory.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-10-3 NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES.
   Where a building or structure was lawful on the effective date of adoption
of this UDO, but could not be built under the terms of this UDO by reason of
restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or other characteristics of
the building or structure or its location on the lot, such building or
structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to
the following provisions:
   (A)   No nonconforming building or structure may be enlarged or altered in a
way which will create a new nonconformity or increase the degree of the
existing nonconformity.
   (B)   Should a nonconforming building or structure be destroyed by any means
to an extent of more than 50% of its replacement cost at time of destruction,
it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this
UDO. Replacement cost shall be based upon the assessed value or an appraisal
completed within the last two years or the amount for which the structure was
insured prior to the date of the damage or destruction. No nonconforming
building or structure shall be moved in whole or in part to any other location
unless every portion of such building or structure and the use thereof is made
to conform to all regulations of the district into which it is moved.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-10-4 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Nonconforming uses. Where a use was lawful on the effective date of
the adoption of this UDO but is no longer permissible under the terms of this
UDO as enacted or amended, such use may be continued so long as it otherwise
remains lawful and subject to the following provisions:
      (1)   No nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any
portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this UDO.
      (2)   No nonconforming use shall be enlarged, increased, or expanded to
occupy a greater area of land than was occupied on the effective date of
adoption or an amendment of this UDO.
         (a)   If a nonconforming use is discontinued for the time periods in
this section, such discontinuance constitutes prima facie evidence that the
nonconforming use has been abandoned and the nonconforming use must be
terminated. Any subsequent use or occupancy of such land or structure must
comply with all regulations of the zoning district in which the structure or
land is located. A period of discontinuance caused by acts of god are not
included in calculating the length of discontinuance or abandonment for this
section.
         (b)   When a nonconforming use is offered for sale, such sale period
is not included in calculating the length of discontinuance for this section so
long as all equipment, building design, and similar use infrastructure is
maintained in working condition during the sale period. However, when land upon
which a nonconforming use is located is offered for sale, but the nonconforming
use is not also offered for sale, such sale constitutes prima facie evidence of
abandonment of the nonconforming use and the period will be included in
calculating the length of discontinuance.
         (c)   The following periods of discontinuance constitute abandonment:
            I.   Nonconforming use within an enclosed structure: Discontinued
or abandoned for 24 months.
            II.   Nonconforming use on a lot, no structures: Six months.
      (3)   Nonconforming use of structure. If a lawful use of a building or
structure, or of building or structure and premises in combination, existed on
the effective date of adoption of this UDO that would not be allowed in the
district under the terms of this UDO, the lawful use may be continued so long
as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: No
existing building or structure devoted to a use not permitted by this UDO in
the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed,
reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in changing the use of the
structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located.
      (4)   Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building or structure that were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at
the time of adoption or amendment of this UDO, but no such use shall be
extended to occupy any land outside such building.
      (5)   Any building or structure, or building or structure and land in
combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted
use shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which such
structure is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
      (6)   When a nonconforming use of a building or structure, or building or
structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six
consecutive months, the building or structure, or building or structure and
premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformance
with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
      (7)   Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises
in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-10-5 NONCONFORMING PARKING LOTS.
   If a parking lot lawfully existed on the effective date of adoption of this
UDO, but does not comply with the provisions of this UDO, such parking lot
shall be considered a legal nonconforming parking lot and may be continued so
long as it remains otherwise lawful, and subject to the following provisions:
   (A)   No existing use of the land or structure on the same property as the
nonconforming parking lot shall be enlarged, increased or extended to occupy an
area of the land or structure greater than 50% of the original land or
structure area without constructing a parking lot in conformance with the
requirements specified in this UDO, including parking lot perimeter and parking
lot interior landscape requirements as detailed in §
16-5-5.
   (B)   No building or structure shall be enlarged, erected, constructed or
reconstructed with such an addition having a floor area greater than 50% of the
original floor area of all buildings and structures on the site, and no major
repairs or renovations shall be made exceeding 50% of the value of the
structure located on the same property as the nonconforming parking lot without
constructing a parking lot in conformance with the requirements specified in
this UDO, including parking lot perimeter and parking lot interior landscape
requirements as detailed in §
16-5-5.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
§ 16-10-6 CERTIFICATION OF OCCUPANCY FOR NONCONFORMING USES.
   A certificate of occupancy shall be required for the continuation of all
nonconforming uses of land, buildings, or structures created by the passage of
this UDO. Application for such certificate of occupancy for nonconforming uses
shall be filed with the Community Development Director by the owner or lessee
of the land or building occupied by such nonconforming use within one year from
the effective date of adoption of this UDO. It shall be the duty of the
Community Development Director to issue a certificate of occupancy for a
nonconforming use.
(Ord. 2021-05-15, passed 5-3-2021)
CHAPTER 17: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
      Article
         
1.   GENERAL
         
2.   REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS AND PROVIDERS
         
3.   (RESERVED)
         
4.   (RESERVED)
         
5.   CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEES
         
6.   (RESERVED)
         
7.   (RESERVED)
         
8.   RESERVED
         
9.   CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL
Section
   
17-1-1   (Reserved)
   
17-1-2   Definitions
   
17-1-3   (Reserved)
   
17-1-4   (Reserved)
   
17-1-5   (Reserved)
   
17-1-6   Cable television franchise
   
17-1-7   Application to existing franchise ordinances and agreements
   
17-1-8   Penalties
   
17-1-9   Other remedies
Cross-reference:
   Municipal Telecommunications Tax, see
Ch. 5, Art. 4.1
§ 17-1-1 (RESERVED)
§ 17-1-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, and the interpretation and enforcement
thereof, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings,
unless the context of the sentence in which they are used shall indicate
otherwise:
   AFFILIATE. A person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls, is owned
or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with another person.
   ANNUAL GROSS REVENUE. [Reserved.]
   CABLE ACT. The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. §§ 532 et
seq., as now and hereafter amended.
   CABLE OPERATOR. A telecommunications carrier providing or offering to
provide “cable service” within the village as that term is defined in the Cable
Act.
   CABLE SERVICE. Has the same meaning defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).
   COMMISSION. The Illinois Commerce Commission or ICC.
   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES. The Village President and Village Board.
   EXCESS CAPACITY. The volume or capacity in any existing or future duct,
conduit, manhole, handhole or other utility facility within the public way that
is or will be available for use for additional telecommunications facilities.
   FCC or FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION. The federal administrative agency,
or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications
carriers, services and providers on a national level.
   GROSS REVENUES. All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without
limitation, cash, credits, property and in-kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or
video service within the holder’s cable service or video service area within
the village.
      (1)   GROSS REVENUES shall include the following:
         (a)   Recurring charges for cable or video service;
         (b)   Event-based charges for cable service or video service,
including, but not limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand charges;
         (c)   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service
equipment;
         (d)   Service charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation and
repair charges;
         (e)   Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service
or video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service
termination charges;
         (f)   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges
and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent
payments;
         (g)   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its
affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation
of the holder’s network to provide cable service or video service within the
village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the
village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant
regional or national compensation arrangement;
         (h)   Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the
operation of the holder’s network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder’s network,
such as a “home shopping” or similar channel, subject to division (1)(i) of
this definition;
         (i)   In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled
or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities or applications,
the portion of the holder’s revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from
its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business; and
         (j)   The service provider fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b).
      (2)   GROSS REVENUES do not include any of the following:
         (a)   Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad
debt, subject to 220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi);
         (b)   Refunds, discounts or other price adjustments that reduce the
amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state-issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit or discount is
attributable to cable service or video service;
         (c)   Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service,
including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services or the provision of directory or Internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to non-
cable service or non-video service in accordance with the holder’s books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable
laws, rules, regulations, standards or orders;
         (d)   The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which
the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the
purchaser’s subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that
it will resell the service within the village and pay the fee permitted by 220
ILCS 5/21-801(b), with respect to the service;
         (e)   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the
subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal or any other
governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state-issued
authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales
and use taxes;
         (f)   Security deposits collected from subscribers; and
         (g)   Amounts paid by subscribers to “home shopping” or similar
vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part
of the cable service or video service.
      (3)   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the
calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the
payment of the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b), which would otherwise be
paid by the cable service or video service.
   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-
401.
   ICC or ILLINOIS COMMERCE COMMISSION. The state administrative agency, or
lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications
carriers, services and providers in the State of Illinois.
   INCUMBENT CABLE OPERATOR. A person or entity that provided cable services or
video services in the village under a franchise agreement with the village
pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-42-11, 1-1-2007.
   OTHER WAYS. The highways, streets, alleys, utility easements or other
rights-of-way within the village, but under the jurisdiction and control of a
governmental entity other than the village.
   OVERHEAD FACILITIES. Utility poles, utility facilities and
telecommunications facilities located above the surface of the ground,
including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities.
   PEG. Public, education and governmental.
   PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE. The amount paid under this chapter and 220 ILCS 5/
21-801(d), by the holder to the village for the service areas within its
territorial jurisdiction.
   PERSONS. Includes corporations, companies, associations, joint stock
companies or associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability companies and
individuals and includes their lessors, trustees and receivers.
   PUBLIC STREET. Any highway, street, alley or other public right-of-way for
motor vehicle travel under the jurisdiction and control of the village which
has been acquired, established, dedicated or devoted to highway purposes not
inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.
   PUBLIC WAY. Includes all public streets and utility easements, as those
terms are defined herein, now or hereafter owned by the village, but only to
the extent of the village’s right, chapter, interest or authority to grant a
license or franchise to occupy and use such streets and easements for
telecommunications facilities.
   SERVICE. The provision of cable service or video service to subscribers and
the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the Commission
pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
   SERVICE PROVIDER FEE. The amount paid under this chapter and 220 ILCS 5/21-
801, by the holder to a village for the service areas within its territorial
jurisdiction.
   STATE. The State of Illinois.
   SURPLUS SPACE. The portion of the usable space on a utility pole which has
the necessary clearance from other pole users, as required by the orders and
regulations of the Illinois Commerce Commission, to allow its use by a
telecommunications carrier for a pole attachment.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER. Includes every person that directly or
indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages plant, equipment or property
within the village, used or to be used for the purpose of offering
telecommunications service.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES. The plant, equipment and property, including,
but not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals, antennas,
electronics and other appurtenances used or to be used to transmit, receive,
distribute, provide or offer telecommunications services.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER. Includes every person who provides tele-
communications service over telecommunications facilities without any ownership
or management control of the facilities.
   TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICE. The providing or offering for rent, sale or
lease, or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of voice,
data, image, graphic and video programming information between or among points
by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar
facilities, with or without benefit of any closed transmission medium.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM. See TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.
   UNDERGROUND FACILITIES. Utility and telecommunications facilities located
under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or
supports for overhead facilities.
   USABLE SPACE. The total distance between the top of a utility pole and the
lowest possible attachment point that provides the minimum allowable vertical
clearance as specified in the orders and regulations of the Illinois Commerce
Commission.
   UTILITY EASEMENT. Any easement owned by the village and acquired,
established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes not inconsistent
with telecommunications facilities.
   UTILITY FACILITIES. The plant, equipment and property, including, but not
limited to, the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, plant and
equipment located under, on or above the surface of the ground within the
public ways of the village and used or to be used for the purpose of providing
utility or telecommunications services.
   VIDEO SERVICE. Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is
required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which
is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public
right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including Internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by
a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video
programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to
access content, information, electronic mail or other services offered over the
public Internet.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Carol Stream.
   VILLAGE PROPERTY. Includes all real property owned by the village, other
than public streets and utility easements as those terms are defined herein,
and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the village, which are not
subject to right-of-way licensing and franchising as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. passed - - ; Ord. 2007-10-39, passed 10-15-2007)
§ 17-1-3 (RESERVED)
§ 17-1-4 (RESERVED)
§ 17-1-5 (RESERVED)
§ 17-1-6 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE.
   A person or entity, including a telecommunications carrier, seeking to
provide cable service or video service pursuant to this chapter shall not use
the public rights-of-way for the installation or construction of facilities for
the provision of cable service or video service or offer cable service or video
service until it has obtained either: a state-issued authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service under § 401 of the Cable and Video Competition
Law of 2007 (220 ILCS 5/21-100 et seq.); or a cable franchise from the village
under 65 ILCS 5/11-42-11.
(Ord. passed - - ; Ord. 2007-10-39, passed 10-15-2007)
§ 17-1-7 APPLICATION TO EXISTING FRANCHISE ORDINANCES AND AGREEMENTS.
   This chapter shall have no effect on any existing franchise ordinance or
franchise agreement until:
   (A)   The expiration of said franchise ordinance or agreement; and
   (B)   An amendment to an unexpired franchise ordinance or franchise
agreement, unless both parties agree to defer full compliance to a specific
date not later than the present expiration date.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 17-1-8 PENALTIES.
   Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting or
refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined
not less than $100, nor more than $750, for each offense. A separate and
distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a violation occurs
or continues.
(Ord. passed - - ; Ord. 96-04-28, passed 4-15-1996)
§ 17-1-9 OTHER REMEDIES.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any judicial remedies
that the village may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of this
chapter.
(Ord. passed - -)
ARTICLE 2: REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS AND PROVIDERS
Section
   
17-2-1   Registration required
   
17-2-2   Registration fee
   
17-2-3   Purpose of registration
§ 17-2-1 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   All telecommunications carriers and providers that offer or provide any
telecommunications service for a fee directly to the public, either within the
village, or outside the corporate limits from tele-communications facilities
within the village, shall register with the village pursuant to this article on
forms to be provided by the Village Clerk, which shall include the following:
   (A)   The identity and legal status of the registrants including any
affiliates;
   (B)   The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or
employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement;
   (C)   A description of registrant’s existing or proposed telecommunications
facilities within the village;
   (D)   A description of the telecommunications service that the registrant
intends to offer or provide, or is currently offering or providing, to persons,
firms, businesses or institutions within the village;
   (E)   Information sufficient to determine whether the registrant is subject
to public way licensing or franchising under this chapter;
   (F)   Information sufficient to determine whether the transmission,
origination or receipt of the tele-communications services provided or to be
provided by the registrant constitutes an occupation or privilege subject to
any municipal telecommunications tax, utility message tax or other occupation
tax imposed by the village;
   (G)   Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for
and received any certificate of authority required by the Illinois Commerce
Commission to provide telecommunications services or facilities within the
village;
   (H)   Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied for
and received any construction permit, operating license or other approvals
required by the Federal Communications Commission to provide telecommunications
services or facilities within the village; and
   (I)   Such other information as the Village Clerk may reasonably require.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 17-2-2 REGISTRATION FEE.
   Each application for registration as a tele-communications carrier or
provider shall be accompanied by a fee of $25.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 17-2-3 PURPOSE OF REGISTRATION.
   The purpose of registration under this article is to:
   (A)   Provide the village with accurate and current information concerning
the telecommunications carriers and providers who offer or provide
telecommunications services within the village, or that own or operate
telecommunication facilities within the village;
   (B)   Assist the village in enforcement of this chapter;
   (C)   Assist the village in the collection and enforcement of any municipal
taxes, franchise fees, license fees or charges that may be due the village; and
   (D)   Assist the village in monitoring compliance with local, state and
federal laws.
(Ord. passed - -)
ARTICLE 3: (RESERVED)
ARTICLE 4: (RESERVED)
ARTICLE 5: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEES
Section
   
17-5-1   Cable/video service provider fee imposed
   
17-5-2   PEG access carriage requirements; PEG access support fee imposed
   
17-5-3   Applicable principles
   
17-5-4   No impact on other taxes due from holder
   
17-5-5   Audits of cable/video service provider
   
17-5-6   Late fees/payments
§ 17-5-1 CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED.
   (A)   Fee imposed. A service provider fee is hereby imposed on any holder
providing cable service or video service in the village.
   (B)   Amount of fee. The amount of the service provider fee imposed hereby
shall be 5% of the holder’s gross revenues.
   (C)   Notice to the village. Unless the holder has earlier sent notice to
the village pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-801(a), the holder shall notify the
village at least ten days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer
cable service or video service in the village.
   (D)   Holder’s liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay the service
provider fee to the village. The holder’s liability for the fee shall commence
on the first day of the calendar month following 30 days after receipt of the
ordinance adopting this chapter by the holder. The ordinance adopting this
chapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the
holder’s application notice sent pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6), to the
village. Together with this chapter, the village shall send the holder
instructions for remitting the payment and statement required hereby.
   (E)   Payment date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed,
the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall
include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
   (F)   Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to cable service or
video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement with the
village, under 65 ILCS 5/11-42-11, in which a fee is paid.
   (G)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c), with credit
for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the amount of such
credit from the fees that operator owes under division (B) of this section.
(Ord. 2007-10-39, passed 10-15-2007)
§ 17-5-2 PEG ACCESS CARRIAGE REQUIREMENTS; PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED.
   (A)   PEG channels; number; carriage. On the date set forth in this chapter,
but not earlier than 90 days after the holder sends notice to the village under
220 ILCS 5/21-801(a), the holder shall designate the same amount of capacity on
its network to provide for public, education and government access use, as the
incumbent cable operator is required to designate under its franchise terms in
effect on 1-1-2007; and retransmit to its subscribers the same number of
public, education, and government access channels as the incumbent cable
operator was retransmitting to subscribers on 1-1-2007.
   (B)   PEG fee imposed. A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any
holder providing cable service or video service in the village in addition to
the fee imposed pursuant to §
17-5-1(b).
   (C)   Amount of fee. The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby
shall be $0.35 per customer per month.
   (D)   Payment. The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the
village or to the entity designated by the village to manage PEG access. The
holder’s liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date
set forth in §
17-5-1(D).
   (E)   Payment due. The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed,
the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall
include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
   (F)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c), shall pay, at
the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for PEG access that
would have been due during the remaining term of the agreement had it not been
terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by an incumbent cable
operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be credited against the fees
that that operator owes under division (C) of this section.
(Ord. 2007-10-39, passed 10-15-2007; Am. Ord. 2017-03-10, passed 3-20-2017)
§ 17-5-3 APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES.
   All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made
pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.
(Ord. 2007-10-39, passed 10-15-2007)
§ 17-5-4 NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from
any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including any tax that
is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to
cable service or video service. A state-issued authorization shall not affect
any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the village’s
simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to
any telephone service provided by the holder. A state-issued authorization
shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the
village’s 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges.
(Ord. 2007-10-39, passed 10-15-2007)
§ 17-5-5 AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER.
   (A)   Audit requirement. The village will notify the holder of the
requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to
submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the
same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder’s books and records and to
recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the
village. If all local franchises between the village and cable operator
terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village
pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et
seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that
the amounts are correct.
   (B)   Additional payments. Any additional amount due after an audit shall be
paid within 30 days after the village’s submission of an invoice for the sum.
(Ord. 2007-10-39, passed 10-15-2007)
§ 17-5-6 LATE FEES/PAYMENTS.
   All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances
adopted by this village pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of
Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.
(Ord. 2007-10-39, passed 10-15-2007)
ARTICLE 6: (RESERVED)
ARTICLE 7: (RESERVED)
ARTICLE 8: RESERVED
ARTICLE 9: CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
Section
   
17-9-1   Adoption and amendments
   
17-9-2   Enforcement
   
17-9-3   Penalties
   
17-9-4   Customer credits
§ 17-9-1 ADOPTION AND AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Adoption. The regulations of 220 ILCS 5/22-501 et seq., are hereby
adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video providers
offering services within the village’s boundaries.
   (B)   Amendments. Any mandatory amendment to the Cable and Video Customer
Protection Law that becomes effective after the effective date of this chapter
shall be incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be applicable to
cable or video providers offering services within the municipality’s
boundaries. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for
adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this chapter by
reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the village.
(Ord. 2007-10-38, passed 10-15-2007)
§ 17-9-2 ENFORCEMENT.
   The village does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of
the customer service and privacy protection standards of the Cable and Video
Protection Law.
(Ord. 2007-10-38, passed 10-15-2007)
§ 17-9-3 PENALTIES.
   (A)   The village, pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/22-501 et seq., does hereby
declare that for any material breach of the standards and requirements of the
Cable and Video Customer Protection Law, as incorporated by reference in this
article, a cable or video provider shall be subject to monetary penalties which
shall not exceed $750 for each day of the material breach, and shall not exceed
$25,000 for each occurrence of a material breach per customer. Such penalties
shall be in addition to the penalties provided in the law and shall not
represent the village’s exclusive remedy for any material breach. All monetary
penalties shall apply on a competitively neutral basis.
   (B)   MATERIAL BREACH means any substantial failure of a cable or video
provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any
provision of the law.
   (C)   The village shall give the cable or video provider written notice of
any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least 30
days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach.
   (D)   A material breach, for the purposes of assuming penalties, shall be
deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by
the cable or video service provider after the notice in division (C) above.
   (E)   The Board of Trustees hereby delegates authority to levy penalties to
the Village Administrator.
   (F)   The decision of the Village Administrator to levy penalties may be
appealed to the Board of Trustees, which shall conduct a hearing on the alleged
material breach and penalties levied therefore within 21 days following receipt
of the cable or video providers request for an appeal.
(Ord. 2007-10-38, passed 10-15-2007)
§ 17-9-4 CUSTOMER CREDITS.
   The village hereby adopts and incorporates by reference the schedule of
customer credits for violations of the law provided for in the provisions of
220 ILCS 22-501 et seq. Those credits shall be applied on the statement issued
to the customer for the next billing cycle following the violation or following
the discovery of the violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for
proactively providing the credits and the customer is under no obligation to
request the credit.
(Ord. 2007-10-38, passed 10-15-2007)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES
ILCS Cites Code Section
ILCS Cites                       Code Section
5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.             16-5-7
5 ILCS 275/1-1 et seq.           2-7-18
5 ILCS 420/4A-101                1-8-6
5 ILCS 430/5-65                  1-9-8
10 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.            1-4-5
10 ILCS 5/1-3                    1-8-3
10 ILCS 5/9-1.4                  1-8-3
10 ILCS 5/9-3                    1-8-3
20 ILCS 1605/17.12               14-2-8
20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.           3-5-4;
                                 3-5-7
35 ILCS 105/1 et seq.            10-1-3
35 ILCS 115/1 et seq.            10-1-3
35 ILCS 120/1 et seq.            10-1-3
35 ILCS 120/3                    5-5-1;
                                 5-5-2
35 ILCS 120/7                    5-16-2
35 ILCS 630/1 et seq.            5-4.1-3
50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.             17-5-5;
                                 17-5-6
50 ILCS 105/4.1                  1-10-1;
                                 1-10-10
                                 6-1-1;
                                 6-2-1;
                                 6-3-1;
                                 6-4-1;
50 ILCS 220/2                    6-5-1;
                                 6-6-1;
                                 6-7-1;
                                 6-10-1 ;
                                 6-16-1;
                                 6-17-1
55 ILCS 5/5-1062                 13-21-4
65 ILCS 5/                       2-1-8
65 ILCS 5/1-2-1                  13-21-1
65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.1                14-1-16;
                                 15-10-1
                                 6-1-1;
                                 6-2-1;
                                 6-3-1;
                                 6-4-1;
65 ILCS 5/1-3-2                  6-5-1;
                                 6-6-1;
                                 6-7-1;
                                 6-10-1 ;
                                 6-16-1;
                                 6-17-1
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-50              1-4-5
65 ILCS 5/3.1-55-10              1-8-4
65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.1—8-2-9.11     1-2-7
65 ILCS 5/8-11-1                 5-4-3
65 ILCS 5/8-11-2                 5-4-1;
                                 5-4-2
65 ILCS 5/8-11-7                 5-5-1
65 ILCS 5/8-11-8                 5-5-2
65 ILCS 5/8-11-23                5-16-1;
                                 5-16-2
65 ILCS 5/8-11-24                5-17-1—
                                 5-17-3
65 ILCS 5/11-5-1.5               16-4-10
65 ILCS 5/11-12-12               13-21-1
65 ILCS 5/11-20-13               9-1-13
65 ILCS 5/11-30-2                13-21-1
65 ILCS 5/11-30-8                13-21-1
65 ILCS 5/11-31-2                13-21-1
                                 17-1-2;
65 ILCS 5/11-42-11               7-1-6;
                                 17-5-1
65 ILCS 5/11-139-1 et seq.       13-1-8
65 ILCS 5/11-150-1               13-2-11
220 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.         5-12-2;
                                 16-9-9
220 ILCS 5/3-105                 5-12-2;
                                 12-7-3
220 ILCS 5/9-222                 5-4.1-3
220 ILCS 5/9-222.1               5-4.1-3
220 ILCS 5/16-102                12-7-21
220 ILCS 5/16-108.5(i)           12-7-21
220 ILCS 5/21-100 et seq.        17-1-6
220 ILCS 5/21-201(v)             12-5-2
220 ILCS 5/21-301(c)             17-5-1;
                                 17-5-2
220 ILCS 5/21-401                12-5-2;
                                 17-1-2
220 ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6))         17-5-1
220 ILCS 5/21-801                17-1-2
220 ILCS 5/21-801(a)             17-5-1;
                                 17-5-2
220 ILCS 5/21-801(b)             17-1-2
220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi)      17-1-2
220 ILCS 5/21-801(d)             17-1-2
                                 17-9-1;
220 ILCS 5/22-501 et seq.        17-9-3;
                                 17-9-4
220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.            12-5-16
220 ILCS 65/4                    12-5-5
                                 10-13-1—
225 ILCS 57/1 et seq.            10-13-3;
                                 10-13-9;
                                 10-13-15
225 ILCS 60/1 et seq.            10-13-18
225 ILCS 63/1 et seq.            10-13-18
225 ILCS 75/1 et seq.            10-13-18
225 ILCS 225/1                   13-2-34
225 ILCS 460/1                   10-4-7
230 ILCS 10/1 et seq.            14-2-8;
                                 14-2-9
230 ILCS 10/6(d)                 10-14-15
230 ILCS 15/1 et seq.            14-2-8
230 ILCS 20/1 et seq.            14-2-8
230 ILCS 25/1 et seq.            14-2-8
230 ILCS 25/7.12                 14-2-8
230 ILCS 30/1 et seq.            14-2-8
                                 5-15-2;
                                 10-14-1;
230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.            11-2-7;
                                 11-2-27;
                                 14-2-8;
                                 14-2-9
235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.           11-2-23
235 ILCS 5/1-3.01                14-2-35
235 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.           11-1-1
325 ILCS 2/1 et seq.             14-2-34
405 ILCS 35/1 et seq.            10-12-4
                                 14-2-4;
410 ILCS 130                     14-2-38;
                                 14-2-39
410 ILCS 705/1-5                 14-2-4
410 ILCS 705/1-10                14-2-1
415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.             15-9-01
415 ILCS 5/3.220                 15-9-00
415 ILCS 5/39.2(e)               15-9-03
430 ILCS 65/1.1                  14-3-15
605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.         12-5-2
                                 8-1-1;
625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.         8-3-1;
                                 8-9-1
625 ILCS 5/1-148.3               8-7-3
625 ILCS 5/1-159.1               8-2-19
625 ILCS 5/6-102                 8-8-2
                                 8-9-1;
625 ILCS 5/6-306.5               8-9-4;
                                 8-9-11
625 ILCS 5/6-306.5(c) (Repealed) 8-9-4
                                 8-9-1;
                                 8-9-4;
625 ILCS 5/11-208.3              8-9-5;
                                 8-9-9;
                                 8-9-11
                                 8-9-1;
625 ILCS 5/11-208.6              8-9-5;
                                 8-9-6
625 ILCS 5/11-306                8-9-1
625 ILCS 5/11-501(a)             8-8-2
625 ILCS 5/11-1306               8-9-9
625 ILCS 5/11-1518               8-7-1
625 ILCS 5/12-712                8-2-5
625 ILCS 5/12-713                8-2-5
625 ILCS 5/15-102                8-2-5
625 ILCS 5/15-103                8-2-5
625 ILCS 5/15-107                8-2-5
625 ILCS 5/15-111                8-2-5 ;
                                 8-2-6
625 ILCS 5/15-111(a)             8-2-6
625 ILCS 5/15-111(a)(12)         8-2-6
                                 8-2-5;
625 ILCS 5/15-316                8-2-7;
                                 Ch. 8, Art. 5, Sch. VIII
625 ILCS 5/15-317                8-2-5
625 ILCS 5/18c-7201              12-7-21
625 ILCS 25/1 et seq.            8-1-1
705 ILCS 405/1-1 et seq.         11-2-1;
                                 14-1-1
720 ILCS 5/9-1(a)(1)             10-10-3
                                 14-2-18;
720 ILCS 5/11-0.1                14-2-21;
                                 14-2-22
720 ILCS 5/11-1 et seq.          10-13-4
720 ILCS 5/11-14                 10-13-17
720 ILCS 5/11-14.1               10-13-17
720 ILCS 5/11-14.3               10-13-17
720 ILCS 5/11-14.4               10-13-17
720 ILCS 5/11-20                 14-2-26—
                                 14-2-29
720 ILCS 5/11-21                 14-2-30
720 ILCS 5/12-5.1                10-12-5
720 ILCS 5/16-1 et seq.          14-1-7
720 ILCS 5/16-25 et seq.         14-1-8
720 ILCS 5/17-55                 14-2-7
720 ILCS 5/24-1                  8-8-2
720 ILCS 5/24-1 et seq.          10-13-4
720 ILCS 5/24-1.1                8-8-2
720 ILCS 5/24-1.2                8-8-2
720 ILCS 5/24-1.2-5              8-8-2
720 ILCS 5/24-1.5                8-8-2
720 ILCS 5/24-1.6                8-8-2
720 ILCS 5/24-2                  14-3-16
720 ILCS 5/24-3.1                8-8-2
720 ILCS 5/28-1 et seq.          10-14-4;
                                 10-14-5
720 ILCS 5/28-1                  14-2-8
720 ILCS 5/28-1(a)(4)            14-2-8
720 ILCS 5/28-2                  14-2-7
720 ILCS 5/28-2(a)(1)—(a)(4)   14-2-7
720 ILCS 5/28-3                  14-2-9
720 ILCS 5/28-5(a)               14-2-10
720 ILCS 5/28-5(b)               14-2-10
720 ILCS 5/36-1                  8-8-2;
                                 8-8-3
720 ILCS 5/36-1 et seq.          8-8-8
720 ILCS 5/36.5                  8-8-8
720 ILCS 550/11                  14-2-4
720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.         15-8-2
720 ILCS 570/102                 14-2-1
720 ILCS 600                     14-2-1
720 ILCS 635/0.01 et seq.        14-2-32
735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.         8-8-6,
                                 15-10-9
740 ILCS 174/15(a)               1-9-6
765 ILCS 160                     16-8-6
765 ILCS 605                     16-8-6
775 ILCS 5/6-101                 1-9-6
805 ILCS 5/1.05 et seq.          10-2-4;
                                 11-2-5
820 ILCS 305/1 et seq.           12-5-8
                                 
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.    Date Passed Code Section
                        17-1-2,
                        17-1-6 
-           - -         17-1-9;
                        17-2-1 
                        17-2-3
90-03-25    3-27-1990   11-2-3
                        Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. I;
                        Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II;
                        Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. III;
                        Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. IV;
                        Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. V;
                        Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. VI;
90-07-55    7-10-1990   Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I;
                        Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. II;
                        Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III;
                        8-2-2;
                        8-2-3;
                        8-2-17;
                        8-2-18;
                        15-4-2
90-09-73    9-11-1990   Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. III;
                        Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I
90-09-83    9-25-1990   Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. I
90-10-88    10-9-1990   Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I
90-10-92    10-23-1990  14-4-4
                        Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II;
90-11-93    11-13-1990  Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. III;
                        Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. VI
90-11-99    11-27-1990  10-6-2
91-02-14    2-26-1991   13-2-14;
                        13-2-15
91-02-15    2-26-1991   9-3-8
91-03-20    3-12-1991   13-3-27
91-03-23    3-26-1991   9-1-1;
                        9-1-4
91-05-38    5-14-1991   Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II
91-06-48    6-25-1991   Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III
91-07-51    7-23-1991   10-6-2
91-09-65    9-10-1991   5-8-3
91-10-71    10-8-1991   Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II;
                        Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. III
91-10-76    10-22-1991  13-3-13
91-11-77    11-12-1991  Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II
91-11-81    11-26-1991  Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III
92-01-02    1-14-1992   Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I
                        13-3-27;
92-01-04    1-14-1992   13-3-29 
                        13-3-32
92-01-10    1-28-1992   10-6-2
92-01-11    1-28-1992   Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. IV
92-02-25    2-25-1992   Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. IV;
                        Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I
92-04-36    4-14-1992   Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. VII
92-04-37    4-14-1992   Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I;
                        Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III
92-04-39    4-14-1992   5-7-1 
                        5-7-11
                        5-10-1 
92-04-41    4-14-1992   5-10-16;
                        5-11-1
92-05-51    5-12-1992   9-3-13;
                        9-3-14
92-05-60    5-26-1992   15-3-1 
                        15-3-9
92-05-63    5-26-1992   Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I
92-06-64    6-9-1992    15-2-5
92-06-65    6-9-1992    10-5-6
92-06-71    6-23-1992   12-3-17
92-06-76    6-23-1992   11-2-4
                        15-5-1;
92-07-79    7-14-1992   15-5-2;
                        15-5-5
92-07-80    7-14-1992   10-6-2
92-07-83    7-14-1992   5-7-7
92-08-96    8-25-1992   Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. I
92-08-98    8-25-1992   15-5-1
92-10-111   10-13-1992  13-3-16
                        10-9-1 
92-10-116   10-27-1992  10-9-4,
                        10-9-6 
                        10-9-9
92-11-117   11-10-1992  10-4-1 
                        10-4-15
92-11-119   11-10-1992  10-9-10
93-01-05    1-12-1993   Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III
93-01-07    1-26-1993   Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III
93-03-36    2-9-1993    13-3-27
                        5-10-5;
93-02-18    2-23-1993   5-10-6;
                        5-10-15;
                        5-10-17
93-02-20    2-23-1993   10-9-3
93-04-40    4-13-1993   8-2-5 
                        8-2-7
93-05-47    5-25-1993   11-2-7
93-05-49    5-25-1993   Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II
93-07-62    7-13-1993   Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III
93-08-77    8-24-1993   15-4-2;
                        15-4-5
93-10-90    10-12-1993  5-4.1-1 
                        5-4.1-7
93-10-91    10-12-1993  14-1-3;
                        14-1-4
93-12-113   12-14-1993  5-4-1 
                        5-4-3
93-12-116   12-14-1993  Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. IV
94-01-03    1-11-1994   Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I
94-02-18    2-22-1994   4-2-8;
                        4-2-9
94-02-19    2-22-1994   13-3-27;
                        13-3-29
94-03-23    3-8-1994    5-7-5
94-03-25    3-8-1994    14-4-6;
                        14-4-7
94-06-49    6-14-1994   Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. I
94-06-50    6-14-1994   13-3-13
94-08-71    8-15-1994   Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II
94-11-89    11-7-1994   Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I
94-11-98    11-21-1994  16-10-2
                        1-3-5;
95-01-03    1-16-1995   1-4-4;
                        1-6-5
95-04-19    4-4-1995    14-2-1;
                        14-2-31
95-05-25    5-15-1995   Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. I
95-06-27    5-15-1995   4-1-2
95-06-26    6-5-1995    15-4-5
95-08-44    8-21-1995   12-3-4;
                        14-4-5
96-03-20    3-18-1996   3-8-4
96-04-28    4-15-1996   17-1-8
96-05-33    5-6-1996    9-1.1-1 
                        9-1.1-4
96-07-45    7-1-1996    11-2-7
96-07-46    7-1-1996    11-2-7
96-08-58    8-19-1996   Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. III;
                        Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III
96-08-60    8-19-1996   11-2-7
96-10-69    10-7-1996   Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I
96-10-70    10-7-1996   11-2-7
97-04-26    4-21-1997   11-2-7
97-04-27    4-21-1997   11-2-7
97-05-34    5-19-1997   Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I
97-07-44    7-7-1997    2-3-5
97-07-45    7-7-1997    2-7-18
97-09-59    9-2-1997    11-2-7
97-10-69    10-6-1997   13-3-13
97-10-74    10-20-1997  Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II
                        Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. I;
97-11-80    11-3-1997   Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II;
                        Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I
97-11-79    11-3-1997   5-10-14
97-11-81A   11-17-1997  11-2-7
97-12-82    11-17-1997  8-2-18
97-12-85    12-15-1997  10-4-2;
                        10-4-7
98-03-18    3-2-1998    13-3-27;
                        13-3-29
98-03-21    3-16-1998   9-2-3
98-03-22    3-16-1998   10-1-19
98-06-39    6-1-1998    5-10-6
98-06-41    6-1-1998    11-2-7
98-06-40    6-1-1998    11-2-7
98-06-48    6-15-1998   15-8-1 
                        15-8-3
                        5-4-1;
                        5-4-2;
98-07-54    7-20-1998   5-4-5;
                        5-4-8 
                        5-4-10
98-10-67    10-5-1998   3-8-1;
                        3-8-4
98-10-72    10-22-1998  11-2-7
98-11-74    11-2-1998   Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III
98-11-76    11-2-1998   11-2-7
98-11-80    11-16-1998  Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. III
99-01-04    1-18-1999   8-2-18
99-02-14    2-16-1999   9-3-18
99-03-21    3-15-1999   2-3-6
99-04-27    4-19-1999   10-2-1;
                        10-2-13
99-05-28    5-3-1999    Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III
99-05-33    5-17-1999   11-2-7
99-09-52    9-20-1999   Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III
99-10-55    10-4-1999   Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. III
99-12-65    12-6-1999   11-2-7
99-12-66    12-6-1999   11-2-7
99-12-67    12-6-1999   11-2-7
99-12-68    12-6-1999   13-2-14;
                        13-2-15
99-12-69    12-6-1999   Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. V;
                        Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. VI
99-12-70    12-6-1999   4-1-5
2000-01-05  1-17-2000   Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I
2000-01-06  1-17-2000   9-1-10
2000-02-09  2-7-2000    11-2-7
2000-02-10  2-7-2000    10-6-1;
                        10-6-3
                        10-5-5;
2000-04-27  4-3-2000    10-5-6;
                        10-5-9;
                        10-5-12
-           4-16-2000   11-2-7
2000-04-30  4-17-2000   11-2-7;
                        11-2-24
2000-04-31  4-17-2000   10-9-6
2000-05-35  5-1-2000    11-2-7
2000-05-39  5-15-2000   11-2-7
2000-06-55  6-5-2000    11-2-7
2000-06-56  6-5-2000    11-2-7
2000-06-57  6-5-2000    Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II
2000-07-60  7-17-2000   11-2-7
                        13-3-1 
2000-08-63  8-7-2000    13-3-15;
                        13-3-17 
                        13-3-32
2000-08-65  8-7-2000    Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. IV
                        Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. III;
2000-08-66  8-7-2000    Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I;
                        Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III
2000-08-72  8-21-2000   Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II;
                        Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. III
2000-10-80  10-2-2000   10-10-1 
                        10-10-19
2000-10-81  10-16-2000  Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III
2000-11-96  11-6-2000   11-2-7;
                        11-2-26
2001-02-10  2-20-2001   Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. IV;
                        Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III
2001-03-12  3-5-2001    5-7-1 
                        5-7-11
2001-04-16  4-2-2001    13-3-16 
                        13-3-18
2001-04-17  4-2-2001    1-7-1 
                        1-7-3
2001-04-21  4-16-2001   11-2-7
2001-05-22  5-7-2001    11-2-7
2001-05-23  5-7-2001    11-2-7
2001-05-25  5-7-2001    11-2-7
2001-05-26  5-21-2001   11-2-7
                        Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. IV;
2001-05-27  5-21-2001   Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I;
                        Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III
                        Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. IV;
2001-08-42  8-6-2001    Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I;
                        Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III
2001-08-45  8-20-2001   Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III
2001-09-48  9-17-2001   Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. IV;
                        Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I
2001-10-51  10-1-2001   Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III
2001-10-52  10-1-2001   11-2-7
2001-11-54  11-5-2001   13-3-13
2001-11-55  11-5-2001   3-2-4
2001-12-59  12-3-2001   3-2-4
2002-03-07  3-4-2002    11-2-36
2002-05-19  5-6-2002    11-2-7
2002-05-26  5-20-2002   10-10-1 
                        10-10-19
2002-06-33  6-17-2002   14-3-15;
                        14-3-16
2002-06-34  6-17-2002   10-4-1
2002-06-35  6-17-2002   10-2-5 
                        10-2-10
2002-06-36  6-17-2002   11-2-7
2002-06-37  6-17-2002   11-2-7
2002-06-38  6-17-2002   11-2-7
2002-06-39  6-17-2002   11-2-7
2002-06-40  6-17-2002   11-2-7
2002-07-44  7-15-2002   3-9-1 
                        3-9-4
2002-08-45  8-5-2002    Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I
                        Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. IV;
2002-09-57  9-16-2002   Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I;
                        Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III
2002-12-74  12-16-2002  Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I
2003-02-05  2-3-2003    11-2-7
2003-02-07  2-18-2003   10-4-1 
                        10-4-15
2003-03-09  3-3-2003    11-2-7
2003-04-15  4-7-2003    13-3-13
                        Ch. 5, Art. 1;
2003-04-17  4-21-2003   5-4-2;
                        5-12-1 
                        5-12-5
2003-04-18  4-21-2003   Ch. 5, Art. 2
2003-05-22  5-5-2003    Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II
2003-05-23  5-5-2003    Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III
2003-05-34  5-19-2003   Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III
2003-07-43  7-21-2003   15-9-00 
                        15-9-07
2003-07-45  7-21-2003   13-3-13;
                        13-3-25
2003-09-55  9-3-2003    Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. I;
                        Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II
2003-10-68  10-20-2003  Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I
2003-10-69  10-20-2003  8-2-18
2003-11-74  11-17-2003  11-2-7
2003-11-75  11-17-2003  1-1-17
2003-11-76  11-17-2003  4-2-9
2003-11-77  11-17-2003  Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. I
                        10-1-19;
2003-12-78  12-1-2003   10-4-4;
                        10-4-8
2003-12-84  12-1-2003   8-7-1 
                        8-7-4
2003-12-85  12-1-2003   15-4-2;
                        15-4-5
2003-12-87  12-15-2003  5-7-5
2004-01-02  1-19-2004   11-2-7
2004-01-01  1-19-2004   11-2-7
2004-01-07  1-19-2004   Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I;
                        Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III
2004-02-09  2-2-2004    13-3-13
2004-04-21  4-19-2004   14-4-4
2004-04-23  4-19-2004   6-15-1 
                        6-15-8
2004-05-27  5-3-2004    11-2-7
2004-05-28  5-3-2004    11-2-7
2004-05-31  5-17-2004   10-1-19;
                        10-4-8
                        5-10-1;
                        5-10-2;
2004-06-33  6-7-2004    5-10-5;
                        5-10-8 
                        5-10-10
2004-06-34  6-21-2004   Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. I;
                        Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II
2004-06-35  6-21-2004   11-2-7
2004-06-36  6-21-2004   13-3-23
                        6-1-1;
                        6-2-1;
                        6-3-1;
                        6-4-1;
2004-06-37  6-21-2004   6-5-1;
                        6-6-1;
                        6-7-1;
                        6-16-1;
                        6-17-1
2004-06-38  6-21-2004   11-2-36
2004-08-44  8-16-2004   10-4-14
2004-08-46  8-16-2004   4-1-5
2004-10-56  10-4-2004   8-1-1;
                        8-1-2
2004-11-61  11-1-2004   11-2-7
2004-12-67  12-6-2004   11-2-7
2005-01-01  1-3-2005    10-1-19
2005-02-10  2-22-2005   13-3-13
2005-02-11  2-22-2005   11-2-7
2005-04-18  4-18-2005   11-2-7
2005-04-19  4-18-2005   11-2-7
2005-04-20  4-18-2005   10-4-13
2005-05-21  5-2-2005    13-3-13
2005-06-28  6-6-2005    11-2-7
2005-06-29  6-6-2005    11-2-7
2005-06-30  6-6-2005    11-2-7
2005-05-31  6-6-2005    11-2-7
2005-05-32  6-6-2005    11-2-7
2005-08-42  8-1-2005    11-2-7
                        5-10-1;
                        5-10-2;
2005-08-45  8-15-2005   5-10-9 
                        5-10-13;
                        5-10-15
2005-08-49  8-15-2005   Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II;
                        Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. III
2005-09-52  9-19-2005   9-1-4
2005-11-61  11-21-2005  5-8-3;
                        5-8-17
2005-12-63  12-5-2005   Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I
2005-02-04  2-6-2006    7-2-5
2006-02-05  2-6-2006    15-4-5
2006-03-09  3-6-2006    15-8-2
2006-04-17  4-17-2006   11-2-7
2006-05-21  5-15-2006   11-2-7
2006-05-22  5-15-2006   11-2-7
2006-06-26  6-19-2006   11-2-7
2006-06-27  6-19-2006   11-2-7
2006-08-38  8-7-2006    Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. VII
2006-11-58  11-6-2006   Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I
2006-11-60  11-20-2006  Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III
2006-11-61  11-20-2006  11-2-7
2006-11-62  11-20-2006  11-2-7
2006-11-63  11-20-2006  11-2-7
2006-11-64  11-20-2006  11-2-7
2006-11-65  11-20-2006  11-2-7
2006-12-71  12-4-2006   Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. III
2006-12-72  12-4-2006   11-2-7
2006-12-73  12-4-2006   11-2-7
2006-12-75  12-18-2006  Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III
2007-03-10  3-19-2007   4-1-5
2007-04-16  3-19-2007   4-1-5
2007-04-17  4-16-2007   11-2-7
2007-05-19  5-7-2007    11-2-7
2007-05-21  5-7-2007    11-2-7
2007-07-29  7-16-2007   Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. III
2007-10-37A 10-15-2007  Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I
2007-10-38  10-15-2007  17-9-1 
                        17-9-4
                        17-1-2;
2007-10-39  10-15-2007  17-1-6;
                        17-5-1 
                        17-5-6
2007-10-40  10-15-2007  11-2-7
2007-10-41  10-15-2007  11-2-7
2007-10-42  10-15-2007  11-2-7
2007-11-44  11-5-2007   11-2-7
2007-11-45  11-5-2007   11-2-7
2007-12-50  12-17-2007  14-3-22
2007-12-51  12-17-2007  9-1-4
2008-02-02  2-4-2008    9-1-7
                        10-1-19;
2008-02-05  2-19-2008   10-4-7;
                        10-4-8
2008-02-06  2-19-2008   8-9-1 
                        8-9-14
2008-04-08  4-7-2008    13-3-13
2008-04-13  4-21-2008   11-2-7
2008-04-14  4-21-2008   11-2-7
2008-04-15  4-21-2008   15-4-5
2008-05-21  5-19-2008   11-2-7
2008-05-22  5-19-2008   11-2-7
2008-05-23  5-19-2008   11-2-7
2008-05-24  5-19-2008   11-2-7
2008-06-27  6-2-2008    5-7-5
2008-06-28  6-2-2008    14-4-8
2008-08-36  8-4-2008    11-2-7
                        5-9-1;
2008-08-37  8-4-2008    5-9-2;
                        5-9-4
2008-11-64  11-17-2008  3-5-1 
                        3-5-10
2008-12-71  12-15-2008  4-1-2
2008-12-72  12-15-2008  Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. I;
                        Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II
2009-02-02  2-2-2009    13-3-13
2009-03-09  3-2-2009    14-1-3
2009-04-14  4-6-2009    5-10-7
2009-05-18  5-4-2009    4-1-11
                        2-7-13;
                        6-1-1;
                        6-2-1;
                        6-3-1;
2009-05-20  5-4-2009    6-4-1;
                        6-5-1;
                        6-6-1;
                        6-7-1;
                        6-16-1;
                        6-17-1
2009-05-22  5-4-2009    12-5-1 
                        12-5-24
2009-06-31  6-15-2009   10-5-6
2009-07-36  7-20-2009   11-2-7
2009-08-36A 8-3-2009    10-7-1 
                        10-7-4
2009-09-41  9-21-2009   14-3-18
2009-10-57  10-19-2009  9-1-5
2009-10-58  10-19-2009  8-9-8
2009-10-59  10-19-2009  2-1-9
                        5-10-1;
2009-11-62  11-16-2009  5-10-2;
                        5-10-6
2009-11-63  11-16-2009  11-2-7
2009-11-65  11-16-2009  11-2-7
2009-12-66  12-7-2009   8-2-18
2009-12-68  12-21-2009  11-2-7
2009-12-69  12-21-2009  11-2-7
2010-01-02  1-19-2010   8-8-1 
                        8-8-10
2010-01-03  1-19-2010   13-3-13
2010-01-04  1-19-2010   11-2-7
2010-03-07  3-15-2010   3-2-4
2010-03-08  3-15-2010   11-2-7
                        10-1-19;
2010-03-09  3-15-2010   10-11-1 
                        10-11-7
2010-03-11  3-15-2010   13-3-13
2010-03-13  3-15-2010   4-1-2
2010-04-15  4-5-2010    Ch. 5, Art. 1;
                        Ch. 5, Art. 2
                        6-13-1 
                        6-13-17;
                        13-2-7;
2010-04-23  4-5-2010    13-2-8 ;
                        13-2-11 
                        13-2-15;
                        13-2-18;
                        13-2-21
2010-05-24  5-3-2010    Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II
2010-05-25  5-3-2010    11-2-7
2010-08-43  8-2-2010    11-2-7
2010-10-47  10-4-2010   11-2-7
2010-11-53  11-15-2010  6-13-9
2011-01-01  1-18-2011   11-2-7
2011-02-02  2-7-2011    11-2-36
                        Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. III;
2011-02-03  2-7-2011    Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. IV;
                        Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I;
                        Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III
2011-04-07  4-4-2011    13-3-13
2011-04-10  4-18-2011   1-6-22;
                        Ch. 2, Art. 4
2011-04-11  4-18-2011   6-13-4
2011-08-25  8-1-2011    Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III
2011-08-26  8-1-2011    Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I
2011-09-30  9-6-2011    11-2-7
2011-09-31  9-6-2011    11-2-7
2011-09-33  9-19-2011   11-2-7
2011-10-35  10-3-2011   Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. I;
                        Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. II
2011-11-36  11-7-2011   6-13-18; 7-2-8
2011-12-40  12-5-2011   13-3-13
2011-12-44  12-19-2011  14-2-32
2011-12-45  12-19-2011  8-1-2
2011-12-46  12-19-2011  14-2-33
2011-12-47  12-19-2011  11-2-2;
                        11-2-7
2012-02-02  2-6-2012    8-8-1 
                        8-8-10
2012-02-03  2-6-2012    10-2-6
2012-02-04  2-6-2012    11-2-7
2012-02-05  2-6-2012    11-2-7
2012-03-09  3-19-2012   11-2-7
2012-04-11  4-2-2012    11-2-7
2012-04-14  4-16-2012   11-2-7
2012-05-18  5-7-2012    11-2-7
2012-05-19  5-7-2012    11-2-7
2012-07-27  7-16-2012   6-9-1 
                        6-9-11
2012-08-28  8-6-2012    11-2-27;
                        11-2-37
2012-11-36  11-19-2012  Ch. 8, Art. 5, Sch. VI
2012-12-43  12-17-2012  13-3-13
2013-01-01  1-7-2013    11-2-7
2013-02-04  2-4-2013    11-2-7;
                        11-2-36
2013-03-06  3-4-2013    11-2-7
2013-04-08  4-1-2013    11-2-7
                        6-13-1 
2013-04-11  4-15-2013   6-13-19;
                        12-3-17
2013-05-13  5-6-2013    11-2-7;
                        11-2-27
2013-05-14  5-6-2013    11-2-7
2013-05-15  5-6-2013    11-2-7
2013-05-16  5-6-2013    11-2-7
                        14-2-15 
2013-05-17  5-6-2013    14-2-17;
                        15-5-1;
                        15-5-5
2013-05-18  5-6-2013    11-2-7
2013-05-22  5-20-2013   11-2-7
2013-05-23  5-20-2013   11-2-7
2013-06-24  6-3-2013    11-2-7
2013-06-25  6-3-2013    11-2-7
2013-06-26  6-3-2013    11-2-7
2013-06-28  6-17-2013   11-2-7
2013-06-29  6-17-2013   11-2-7
2013-08-36  8-5-2013    11-2-7
2013-08-37  8-19-2013   11-2-7
2013-08-35  8-20-2013   1-5-1;
                        1-5-4
2013-11-46  11-4-2013   11-2-7
2013-12-50  12-16-2013  13-3-13
2013-12-51  12-16-2013  11-2-7
2013-12-52  12-16-2013  11-2-7
2013-12-53  12-16-2013  11-2-7
2013-12-54  12-16-2013  11-2-7
2013-12-55  12-16-2013  11-2-7
                        10-9-1 
2014-01-01  1-6-2014    10-9-4,
                        10-9-6,
                        10-9-7
2014-01-02  1-6-2014    11-2-7
2014-01-03  1-6-2014    11-2-7
                        6-1-1 ;
                        6-2-1 ;
                        6-3-1 ;
2014-02-07  2-18-2014   6-4-1 ;
                        6-5-1 ;
                        6-6-1 ;
                        6-7-1 ;
                        6-16-1
                        9-1-5 ;
                        9-1-7 ;
                        9-1-15 ;
2014-02-08  2-18-2014   9-2-3 ;
                        9-2-4 ;
                        9-4-1  
                        9-4-5
2014-02-09  2-18-2014   11-2-7 ;
                        11-2-24
2014-03-10  3-3-2014    11-2-7
2014-03-11  3-3-2014    Ch. 8, Art. 5, Sch. IV
2014-04-16  4-21-2014   11-2-7
2014-04-17  4-21-2014   11-2-7; 
                        11-2-24
                        6-1-1; 
                        6-2-1; 
                        6-4-1; 
                        6-5-1; 
2014-06-21  6-2-2014    6-6-1; 
                        6-7-1; 
                        6-10-1; 
                        6-16-1; 
                        6-17-1
2014-06-27  6-16-2014   11-2-7
2014-07-29  7-7-2014    11-2-7
2014-07-30  7-7-2014    Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I
2014-07-31  7-7-2014    Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I
2014-08-34  8-4-2014    11-2-7
2014-08-36  8-18-2014   11-2-7
2014-08-37  8-18-2014   11-2-7
2014-08-38  8-18-2014   11-2-7
2014-08-39  8-18-2014   11-2-7
2014-08-40  8-18-2014   9-4-2
2014-09-46  9-15-2014   10-12-1  -
                        10-12-6
2014-10-50  10-20-2014  11-2-7
2014-10-51  10-20-2014  11-2-7; 
                        11-2-24
2014-11-53  11-3-2014   Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. VI
2014-12-55  12-15-2014  13-3-13
2014-12-56  12-15-2014  8-2-5
2015-01-01  1-5-2015    11-2-7
2015-05-08  5-4-2015    11-2-7
2015-05-09  5-4-2015    11-2-7
2015-10-20  10-5-2015   11-2-7
2015-10-21  10-19-2015  13-3-27
2015-11-25  11-2-2015   11-2-7
2015-11-27  11-16-2015  11-2-7
2015-11-28  11-16-2015  11-2-7
2016-02-07  2-16-2016   11-2-7
2016-02-08  2-16-2016   11-2-7
2016-03-12  3-7-2016    11-2-7
2016-03-13  3-7-2016    11-2-7
2016-03-14  3-21-2016   11-2-7
2016-03-15  3-21-2016   13-3-13
2016-03-16  3-21-2016   11-2-7
2016-03-17  3-21-2016   11-2-7
2016-03-18  3-21-2016   11-2-7
2016-04-19  4-4-2016    Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. IV;
                        Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I
2016-04-20  4-18-2016   14-2-34
2016-04-24  4-18-2016   11-2-7
2016-05-26  5-2-2016    11-2-7
                        10-12-4;
2016-06-28  6-6-2016    10-12-5;
                        10-12-6
2016-07-31  7-18-2016   10-10-16;
                        11-2-38
2016-07-32  7-18-2016   9-1-5;
                        10-6-4
2016-07-34  7-18-2016   5-8-3;
                        5-8-14
2016-12-48  12-19-2016  11-2-7
2016-12-49  12-19-2016  5-7-1 -
                        5-7-11
2017-01-01  1-17-2017   11-2-7
2017-01-02  1-17-2017   11-2-7
                        6-13-3;
2017-02-06  2-21-2017   6-13-4;
                        6-13-7
                        12-5-1;
                        12-5-2;
2017-03-08  3-20-2017   12-5-4;
                        12-5-9;
                        12-5-15;
                        12-5-16
2017-03-10  3-20-2017   17-5-2
2017-03-11  3-20-2017   12-6-1 -
                        12-6-20
2017-04-12  4-3-2017    13-3-13
2017-05-17  5-1-2017    14-2-35;
                        14-2-36
2017-05-22  5-1-2017    10-9-1;
                        14-2-31
2017-06-23  6-5-2017    9-5-1 -
                        9-5-4
2017-06-24  6-5-2017    11-2-7
2017-06-25  6-5-2017    11-2-7
2017-06-26  6-5-2017    11-2-7
2017-07-31  7-17-2017   11-2-7
2017-07-32  7-17-2017   Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I
2017-07-33  7-17-2017   Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I;
                        Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III
2017-07-35  7-17-2017   11-2-7
2017-08-47  7-17-2017   11-2-7
2017-08-48  8-7-2017    11-2-7
2017-08-49  8-7-2017    11-2-7
2017-08-50  8-21-2017   11-2-7
2017-08-51  8-21-2017   11-2-7
2017-08-52  8-21-2017   11-2-7
2017-09-53  9-5-2017    11-2-7
2017-09-55  9-18-2017   5-8-3
2017-09-56  9-18-2017   Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. IV;
                        Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III
2017-10-57  10-2-2017   11-2-7
2017-10-58  10-2-2017   Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. III;
                        Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III
2017-10-59  10-2-2017   11-2-7
2017-10-60  10-2-2017   11-2-7
2017-10-61  10-16-2017  Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. VIII
2017-11-62  11-6-2017   15-4-5
2017-11-63  11-6-2017   Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I
2017-11-64  11-6-2017   Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. I
2017-11-67  11-20-2017  11-2-7
2017-11-68  11-20-2017  11-2-7
2017-12-71  12-4-2017   11-2-7
2017-12-72  12-4-2017   11-2-7
2017-12-73  12-18-2017  1-9-1 
                        1-9-8
2018-01-01  1-16-2018   Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III
2018-01-02  1-16-2018   11-2-7
2018-02-03  2-5-2018    11-2-7
2018-02-05  2-20-2018   Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I,
                        III
2018-02-06  2-20-2018   11-2-7
2018-03-08  3-5-2018    Ch. 5, Art. 1;
                        Ch. 5, Art. 2
2018-03-09  3-5-2018    Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I
2018-4-11   4-2-2018    13-3-13
2018-04-12  4-2-2018    5-13-1 
                        5-13-8
2018-04-17  4-16-2018   1-8-1 
                        1-8-17
2018-05-18  5-7-2018    11-2-7
                        10-1-19;
2018-05-19  5-7-2018    10-13-1 
                        10-13-24
2018-05-20  5-21-2018   11-2-7
2018-06-21  6-18-2018   11-2-7
2018-06-22  6-18-2018   5-9-1 
                        5-9-8
2018-07-24  7-2-2018    11-2-7
2018-07-29  7-16-2018   2-7-13
2018-07-30  7-16-2018   12-7-1 
                        12-7-21
2018-09-33  9-4-2018    Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I
2018-10-39  10-15-2018  11-2-7
2018-10-40  10-15-2018  11-2-7
2018-11-41  11-5-2018   1-9-6
2018-12-45  12-3-2018   11-2-7
2018-12-46  12-17-2018  Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I
2018-12-50  12-17-2018  8-2-6
2019-02-01  2-4-2019    11-2-7
2019-02-04  2-19-2019   5-7-1 
                        5-7-11
                        6-13-3,
2019-02-05  2-19-2019   6-13-4,
                        6-13-7
2019-02-06  2-19-2019   5-8-15
2019-03-08  3-4-2019    11-2-7
2019-03-09  3-18-2019   Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. IV
2019-04-11  4-1-2019    5-14-1 
                        5-14-13
2019-04-12  4-1-2019    13-3-13
2019-04-13  4-1-2019    11-3-1 
                        11-3-7
2019-04-15  4-15-2019   1-9-1 
                        1-9-8
                        6-1-1;
                        6-2-1;
                        6-4-1;
                        6-5-1;
                        6-6-1;
2019-05-16  5-6-2019    6-7-1;
                        6-10-1;
                        6-16-1;
                        6-17-1;
                        6-18-1;
                        6-19-1;
                        15-4-5
2019-06-18  6-3-2019    11-2-7
2019-06-20  6-3-2019    10-2-1;
                        14-2-37
                        8-1-2;
2019-07-22  7-15-2019   15-4-5;
                        15-10-1—
                        15-10-9; Repeals 8-2-20
2019-07-23  7-15-2019   Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. IV;
                        Art. 6, Schd. I
2019-07-24  7-15-2019   6-14-1
                        10-9-1;
                        10-9-3;
2019-08-29  8-5-2019    10-9-4;
                        10-9-6;
                        10-9-7;
                        14-2-31
2019-09-35  9-30-2019   11-2-7
2019-11-36  11-4-2019   11-2-7
2019-12-51  12-16-2019  11-2-7
2019-12-53  12-16-2019  14-5-1—
                        14-5-5
                        14-2-1;
2020-01-01  1-20-2020   14-2-4;
                        14-2-32
2020-02-02  1-20-2020   14-2-38;
                        14-2-39
2020-04-10  4-6-2020    13-3-13
                        6-13-3;
2020-04-11  4-6-2020    6-13-4;
                        6-13-7;
                        6-13-10
                        13-3-1—
                        13-3-9;
                        13-3-18;
2020-05-15  5-18-2020   13-3-25;
                        13-3-31;
                        13-3-32;
                        15-4-5
                        13-2-33—
                        13-2-37;
                        13-4-1—
                        13-4-4;
                        13-5-1—
                        13-5-6;
                        13-6-1—
                        13-6-10;
                        13-7-1—
                        13-7-5;
                        13-8-1—
                        13-8-7;
                        13-9-1—
                        13-9-8;
                        13-10-1—
                        13-10-10;
2020-06-18  6-15-2020   13-11-1—
                        13-11-3;
                        13-12-1;
                        13-3-1;
                        13-14-1—
                        13-14-7;
                        13-15-1—
                        13-15-4;
                        13-16-1—
                        13-16-5;
                        13-17-1;
                        13-17-2;
                        13-18-1;
                        13-18-2;
                        13-19-1—
                        13-19-11;
                        13-20-1—
                        13-20-3
2020-07-19  7-6-2020    Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I
2020-07-20  7-6-2020    1-6-23
2020-08-27  8-17-2020   11-2-7
                        10-1-19;
2020-09-29  9-21-2020   10-14-1—
                        10-14-20;
                        11-2-7
2020-10-34  10-19-2020  11-2-7
2020-11-37  11-2-2020   11-2-7
2020-11-38  11-2-2020   11-2-7
2020-11-39  11-2-2020   11-2-7
2020-11-40  11-2-2020   11-2-7
                        13-6-2;
2020-11-41  11-16-2020  13-21-1—
                        13-21-27
2021-01-01  1-18-2021   1-5-1
2021-03-03  3-1-2021    11-2-7
2021-03-06  3-1-2021    11-2-7
2021-03-07  3-1-2021    11-2-7
2021-03-08  3-15-2021   Repeals 10-4-16
2021-03-09  3-15-2021   11-2-7
2021-04-10  4-5-2021    11-2-7
2021-04-13  4-19-2021   11-2-7
2021-04-14  4-19-2021   11-2-7
                        Repeals Ch. 6, Art. 11; Repeals Ch. 6, Art. 12; Repeals
                        Ch. 7, Repeals Ch. 12, Art. 1;
                        16-1-1—
                        16-1-9;
                        16-2-1—
                        16-2-26;
                        16-3-1—
                        16-3-11;
                        16-4-1—
                        16-4-26;
2021-05-15  5-3-2021    16-5-1—
                        16-5-16;
                        16-6-1—
                        16-6-10;
                        16-7-1—
                        16-7-6;
                        16-8-1—
                        16-8-6;
                        16-9-1—
                        16-9-12;
                        16-10-1—
                        16-10-6
2021-05-16  5-3-2021    11-2-7
2021-06-20  6-7-2021    6-13-12
2021-06-21  6-7-2021    11-2-7
2021-06-22  6-7-2021    11-2-7
2021-07-29  7-19-2021   11-2-7
                        16-3-8;
                        16-3-11;
                        16-4-15;
2021-08-33  8-2-2021    16-4-18;
                        16-5-8;
                        16-5-10;
                        16-8-3;
                        16-8-4
2021-09-39  9-7-2021    16-3-11
2021-09-43  9-7-2021    1-10-1—
                        1-10-11
                        16-2-1;
                        16-2-13;
                        16-2-15;
                        16-3-4;
                        16-3-11;
2021-09-45  9-20-2021   16-4-13;
                        16-4-18;
                        16-4-22;
                        16-4-27;
                        16-5-2;
                        16-6-4;
                        16-6-9
2021-09-46  9-20-2021   11-2-7
2021-09-47  9-20-2021   11-2-7
2021-09-48  9-20-2021   11-2-7
2021-10-49  10-4-2021   11-2-7
2021-10-50  10-18-2021  Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. III
2021-10-51  10-18-2021  5-15-1—
                        5-15-7
2021-11-54  11-15-2021  8-1-1
2021-12-57  12-6-2021   11-2-7
2022-01-01  1-3-2022    11-2-7
2022-01-02  1-3-2022    11-2-7
2022-01-03  1-3-2022    11-2-7
                        16-2-3;
                        16-2-6;
                        16-3-5;
2022-01-04  1-3-2022    16-3-6;
                        16-3-11;
                        16-4-15;
                        16-5-2;
                        16-5-8
2022-01-05  1-17-2022   11-2-7
                        Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd.
2022-01-06  1-17-2022   I,
                        III
2022-02-07  2-7-2022    11-2-7
2022-02-08  2-7-2022    11-2-7,
                        11-2-39
                        10-14-1;
                        10-14-2;
2022-02-09  2-7-2022    10-14-5;
                        10-14-6;
                        11-2-7
                        6-13-13;
2022-02-10  2-22-2022   6-13-14;
                        12-7-4
                        16-2-22;
                        16-3-11;
                        16-4-5;
2022-02-11  2-22-2022   16-4-13;
                        16-4-15;
                        16-4-28;
                        16-5-2
2022-03-14  3-7-2022    11-2-7
2022-03-16  3-21-2022   16-5-8-2
2022-04-17  4-4-2022    13-3-13
2022-04-20  4-18-2022   11-2-7
                        16-3-11;
                        16-4-15;
2022-05-21  5-2-2022    16-4-18;
                        16-5-2;
                        16-5-6;
                        16-5-8
2022-05-22  5-2-2022    11-2-7
2022-05-23  5-2-2022    11-2-7
2022-05-24  5-16-2022   12-3-16
2022-06-29  6-6-2022    11-2-7
2022-06-30  6-6-2022    11-2-7
2022-06-31  6-6-2022    11-2-7
2022-06-32  6-20-2022   11-2-7
2022-06-33  6-20-2022   11-2-7
2022-07-35  7-18-2022   11-2-7
                        16-2-13;
                        16-3-4;
                        16-3-8;
                        16-3-9;
2022-09-39  9-6-2022    16-4-15;
                        16-4-18;
                        16-4-28;
                        16-5-8;
                        16-7-5
2022-10-46  10-3-2022   11-2-7
2022-12-54  12-5-2022   11-2-7
2022-12-55  12-5-2022   11-2-7
2022-12-56  12-5-2022   11-2-7
2023-01-01  1-16-2023   16-3-11;
                        16-4-9
2023-01-02  1-16-2023   11-2-7
2023-02-03  2-6-2023    11-2-7
2023-02-04  2-6-2023    11-2-7
2023-02-05  2-6-2023    5-16-1;
                        5-16-2
                        16-2-13;
                        16-3-11;
                        16-4-2;
2023-03-08  3-20-2023   16-4-17;
                        16-5-2;
                        16-6-4;
                        16-8-4
2023-03-09  3-20-2023   14-5-3
2023-04-11  4-3-2023    16-3-11
                        6-13-3;
                        6-13-4;
2023-04-17  4-17-2023   6-13-7;
                        6-13-17;
                        15-4-5
2023-04-20  4-17-2023   11-2-7
2023-05-25  5-15-2023   11-2-7
2023-05-26  5-15-2023   11-2-7
2023-06-29  6-19-2023   11-2-7
2023-07-30  7-17-2023   11-2-7
2023-07-31  7-17-2023   11-2-7
                        16-2-3;
                        16-2-16;
                        16-2-18;
                        16-2-22;
                        16-3-11;
2023-07-32  7-17-2023   16-4-1;
                        16-4-15;
                        16-4-18;
                        16-4-29;
                        16-5-6;
                        16-5-10
                        10-1-3;
2023-07-35  7-17-2023   10-1-19;
                        10-2-1
2023-08-36  8-7-2023    11-2-7
2023-08-37  8-7-2023    11-2-7
2023-08-38  8-7-2023    11-2-7
2023-08-40  8-7-2023    13-2-37
2023-09-41  9-18-2023   11-2-7
2023-10-48  10-16-2023  11-2-7
2023-11-51  11-6-2023   11-2-7
2023-11-52  11-6-2023   Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. I
2023-12-60  12-18-2023  11-2-7
2024-01-01  1-15-2024   11-2-7
2024-01-02  1-15-2024   11-2-7
2024-01-03  1-15-2024   11-2-7
2024-02-06  2-5-2024    5-8-3
2024-03-10  3-18-2024   13-3-13
2024-03-11  3-18-2024   Ch. 8, Art. 5, Schd. I
2024-04-14  4-1-2024    11-2-7
2024-04-15  4-1-2024    6-13-4;
                        6-13-7
2024-05-21  5-6-2024    11-2-7
2024-05-22  5-6-2024    11-2-7
2024-05-23  5-6-2024    11-2-7
2024-05-24  5-6-2024    11-2-7
2024-05-25  5-6-2024    11-2-7
2024-05-26  5-6-2024    14-2-33
                        16-3-11;
                        16-4-18;
2024-06-30  6-3-2024    16-5-2;
                        16-5-8;
                        16-5-9
2024-07-31  7-1-2024    11-2-7
2024-09-37  9-16-2024   Ch. 8, Art 6, Schd. I
2024-10-41  10-7-2024   11-2-7
2024-10-42  10-7-2024   5-14-8
2024-10-45  10-21-2024  Ch. 8, Art 6, Schd. I
2024-10-46  10-21-2024  Ch. 8, Art 5, Schd. III
2024-11-47  11-4-2024   11-2-7
2024-11-48  11-4-2024   11-2-7
2025-01-01  1-6-2025    1-10-1—
                        1-10-11
2025-02-04  2-3-2025    11-2-7
2025-03-05  3-3-2025    11-2-7
2025-03-06  3-3-2025    11-2-7
2025-03-07  3-17-2025   13-3-13
                        16-2-25,
2025-03-10  3-17-2025   16-3-11,
                        16-5-2
                        16-3-3;
2025-04-14  4-21-2025   6-13-4;
                        6-13-7
2025-04-15  4-21-2025   5-17-1—
                        5-17-4
                        10-5-3—
2025-05-16  5-5-2025    10-5-6;
                        10-5-9
2025-05-17  5-5-2025    15-5-2
2025-05-20  5-5-2025    11-2-7
2025-05-21  5-19-2025   11-2-7
2025-05-22  5-19-2025   11-2-7
                        8-2-20;
2025-07-27  7-7-2025    Ch. 8, Art. 6, Schd. II;
                        15-4-5
                        16-3-11,
                        16-4-15,
                        16-5-2,
2025-08-31  8-4-2025    16-5-6,
                        16-5-8,
                        16-5-10,
                        16-8-4,
                        16-9-12
2025-08-33  8-4-2025    11-2-7
2025-08-34  8-4-2025    8-7-1,
                        8-7-4
2025-08-35  8-4-2025    4-1-2,
                        4-1-5
                        6-1-1;
                        6-2-1;
                        6-4-1;
                        6-5-1;
2025-09-38  9-2-2025    6-6-1;
                        6-7-1;
                        6-10-1;
                        6-16-1;
                        6-18-1
2025-10-42  10-6-2025   11-2-1;
                        11-2-2
2025-12-44  12-15-2025  14-3-2
                       
 
 
